DEALS
L6107x
Final Examination - December 1994
Professors Goldberg, Gilson, and Raff
This examination consists of three pages, including this page.
Check now to see that your exam has all three pages.
ANSWERS MUST BE TYPEWRITTEN.
INSTRUCTIONS
Please read these instructions carefully. Failures to follow instructions will be penalized.
This is an open book take home exam. You can take it in any 24 hour period during the Exam
period. It must be turned in to Room G of the Law School no later than 4 p.m. on December 22.
You must answer three questions. You must answer the questions on the three deals on which your
team had neither primary nor secondary responsibility.
Answers must be typed. You have a maximum of two pages double spaced for each question.
Margins and type face must be at least as big as that used in this examination document. That is, we
are attempting to prevent you from writing too much and any ambiguities will be interpreted with
that in mind. Start each answer on a fresh sheet of paper. That is, we will expect three selfcontained two page (or less) documents. In addition, we will expect you to return the attached
receipt and pledge sheets with the following information filled in: time started, time completed, and
your signature.

****************************

Exam Question: Movie Contracts
A typical contract between a movie producer and an Actor would include a "pay or play"
clause similar to the following. What functions are served by such a clause?
With respect to any Picture produced hereunder, the Actor shall become "pay or
play" with respect to the Fixed Compensation if and when such Picture is "set for
production" (i.e., if and when the screenplay budget and schedule have been
approved, the principal members of the cast, the producer and director have been

made "pay or play" for their fixed compensation and a firm start date has been set for
principal photography), or if and when the director and at least one other principal
cast member or the producer have become "pay or play" with respect to the Picture,
or at any earlier time at the Producer's election in its sole discretion. If at any time
after the Actor has become "pay or play", the Producer shall elect not to utilize
Actor's acting services, the Producer shall be free so to elect, but the Producer shall
not thereby be relieved of the Producer's obligation to pay the applicable Fixed
Compensation provided for. If principal photography of such Picture has not
commenced by the date ("Outside Date") which is six (6) months subsequent to the
date of the proposed Start Date as of the date on which the Actor becomes "pay or
play" with respect to the Picture, which Outside Date shall be subject to extension
(on grounds specified elsewhere in the agreement) and/or on account of principal cast
or director unavailability, then the full amount of Actor's Fixed Compensation shall
thereupon become payable, and Actor shall be released from his respective
obligations to the Producer.
Exam Question: Securitization of Municipal Tax Receipts
"Any Eligible Replacement Receivables transferred to the Issuer shall be selected in a manner
that precludes adverse selection." (Purchase and Servicing Agreement, Section 3.02) What did the
parties intend this provision to mean? Did the provision solve their problem?
Exam Question: Underwritten Debt Offering
Over the course of the semester, we have considered the role of reputational and
informational intermediaries, like lawyers and accountants, in overcoming information asymmetries.
Under the heading "Legal and Audit Opinions," the Avco Financial Services, Inc. Prospectus for
Debt Securities and Warrants to Purchase Debt Securities (on p. 8 of the Prospectus and p. 102 of
the materials distributed by the team in connection with the transaction) provides that "[c]ertain legal
matters in connection with the Securities being offered hereby will be passed upon for the Company
by its Senior Vice President, Secretary and General Counsel, Herbert F. Smith, Esq...., and for any
underwriters or agents by LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby & MacRae...." Please evaluate this arrangement.
Exam Question: Recapitalization
In the Hanover (Horn & Hardart) recapitalization, Hanover had an apparently viable
catalogue business. However, it had an extremely high debt burden stemming from the restaurant
operations that had since been discontinued. That burden represents "sunk costs." Economic theory
tells us that sunk costs should not matter to a firm since decisions should only be influenced by
expected future costs and revenues. Why did the debt burden adversely effect Hanover's business?
At the time of the recapitalization, one entity, NAR, owned approximately 47% of Horn &
Hardart. NAR entered into a standby purchase agreement for the new shares. This meant that if the
other shareholders declined to exercise their right to buy additional shares at $1.50, NAR would do
so. Conceivably, NAR could end up with over 60% of the equity. How does this standby agreement
influence the decision of debt holders to tender?
Exam Question: American Reinsurance Buyout
Please discuss the ways in which the transaction structure served to protect KKR from
overpaying in its acquisition of American Reinsurance.

DEALS -- Page 3 of 3

END OF EXAMINATION

