DEALS
L61O7x
Final Examination - Decemher 1995
Professors Goldherg and Gilson

This examination consists of four pages, including this page. Check now to see that your exam
has all four pages.

ANSWERS MUST BE TYPEWRITTEN.
IF YOU ARE A CANDIDATE FOR GRADUATION IN FEBRUARY, 1996, WRITE ON ThE TOP OF YOUR
FIRST PAGE, "CANDIDATE FOR GRADUATION IN FEBRUARY, 1996."

INSTRUCTIONS
Please read these instructions carefully. Failures to follow instructions will he penalized.
This is an open book take home eram. You can take it in any 24 hour period during the
Exam period. It must be turned in to Room G of the law School no later than 4 p.m. on
December 22.
You must answer three questions. You must answer the questions on the three deals on which your team had
neither primary nor secondary responsibility.
Answers must be typed. You have a maximum of two pages double spaced for each question. Margins and type
face must be at least as big as that used in this examination document. That is, we are attempting to prevent you
from writing too much and any ambiguities will be interpreted with that in mind. Start each answer on a fresh
sheet of paper. That is, we will expect three self-contamed two page (or less) documents. In addition, we will
expect you to return the attached receipt and pledge sheets with the following information filled in: time started,
time completed, and your signature.

DEALS — PAGE 2 OF 4

1. The MOVIE DEAL:
If a movie is a success, it will sometimes be financially attractive to produce a sequel.
The following clause of a contract between an independent producer and a distributor is fairly typical. It allocates
the rights to the sequel to the distributor and gives the producer a right of "first negotiation." Why structure the
arrangement in this way? Be sure to discuss how the compensation arrangement set forth in the clause fits in.
(Recall that this particular contract gave the producer "gross points" after a certain level of revenue had been
produced; this is somewhat unusual, with producers typically receiving contingent compensation based on socalled "net profits". Do not worry about the gross versus net distinction; presume that the arrangement would be
roughly the same regardless of what the contingeni compensation was linked to.) Note: actual dollar values were
deleted from the contract; we use $XX0,000 to designate dollar values, all of which were in the six digit range.
(a)
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, upon timely payment of the Minimum
Guarantee, [Distributor] shall own, and is hereby granted, the remake, sequel, prequel, and television
program and series rights (as those terms are commonly understood and used in the entertainment
industry) to the Picture. Any one or more sequel, remake or television program or series shall be referred
to herein as a "Sequel".
(b)
Subject to (Producer] being available as, when and wbere requested by (Distributor], (as
modified by subparagraph (c) here in below), (Distributor] hereby grants [Producer] ("[Producer]") the
right of first negotiation to produce and direct the first Sequel. In the event that [Distributor] elects to
produce a Sequel, [Distributor] shall negotiate in good faith with [Producer] with respect to the details
of his agreement to so produce and direct the Sequel for a period of fifteen (15) business days.
(c)
Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (b) hereinabove, in the event that [Producer]
elects to produce and direct the Sequel, but is not available as, when and where requested by
[Distributor], [Distributor] shall be obligated to wait a maximum of one hundred and twenty (120) days
for [Producer] to become available, commencing no later than the date ten (10) business days after
[[)istributor] sends written notice to [Producer] of (Distributor]'s intent to produce the Sequel.
(d)
(Producer] shall receive a fee for producing and directing the Sequel ("[Producerl's Fee").
(Producer]'s Fee shall be the same as for the Picture, provided that the budget for the Sequel is the same
as the budget for the Picture. In the event that the budget of the Sequel is either greater than or less than
the budget of the Picture, [Producer]'s Fee for the Sequel shall be pro rata to the budget of the Sequel.

DEALS — PAGE 3 OF 4

That is, [Producer]'s Fee shall be determined by multiplying the respective dollar with respect to the
Picture by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the budget of the Sequel and the denominator of
which shall be the budget of the Picture. The foregoing notwithstanding, in no event shall (Producerl's
Fee be less than $XX0,000.00 nor more than x% ~f the fee which [Producer] received for directing and
producing the Picture.
In addition, [Producer] shall receive a contingent compensation (the "Sequel Gross Participation") with
respect to the Sequel provided, however, that the percentage of the Sequel Gross Participation shall be
pro rata to the budget of the Sequel. That is, the percentage of Gross Receipts paid pursuant to the Sequel
Gross Participation shall be determined by multiplying six percent (6%) by a fraction, the numerator of
which shall be the budget of the Sequel and the denominator of which shall be the budget of the Picture.
In no event shall the percentage of Gross Receipts paid pursuant to the Sequel Gross Participation be
greater than six percent (6%) or less than four percent (4%).
(e)
In the event that [Producer] does not produce and direct the Sequel, [Producer] shall receive a
passive payment (the "Passive Payment") equal to ($XX0,000.00) if the budget of the Sequel is equal
to the budget of the Picture. In the event that the budget of the Sequel is either greater than or less than
the budget of the Picture, the Passive Payment shall be pro rata to the budget of the Sequel. That is, the
Passive Payment shall be determined by multiplying $XX0,000.00 by a fraction, the numerator of which
shall be the budget of the Sequel and the denominator of which shall be the budget of the Picture. The
foregoing notwithstanding, in no event shall the Passive Payment be less than $XX0,000.00 nor more
than x% of $XX0,000.00.
In addition, at such time, if ever, that the Sequel first generates Net Receipts, [Producer] shall receive
the sum of $XX0,000.00 and a sum equal to three percent (3%) of the Gross Receipts of the Sequel.

2. NORTHWEST AIRLINES LBO
The Northwest Airlines auction was conducted successfully despite the fact that the
airline had not entered into a contract with the pilot's union. The terms of such a contract (with one of the firm's
largest "suppliers") obviously would affect the value of the transaction. Why were the parties willing to leave
this question open? You should touch upon these questions in your answer:
(a) Why would Northwest Airlines' board decline to consider an offer contingent on the execution of a
labor agreement with the pilots' union?

DEALS — PAGE 4 OF 4

(b) Why did Checchi make an offer that was not contmgent on the execution of a labor agreement with
the pilot's union?
(c) Would the absence of a labor agreement with the pilots' union affect the price that Checchi was
willing to bid?
(d) How would NWA's capital structure affect its ability to bargain with the union?

3. VENTURE CAPITAL
In this transaction, the venture capitalist held convertible preferred stock with full voting rights.
Dividends were deferred for a number of years after which the preferred stock was to receive its cumulated
dividend. In effect, the venture capitalist receives nothing for a number of years and then is entitled to a large
lump sum payout (in addition to its option to convert to common). Why structure the venture capitalist's rewards
in this way?

4. ATI' TELEPHONE RECEIVABLES SECURITIZATION
TLA wanted to borrow money and reduce its costs by using its ATT receivables as security. Instead of
securitizing them, TLA could have simply borrowed funds directly from one or a syndicate of banks and given
the banks a security interest in the receivables as collateral. What advantages did securitization provide over a
direct secured loan?

5. NEXTEL-MOTOROIA
In the Nextel-Motorola merger, Craig McCaw (acting through Eagle River Investments of which he is
the primary member and holder of a majority interest) purchased $300 million of shares in Nextel at
approximately $12.25 per share. In addition, he had the right to exercise three tranches of options (up to 35
million shares) in tbe future. His exercise of the second and third option was contingent upon his exercise of the
previous option. Specifically, if he does not fully exercise his option in one period, the number of shares he can
take in the next period is reduced on a one to one basis. Why would the parties make the terms of the options
contingent on the exercise of the previous tranches?

END OF EXAMINATION

