Deals Exam Fall 2001
DEALS – L6107
PROFESSORS GOLDBERG AND SCHIZER
This exam consists of two questions. You must answer both. Answers should
be typed. There is a constraint on the length of your answers. The maximum for
EACH question is four (4) pages (double-spaced). That translates to a 1,000 word
maximum for each question. If you believe that you need some additional facts,
state what your assumptions are and why they are reasonable.
Question 1.
Our client, Cinematique, is contemplating entering into an arrangement in which
it will be the exclusive French distributor for five films for the American distribution
company, Spectacular Pictures. The proposal is that it simultaneously enter into five
separate and identical (except for the name of the picture and the director and cast
members) contracts; the critical terms of the proposed contracts are attached.
Write a memo describing possible pitfalls in this arrangement and
recommending possible improvements. Remember that improvements are not
necessarily free. To get a particular term that is favorable to your client might
require giving up something of value.
Some background will be helpful. Spectacular Pictures distributes about 30 films
per year in the United States. It produces ten to fifteen itself. Before the film is made it
usually sells the distribution rights for exhibition outside the United States. The
Cinematique proposed contracts are an example of this practice. The normal pattern of
release is for a film to be distributed first in the United States and European exhibition to
begin about two to four months later. Spectacular does not make films with production
budgets in the Titanic range–over $100 million. Rather, its films’ budgets typically range
from $5 million to $50 million. Foreign sales have become increasingly important to
American film distributors. Foreign box office revenues are now well above domestic
revenues. France is one of the major markets for American films, accounting for 5-7% of
revenues. Distribution is not exhibition. That is, the exhibitors own the theaters; the
distributors enter into contracts with exhibitors, determine national marketing strategies
and negotiate contracts with the theaters. While some distributors are vertically
integrated into exhibition, Cinematique is not.
Note: we have edited out a number of terms not essential to the question. However, do
not assume that every term presented here deserves comment.

DISTRIBUTION LICENSE AGREEMENT
This Distribution License Agreement (‘this Agreement’) is made as of December
15, 2001 between SPECTACULAR PICTURES, New York, NY (“Licensor”) and
the party named below (“Distributor”), as follows:
1. DISTRIBUTOR:

Cinematique, INC.

2. PICT UR E:

“T he Ro ad to Kabul”

3. TERRITORY:

France and French-speaking countries

4. TERM:
Commencing on execution of this Agreement, and
contin uing fifteen (15 ) yea rs a fter theatrical release of the P ictu re in th e T erritory.
5. MINIMUM GUAR ANTEE AND DE LIVERY: US $ Five Hundred Thousand
Do llars ($500,000). T he Minimum Guarantee is payable 5% on signature of th is
agreement and 95% on notice of a vailability of the Initial Materials. De livery shall
be made no later than 45 days from Distributor’s written order. All installments of
the Minimum Guarantee will be paid by wire transfer to the following account:
Spectacular Pictures
Ne w Yo rk , New York
Acct:00000000000
ABA#:00000000000
6. DELIVERY: "Delivery" as used herein means delivery, at cost if not otherwise
indicated of the following Initial Materials:
a)1 35mm new color English-language feature print
b)1 35mm new color English-language trailer print
c)all available marketing and advertising material
Distributor will have a twenty-one (21) day period to check the materials and
accept them.
7. AUTHORIZED LANG UAGE(S): English subtitled and/or dubbed in French.
8. LICE NS ED RIG HT S/R ES ER VE D R IGHT S: S ubject to tim ely paym ent in full
of the Guarantee without deduction or offset of any kind, Licensor hereby
licenses to Distributor the exclusive theatrical distribution rights in the Picture, for
the territory and term, in the authorized language(s) set fo rth above, and in all
formats and systems whether now known or yet to be invented.
9. D istributor shall not sub-distribute T heatrical D istribution R ights in Fra nce to
the P icture without prior written approval from Licensor.
10. DISPOSITION OF RECEIPTS:
A. TERMS:
Gro ss R eceipts shall be applied in the following m anner:
• First. Distributor shall retain its 35% Theatrical Distribution Fee;

• Second. Distributor shall deduct out of the remaining 65% of
Gross Receipts its Recoupable Theatrical Distribution Expenses and the
Minimum G uarantee:
•Third, once the Recoupable Theatrical Distribution Expenses and
the Minimum Guarantee are recouped, Distributor’s Theatrical Distribution
Fee shall be increased to 50%
•Finally, Distributor shall remit to Licensor the remaining 50% of
the Gross Receipts.
•Gross Receipts Calculated at Source: For the purpose of
determining Licensor’s share of Gross Receipts, Gross Receipts shall be
calculated at the “source.” Neither Distributor’s subsidiaries, parents,
affiliated, subdistributors or agents may deduct or charge any fee against
Gro ss R eceipts in calculating amounts d ue Licensor.
B. CROSS CO LLATERALIZATION: In the determination of Licensor’s share of
receipts hereunder, there sh all be no cros s-co llateralization b etween the Pictu re
and any other pictures, provided that cross-collateralization among the Licensed
Rights is hereby authorized to recoup only the Minimum G uarantee and the
Recoupable Theatrical Distribution Expenses.
11. MARKETING/ADVERTISING/PRINT COMMITMENTS:
Prior to initial theatrical release, Distributor will submit to Licensor its minimum
and m axim um marketing and advertising b udget for the relea se of the Picture
(“Marketing/Advertising Comm itment”) as well as its maximum and minimum
number of prints (“Print Comm itment”) that will be used for the theatrical release
of the Picture. Any amounts expended by Distributor for theatrical marketing and
advertising in excess of the Marketing/Advertising Comm itment, or for theatrical
release prints in excess of the Print Comm itment, will not be deductible as
“Distribution E xpenses” or otherwise in determining Licensor’s share of re ceipts
hereunder unless expressly agreed to in writing by Licensor.
12. DUBBING, SUBTITLING AND EDITIONS
Licensor will timely provide Distributor with any dubbing, subtitling or editing
restrictions and requirem ents, and Distributor agrees to com ply with sam e.
Distributor may edit the Picture only to the extent necessary to meet
governm ental censorship requirem ents, and then only subject to the afore said
editing restrictions and requirements. Except for such editing for censorship, the
Picture may be exhibited only in its original continuity as supplied by Licensor
without alteration, interpolation, cut or elimin ation.
13. RECOUPABLE DISTRIBUTION EXPENSES
“Recoupable Distribution Expenses” means all auditable, out-of-po cket,
customary, reasonable and necessary costs directly associated with the
exploitation of the Specific Licensed Right, exclusive of salaries and overhead,
actually paid by Distributor in arms-length transactions with third parties less any
discounts, credits, rebates or similar allowances including the minimum
Guarantee (as such term is defined in the License Agreement). In no case may
any item be deducted more than once. For the purposes of this paragraph,

“Distributor” includes Distributo r’s subsidiaries , pare nts, affiliates, sub distribu tors
and agents.
14. BLOCKED FUNDS
If it is legally impossible to transmit any monies due to Licensor, then Distributor
will immediately so notify Licensor. Distributor will then deposit such m onies in
Licensor’s name, but at Distributor’s expense, in a suitable depository designated
by Licensor.
15. EXCHANGE PROVISIONS
All payments to Licensor will be in United States dollars. All payments due
Licensor will be computed at the prevailing exchange rate on the date due at
Chase Manhattan Bank, N.A. For a late payment, Licensor will be entitled to the
most favorable exchange rate between the due date and the payment date. The
parties agree that the risk of devaluation of the United States dollar against the
currency of the Territory will be Licensor’s sole risk, and the risk of the
devaluation of the currency of the Territory against the United States dollar or
other currently designated by Licensor will be Distributor’s sole risk. Distributor
will calculate and recoup the minimum G uarantee and Distribution Expenses
solely in the currency in the Territory. W here payment of any such item is not
made in the currency of the Territory, it will be converted to the currency of the
Territory for recoupment purposes using the exchange rate applicable on the
date the item was paid.
16. LATE PAYMENTS
Any payment due Licensor not made by its due date will, in addition to any other
right or remedy of Licensor, incur a finance charge at the lesser of three hundred
basis points over the 3-month LIBOR rate (“LIBOR+3”) on the date payment was
due or the highest applicable legal contract rate. This finance charge will accrue
from the date the paym ent was due until it is paid in full.
17. ACCOUNTINGS
Allocation: If the Picture is exploited in connection with other pictures, Distributor
may only allocate receipts and expenses among the Picture and such other
picture in a fair, re asonable, custom ary and non-discriminatory m anner.
Financial Records: Distributor will keep and maintain complete and accurate and
detailed records in connection with its exercise of the Licensed Rights, including
without limitation records of all Gross Receipts and distribution expenses.
Sta tem ents: Distributor will render accounting statements to Licensor in English
(and, if re quested, supporting docum entation) which set fo rth all Gro ss Re ceipts
derived, all Recoupable Distribution Expenses paid and all exchange rates used,
all on a country-by-country basis. Distributor will render statements quarterly
within 45 days afte r the end of ea ch calendar quarter, or such other quarterly
accounting periods as Licensor m ay designate. All reserves will be reasonable
and will be liquidated on a custom ary and reasonable basis. Late paym ents will
bear interest at the Ch ase M anhattan prim e rate plus three percentage points
from the payment due date until payment, plus accrued interest is receive d.

Au dit R ights: Continuing until three (3) years after the term, Licensor may
examine and copy on its own or through its auditor Distributor’s financial records
regarding the Picture on ten (10) days’ notice. The examination will be at
Licensor’s expense unless an underpaym ent of m ore than five percent (5% ) is
uncovered, in which case Distributor will pay the costs of the examination on
demand.
18. DELIVERY AND RETURN
Distributor may only reject delivery items hereunder on grounds of technical
quality, and not commercial or artistic grounds. Each delivery item delivered
hereunder will be deeme d acceptable for all purposes hereunder unless
Distributor gives Licensor written notice of rejection within ten (10) days after
Distributor’s receipt, or access to of such item. A notice of rejection will include
full details of the technical defects in any rejected item(s). At any time within 30
days after receipt of notice of rejection, Licensor m ay (i) cure such de fective
delivery by correcting the defect(s) or delivering replacement item (s) or (ii) subm it
the issue of w hether pro per Delive ry of such item or items has been made to
arbitration in accordance with Disputes; Remedies paragraph below. If Licensor
seeks to cure, then the time periods set forth above fo r review and cure with
respect to items initially delivered will be applicable to delivery of corrected and
replaced item s as well.
19. LICEN SOR represents that the picture is to be directed by ______. The cast
shall include _____, ______, and _______. H owever, it reserves the right to
replace any and all of these.
20. DISPUTES; REMEDIES
All disputes with regard to De livery w ill be resolve d by arbitration. T he sole
remedy of Distributor for a failure for any reason by Licensor to deliver the
Picture will be return of a ny portion of the minim um Guarantee previou sly paid.
Under no circumstances will Distributor be entitled to lost profits or consequential
damages.
21. BEST EFFORTS/FAIR DEALING
Distributor shall use its best efforts and skill in the distribution and exploitation of
the Picture. Distributor will exercise its rights hereunder in a fair, reasonable,
custom ary an d non-discriminatory m anner with respect to Licensor.
22. REPRESENTATIONS AND W ARRANTIES
All representations and warran ties customarily included in agreements of this
kind are incorporated herein by reference.
23. DEFAULT AND TERMINATION
Default: Distributor will be in default of the License Agreement if: (i) Distributor
fails to pay any installme nt of the Minimum Guarantee or any other am ounts
under this or any other agreement when due; (ii) Distributor becomes insolvent or
fails to pay its debt obligations when due; (iii) Distributor makes an assignment

for the benefit of creditors, seeks relief under any bankruptcy law or similar law
for the protection of debtors, or allows a petition of bankruptcy to be filed against
it; or a receive r or tru stee to be appointed fo r substantially all of its assets that is
not rem oved within thirty (30 ) days; (iv) Distributor breaches any material term,
covenant or co ndition of this A greem ent or an y other agreement with Licensor;
(v) a Distributor A ffiliate breaches any m aterial term, covenant or condition of th is
or any other agreement with Licensor; or (vi) Distributor attempts to make any
assignment, transfer, sublicense or appointment of an agent without first
obtaining Licensor’s prior written approval. This Agreement may only be
assigned with the prior written approval of Licensor which shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
No tice to D istributor: Licensor will give D istributor Notice of an y claimed defau lt.
If the default is capable of cure, then Distributor will have ten (10) days after
receipt of Licensor’s notice to cure a monetary default, and twenty (20) days after
receipt of L icensor’s notice to cure a non-monetary defau lt. If the defau lt is
incapable of cure, or if Distributor fails to cure within the time provided, then
Licensor may proceed against Distributor for available relief, including
term inating this or any other License Agreement retroactive to the date of de fau lt,
suspending Delivery of the Picture(s) and declaring all unpaid amounts due
Licensor immediately due and payable.
24. TERMINATION OTHER THAN F OR DEF AULT
(a)U pon notice to Distributor, Licensor m ay in its sole discretion term inate this
Agreement upon the occurrence of any of the following events: (i) principal
photography of the Picture has not commenced within twelve (12) months after
the date of execution of the License Agreement (“Execution Date”), (ii) the
Picture is not ready for delivery to Distributor within twenty-four (24) months after
the Execution Date, (iii) Licensor abandons the Picture either prior to or after the
commencement of principal photography; and (iv) the Picture is set up for
production and/or distribution with, or is actually distributed in the United States
by, an entity unrelated to Licensor and Licensor no longer has the Licensed
Rights in the Territory.
(b)In the event of te rmination pursuant to paragraph (a), Licensor shall return to
Distributor such portion of the Minimum G uarantee theretofore paid to Licensor
by Distributor; and Distributor shall return to Licensor all physical film m aterials,
publicity materials and documents theretofore furnished by Licensor to Distributor
in connection with the Picture. Other than the return of said portion of the
Minimum Guarantee, Licensor shall have no obligation of an y kind whatsoever to
Distributor, or anyone claiming through Distributor, by reason of such termination,
except as follows: if after termination by Licensor pursuant to paragraph (a)
Licensor or a related entity regains or continues to have all necessary rights in
the Territory, Licensor or such related entity shall offe r to negotiate with
Distributor with respect to the Licensed Rights in the Territory before offering
same to any third party.
25. ARBITATION; FORUM; CHOICE OF LAW ; OMITTED TERMS

An y and all disp utes under this agreem ent shall be submitted exclusive ly to
binding arbitration (“AFMA Arbitration”) in Los Angeles, California under the
Rules of International Arbitration of the American Film Marketing Association
(“AFM A A rbitration Ru les”) in effect as of the date the request for a rbitration is
filed. Each party waives any right to adjudicate any such dispute in any other
court or forum , except that any party m ay seek interim and equitable relief in
accordance with the A FM A A rbitration Ru les.
26. BINDING AGREEMENT:
This agreement sets forth the entire understanding and agreement of the parties
and is a binding agreement.

[EXAM CONTINUES ON NEXT PAGE]

Question 2 (four parts).
Ellen Entrepreneur has an idea for developing a safer and more effective anthrax
vaccine. To proceed, she needs $3 million dollars to rent office space and a laboratory,
and to retain the necessary scientific talent. The risk and potential reward here are great,
since a better vaccine would be worth a great deal, but a number of competitors are also
trying to achieve this goal, and the first one to get a patent can be expected to capture all
the profits. Given the risk, commercial banks are unwilling to finance the transaction. In
the “best case” scenario, it will take five years to bring a product to market.
However, Ellen has been approached by Irving, the manager of an investment
fund (“the Fund”). Irving offers to provide the necessary $3 million on the following
conditions. To begin with control rights, Irving will claim three out of four board seats,
with the other seat going to Ellen. Irving insists on a number of covenants to limit
Ellen’s freedom. For instance, she is not allowed to work for any other firms, she must
seek board approval for all checks above $40,000, and she must have regular
consultations with the Fund’s in-house science expert. The Fund’s souped-up board
representation and covenants automatically expire after an initial public offering (i.e., a
so-called “IPO,” or sale of stock to the public).
Irving further proposes that Ellen will pay $15,000 for 15,000 shares of common
stock. Ellen will receive a cash salary of $50,000 per year, plus options to buy 5000
shares with a $1 exercise price, which will vest in five years (i.e., allowing her to
exercise the options and sell the stock in five years). Ellen’s options “accelerate” in an
IPO, which means that she can exercise them even if the IPO takes place within two
years. Ellen will also be able to hire Sandra and Sid, two scientists, who will receive
compensation packages identical to Ellen’s.
Finally, Irving proposes that the Fund will receive 30,000 shares of convertible
preferred stock, for which the fund will pay $100 per share (i.e., for a total of $3 million).
These shares are “participating,” which means that, in the event of a “liquidation,” the
Fund can claim a liquidation preference of $3 million dollars and, then, the Fund can
claim a portion of what is left over, as if the Fund owned 30,000 shares of common stock.
In other words, the Fund claims its liquidation preference and then “participates” as a
common shareholder. The term “liquidation” is defined to include dissolution or
bankruptcy of the firm, as well as sale of the stock or sale of its assets to a third party.
However, “liquidation” does not include an IPO. In an IPO, the Fund’s convertible
preferred stock automatically converts to 30,000 shares of common stock.
Meanwhile, Ellen knows that her sister Irene, an Internet entrepreneur, started a
firm three years ago. Irene’s investors also took convertible preferred stock, while Irene
had common stock and options on common stock. As in Ellen’s deal, the investors’
liquidation preference was $3 million and their security automatically converted to
common stock in an IPO. Unlike in Ellen’s deal, however, in Irene’s transaction the
preferred stock was not “participating.” Thus, in a liquidation (i.e., a bankruptcy or
acquisition other than an IPO), Irene’s investors had to choose between claiming their $3

million liquidation preference, on one hand, and claiming a share as common
shareholders, on the other. As long as Irene’s investors did not convert their stock, they
could claim their $3 million liquidation preference. Yet if Irene’s investors did not
convert, they could not share in any liquidation proceeds in excess of $3 million – that is,
they could not claim a share as a common shareholder. The only way to share in profits
(i.e., to claim a share of any proceeds that exceeds $3 million) would be to convert; but if
Irene’s investors were to convert, they would no longer be able to claim their $3 million
liquidation preference.
You are Ellen’s lawyer. She asks you the following questions, and your
memo answering them serves as the answer to this question.
A. Ellen wants to know why her investors are giving her a different deal than her
sister got in 1999. Also, given the nature of Ellen’s business, how important is it that her
investors will receive participating convertible preferred stock, instead of the classic
convertible preferred stock that was used in her sister’s deal? As a practical matter,
under what circumstances will this difference matter?
B. If Ellen is successful, the investors eventually will want to cash out. There are
two possible exit strategies: a sale of the firm to a third party; or an IPO in which the firm
sells new shares in the public market, after which the investors will sell their stock in the
public market. Assuming an equal price is available for the firm either way, which exit
method is Ellen likely to prefer? Which is the investor likely to prefer? Does the use of
participating convertible preferred, as opposed to traditional convertible preferred, affect
your analysis?
C. Under US tax law, there are two different kinds of options awarded as
compensation: Incentive and nonqualified stock options (ISOs and NQOs, respectively).
With NQOs, the executive reports, as ordinary income taxable at 39%, the profit upon
exercising the option, and the employer is permitted a deduction for the amount of
taxable income included by the executive. With an ISO, in contrast, the executive’s
profit is taxed at capital gains rates (20%, assuming the relevant holding period is
satisfied); the firm, meanwhile, is not permitted a deduction. Corporate tax rates range
from 0% to 35%. Which is the tax efficient compensation strategy in Irene’s business,
and why?
D. Assume for purposes of this question only that ISOs are the preferred method
of compensation (and no inference should be drawn here about the answer to the prior
question). Assume also that the option granted to Ellen will be an option to buy common
stock (and not an option to buy convertible preferred stock.) One of the conditions that
an option must satisfy under the tax law, in order to qualify as an ISO, is the following:
measured on the date that the option is granted, the option’s exercise price cannot be
lower than the fair market value of the stock. Given this condition, does it help (or hurt)
Ellen’s tax analysis – that is, on the question whether Ellen’s options will qualify as ISOs
– for the investor to receive convertible preferred stock, instead of, say, plain vanilla
common stock (and nothing else)? In terms of Ellen’s tax planning, does it matter if the

investor’s convertible preferred stock is “participating”? You should assume that the
investors will invest on the same date that the options are granted to the employees.
[END OF EXAM]

