B. Conspiracy 707

(the agreement jtsele, But agreements to commit crime are rarely reduced to

terms and conditions of the joint undertaking. How then can the necessary
agreement be described and proved? For a representative statement of the
applicable standard, consider United States v. James, 528 F.2d 999, 1011
(5th Cir. 1976):

To establish the common plan element of a conspiracy, it is not necessary for
the government to prove an express agreement between the alleged conspira-
tors to go forth and violate law. ...“A conspiracy is seldom born of open
covenants openly arrived at. The proof, by the very nature of the crime,

or ‘phases of a conspiracy is not required. It_is enough that he knows the
essential nature of it. “And, it is black letter law that all participants in a
conspiracy need not know each other; all that is necessary is that each
know that it has a scope and that for its success it requires an organization
wider than may be disclosed by his personal participation.”

INTERSTATE CIRCUIT, INC. v. UNITED STATES

Supreme Court of t) States
306 U.S. 20: (1939))
aes

Justice Stone delivered the opinion of the Court.

.. This case is here on appeal . . . from a final decree of the District Court
for northern Texas restraining appellants from continuing in a combination
and conspiracy condemned by the court as a violation of Section 1 of the
Sherman Anti-Trust Act....

[The case involved two related movie theater chains, Interstate Circuit and
Texas Consolidated Theaters, which together dominated the market for exhi-
biting films in the cities where their theaters were located. ‘The other members

films to theaters; together the eight distributed 75 percent of all first-run films
exhibited in the United States. Interstate and Consolidated admittedly had
entered contractual agreements with each of the eight distributors, specifying
the terms on which the theaters would exhibit their films, but each individual
contract between the exhibitor and a distributor could not by itself constitute

eight distributors had : an agreement with one a:

[The centerpiece of the Government’s case was a letter -yhitten by O’Donnell,
Interstate’s manager, to each distributor, in which he as! asked compliance with two
demands as a condition of Interstate’s continued exhibition of that distributor’s
films. One demand was that the distributor agree that on subsequent runs it



708 7. Group Criminality

would not permit its films to be shown in theaters charging an admission price of
less than 25 cents. (At the time, 1934-1935, admission tickets to see second-run
films i Téxas theaters sold for as little as 10 or 15 cents.) Interstate’s second
demand was that the distributor agree not to permit its first-run motion pictures
to be shown on a double-bill with another feature film.

[The letter addressed to each distributor identified all eight distributors as

addressees of the proposal, and subsequently each distributor agreed with
Interstate to accept the proposed restrictions. On this basis the trial_cou court

found that the distributors had agreed and_conspired with | one ano th
restrictions, ix in 1 violation of the Sherman Act.]

As is usual in cases of alleged unlawful agreements to restrain commerce,
the Government is without the aid of direct testimony that the distributors
entered into any agreement with each other to impose the restrictions upon
subsequent-run exhibitors. In order t0 establish agreement it is compelled to
rely on inferences drawn from the course of conduct of the alleged
conspirators.

The trial court drew the inf nference of agreement from the nature of the
proposals made on behalf of Interstate and Consolidated; from the manner in
which they were made; from the substantial unanimity of action taken upon
them by the distributors; and from the fact that appellants did not call as
witnesses any of the superior officials who negotiated the contracts with
Interstate or any official who, in the normal course of business, would have
had knowledge of the existence or non-existence of such an agreement among
the distributors. This conclusion is challenged by appellants because not sup-
ported by subsidiary findings or by the evidence. We think this inference of
the trial court was rightly drawn from the evidence. ...

The O’Donnell letter named on its face as addressees the eight local repre-
sentatives of the distributors, and so from the beginning each of the distribu-
tors knew that the proposals were under consideration by the others:
was aware that all were in active competition and that without substantially

unanimous action 1 with: respect to the restrictions for any given territory there

was risk of a substantial loss of the business and good will of the subsequent-
run and independent exhibitors, but that with it there was the prospect of
increased profits. There was, therefore, strong motive for concerted action,
full advantage of which was taken by Interstate and Consolidated in present-
ing their demands to all in a single document.

There was risk, too, that without agreement diversity of action would
follow. Compliance with the proposals involved a radical departure from
the previous business practices of the industry and a drastic increase in admis-
sion prices of most of the subsequent-run theatres. ...

It taxes credulity to believe that the several distributors would, in the
circumstances, have accepted and put into operation with substantial una-
nimity such far-reaching changes in their business methods without some
understanding that all were to join, and we reject as beyond the range of
probability that it was the result of mere chance. ...



B. Conspiracy 709

While the District Court’s finding of an agreement of the distributors
among themselves is supported by the evidence, we think that in the circum-
stances of this case such-agreement for the imposition of the restrictions upon
subsequent-run exhibitors was not a prerequisite to an unlawful conspiracy. It
was enough that, knowing that concerted action was contemplated and
invited, the distributors gave their adherence to the scheme and participated
in it. Each distributor was advised that the others were asked to participate;

merce, which, we will presently point out, was unreasonable within the mean-
ing of the Sherman Act, and knowing it, all participated in the plan. The
evidence is persuasive that each distributor early became aware that the
others had joined. With that knowledge they renewed the arrangement and
carried it into effect for the two successive years. .

It is elementary that an unlawful conspiracy may be and often is formed
without simultaneous action or agreement on the part of the conspirators. . . .
“We think the conclusion is unavoidable that the conspiracy and each con-
tract between Interstate and the distributors by which those consequences
were effected are violations of the Sherman Act and that the District Court
rightly enjoined the conspiracy among the distributors. Affirmed.

NOTES ON THE REQUIRED AGREEMENT

1. Parallel action or common action? Interstate Circuit is a landmark in
the law of conspiracy, not only for antitrust cases but also for the general
problem of establishing the existence of a conspiratorial relationship. How
can the Court’s statement that “[i]t is elementary that an unlawful conspiracy
may be and often is formed without simultaneous action or agreement on the
part of the conspirators” be reconciled with the definition of conspiracy?

evidence in Interstate Circuit could support an inference that the distributors
actually spoke to one another and agreed to act in common. So while there
might not have been an express agreement, its existence could be inferred
from circumstantial evidence. Presumably, the Court meant that it was not
necessary to establish this kind of express agreement. In other words, a con-
spiracy may exist if there is no communication and no express agreement,
provided that there is a tacit agreement reached without communication.
But then what is the difference between parallel action that occurs because
of a tacit agteement (that is, a conspiracy) and parallel action that occurs
without any agreement at all?

2. Problems. (a) During an urban ni one teenager shouts to three of his

friends, “There’s great stuff in that store’ and the owner’s a cheat. Let’s go get
it!” All four run into the store and start’ grabbing goods. Seeing the looting, two
passersby, strangers to each other, efiter the store and join in the looting. Are
the four teenagers guilty of conspiracy? Are the two passersby guilty of

/

/



710 7. Group Criminality

conspiracy with each other? Are they guilty of conspiracy with the four teen-
agers? Note that the answers to these questions can be important for several
reasons. For example, as we shall see, a conspiracy charge could permit a
substantial increase in punishment. In addition, in some jurisdictions,
conspirators can be held liable for additional crimes committed by their co-
conspirators that are committed in furtherance of the conspiracy.

(b) Motorist M loudly protests the action of an officer who stops him for a
traffic violation, and a crowd gathers. When the officer attempts to make an
arrest, M pushes the officer to the ground and various members of the crowd
then assault the officer. Is M guilty of conspiracy? Griffin v. State, 455 S.W.2d
882 (Ark. 1970), finds a conspiracy on similar facts. Is this a correct result
under the Interstate Circuit principle?

(c) During a party attended by members of the rival Crips and Bloods
gangs, Garcia, one of the Bloods, began “talking smack” to Crips members
who were present, and several of his fellow Bloods did likewise. At some
point, the confrontation escalated. Garcia and others drew weapons, and
shooting broke out. Several Crips were seriously injured, presumably by gun-
fire from the rival gang. Garcia was seen shooting, but there was no evidence
that any of the wounded were shot by him. He was convicted of conspiring
with his fellow gang members to commit aggravated assault. Can common
gang membership, together with parallel action (insulting their rivals, draw-
ing their weapons) prove a conspiratorial agreement under the Interstate
Circuit principle? The Ninth Circuit did not think so. Do you agree? Reversing
Garcia’s conviction, the court said (United States v. Garcia, 151 F.3d 1243,
1245-1246 (9th Cir. 1998)):

An inference of an agreement is permissible only when the nature of the acts
would logically require coordination and planning. [There was] nothing to
suggest that the violence began in accordance with some prearrangement.
The facts establish only that... an ongoing gang-related dispute erupted
into shooting. .. . Such evidence does not establish that parties to a conspiracy
“work[ed] together understandingly, with a single design for the accomplish-
ment of a common purpose.”

[W]e are left only with gang membership as proof that Garcia conspired
with fellow Bloods to shoot the [victims]. The government points to expert
testimony ... [stating] that generally gang members have a “basic agreement”
to back one another up in fights, an agreement which requires no advance
planning or coordination. This testimony ... at most establishes one of the
characteristics of gangs but not a specific objective of a particular gang—let
alone a specific agreement on the part of its members to accomplish an illegal
objective.

[A]Howing a conviction on this basis would “smack . . . of guilt by associa-
tion.” ... Acts of provocation such as “talking smack” or bumping into rival
gang members [at most] indicates that members of a particular gang may be
looking for trouble, or ready to fight. .. . The fact that gang members attend a
function armed with weapons may prove that they are prepared for violence,
but without other evidence it does not establish that they have made plans to

