Six people affiliated with the Oath Keepers convicted in
Capitol riot
washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2023/03/20/oath-keepers-trial-convictions
March 20, 2023
National Security
By Paul Duggan
and
Spencer S. Hsu
March 20, 2023 at 4:59 p.m. EDT
Six people described by authorities as being affiliated with the right-wing extremist group the
Oath Keepers were convicted Monday of numerous federal crimes related to the Jan. 6, 2021,
attack on the U.S. Capitol.
After a trial in U.S. District Court in Washington, the jury returned a total of 27 guilty
verdicts, with every defendant convicted of at least one charge and most found guilty of
several offenses. In all, the defendants faced 34 charges stemming from the Capitol riot. The
jury, which is continuing to deliberate, issued not guilty verdicts on five counts and has yet to
reach decisions on two others.
Four of the defendants were convicted of the most serious offense in the case, conspiring to
obstruct an official proceeding. Theirs was the latest of several trials dealing with the militia
group’s involvement in the Capitol mayhem.
Authorities have described the defendants, ranging in age from their 20s to their 70s, as
members or associates of the Oath Keepers. Five of them originally were charged in early
2021 with conspiracy and aiding and abetting the obstruction of an official proceeding of
Congress. Their trial was separate from two different, higher-profile trials in which other
defendants, including Oath Keepers founder Stewart Rhodes, were accused of seditious
conspiracy.
Skip to end of carousel
What to know about the Oath Keepers sedition trial
Oath Keepers founder Stewart Rhodes was found guilty of seditious conspiracy in the
Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol.
He is accused of guiding a months-long effort to unleash politically motivated violence
to prevent the swearing-in of President Biden.
Where do things stand now? Some Oath Keepers have been convicted and others still
face trial.
1/3

Rhodes is the most high-profile person charged in the investigation so far.
The Oath Keepers trial is the highest-profile prosecution to arise from the 2021 Capitol
chaos.
The trial is an important step in the wider probe, analysts say.
1/2
The five, all found guilty Monday of various crimes, were Connie Meggs, 60, of Dunnellon,
Fla., whose husband, Kelly Meggs, was convicted of seditious conspiracy with Rhodes; Laura
Steele, 53, of Thomasville, N.C., whose brother Graydon Young previously pleaded guilty to
obstructing an official proceeding; married couple Bennie and Sandra Parker, 72 and 63,
respectively, of the Cincinnati area; and William Isaacs, 23, of Kissimmee, Fla.
They were accused of joining a group, or “stack,” of Oath Keepers who climbed the East
Capitol steps in single file and helped a mob of supporters of President Donald Trump force
open the huge Columbus Doors. The rioters, acting on Trump’s false assertion that voter
fraud had denied him a second term in office, stormed the Capitol while Congress was
meeting to confirm Joe Biden’s victory in the November election.
The sixth defendant, Michael Greene, 39, of Indianapolis, was charged and arrested in June
2022. Prosecutors accused Greene — previously identified in government filings only as
“Person 10” or “Whip” — of serving as Rhodes’s on-the-ground coordinator in Washington
for the Oath Keepers security details for Republican VIPs on Jan. 6, 2021.
Greene, who faced five charges, was convicted of trespassing on restricted grounds but was
acquitted of three offenses. In his case, the jury has not yet reached a verdict on a charge of
conspiring to obstruct an official proceeding.
Meggs was convicted of all five charges she faced: two counts involving conspiracy to obstruct
an official proceeding and charges of preventing Congress from performing its duty,
destruction of government property and trespassing on restricted grounds. Sandra Parker
was convicted of the same crimes in addition to obstructing police officers.
Jurors acquitted Bennie Parker of two offenses while convicting him of trespassing. In his
case, the jury is still deliberating on a charge of conspiring to obstruct an official proceeding.
Isaacs and Steele were found guilty of two counts involving conspiring to obstruct an official
proceeding and charges of preventing Congress from performing its duty, destruction of
government property and trespassing on restricted grounds. Isaacs also was convicted of two
charges involving obstructing police officers, while Steele was also found guilty of obstructing
police officers and tampering with evidence.
2/3

Six members of the Oath Keepers, including Rhodes, have been convicted at trial of seditious
conspiracy, and four others have pleaded guilty to the charge. Three of Rhodes associates
were found not guilty of that charge but convicted of other felony charges including
obstructing an official proceeding and aiding and abetting.
3/3