p. 1213
p. 1214
PART III. TREATMENT AND CORRECTION [OMITTED]
PART IV. ORGANIZATION OF CORRECTION [OMITTED]
PART I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1. PRELIMINARY
Section 1.01. Title and Effective Date [omitted]
*
Section 1.02. Purposes; Principles of Construction
(1) The general purposes of the provisions governing the
definition of offenses are:
(a) to forbid and prevent conduct that unjustifiably and
inexcusably inflicts or threatens substantial harm to
individual or public interests;
(b) to subject to public control persons whose conduct
indicates that they are disposed to commit crimes;
(c) to safeguard conduct that is without fault from
condemnation as criminal;

--- Page 2080 ---
(d) to give fair warning of the nature of the conduct
declared to constitute an offense;
(e) to differentiate on reasonable grounds between
serious and minor offenses.
(2) The general purposes of the provisions on sentencing,
applicable to all official actors in the sentencing system, are:
(a) in decisions affecting the sentencing of individual
offenders:
(i) to render sentences in all cases within a range of
severity proportionate to the gravity of offenses, the
harms done to crime victims, and the blameworthiness of
offenders;
(ii) when reasonably feasible, to achieve offender
rehabilitation, general deterrence, incapacitation of
dangerous offenders, restitution to crime victims,
preservation of families, and reintegration of offenders
into the law-abiding community, provided these goals are
pursued within the boundaries of proportionality in
subsection (a)(i);
(iii) to render sentences no more severe than
necessary to achieve the applicable purposes in
subsections (a)(i) and (a)(ii); and
(iv) to avoid the use of sanctions that increase the
likelihood offenders will engage in future criminal
conduct.
(b) in matters affecting the administration of the
sentencing system:
(i) to preserve judicial discretion to individualize
sentences within a framework of law;
(ii) to produce sentences that are uniform in their
reasoned pursuit of the purposes in subsection (2)(a);
p. 1214
p. 1215
(iii) to eliminate inequities in sentencing across
population groups;

--- Page 2081 ---
(iv) to ensure that adequate resources are available
for carrying out sentences imposed and that rational
priorities are established for the use of those resources;
(v) to ensure that all criminal sanctions are
administered in a humane fashion;
(vi) to promote research on sentencing policy and
practices, including the effects of criminal sanctions on
families and communities; and
(vii) to increase the transparency of the sentencing
and corrections system, its accountability to the public,
and the legitimacy of its operations as perceived by all
affected communities.
(3) The provisions of the Code shall be construed according
to the fair import of their terms but when the language is
susceptible of differing constructions it shall be interpreted to
further the general purposes stated in this Section and the
special purposes of the particular provision involved. The
discretionary powers conferred by the Code shall be exercised
in accordance with the criteria stated in the Code and, insofar as
such criteria are not decisive, to further the general purposes
stated in this Section.
Section 1.03. Territorial Applicability
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Section, a person
may be convicted under the law of this State of an offense
committed by his own conduct or the conduct of another for
which he is legally accountable if:
(a) either the conduct which is an element of the offense
or the result which is such an element occurs within this
State; or
(b) conduct occurring outside the State is sufficient under
the law of this State to constitute an attempt to commit an
offense within the State; or
(c) conduct occurring outside the State is sufficient under
the law of this State to constitute a conspiracy to commit an
offense within the State and an overt act in furtherance of
such conspiracy occurs within the State; or

--- Page 2082 ---
(d) conduct occurring within the State establishes
complicity in the commission of, or an attempt, solicitation or
conspiracy to commit, an offense in another jurisdiction
which also is an offense under the law of this State; or
(e) the offense consists of the omission to perform a legal
duty imposed by the law of this State with respect to
domicile, residence or a relationship to a person, thing or
transaction in the State; or
(f) the offense is based on a statute of this State which
expressly prohibits conduct outside the State, when the
conduct bears a reasonable relation to a legitimate interest
of this State and the actor knows or should know that his
conduct is likely to affect that interest.
(2) Subsection (1)(a) does not apply when either causing a
specified result or a purpose to cause or danger of causing such
a result is an element of an offense and the result occurs or is
designed or likely to occur only in another jurisdiction where the
conduct charged would not constitute an offense, unless a
legislative purpose plainly appears to declare the conduct
criminal regardless of the place of the result.
p. 1215
p. 1216
(3) Subsection (1)(a) does not apply when causing a
particular result is an element of an offense and the result is
caused by conduct occurring outside the State which would not
constitute an offense if the result had occurred there, unless the
actor purposely or knowingly caused the result within the State.
(4) When the offense is homicide, either the death of the
victim or the bodily impact causing the death constitutes a
“result,” within the meaning of Subsection (1)(a) and if the body
of the homicide victim is found within the State, it is presumed
that such result occurred within the State.
(5) This State includes the land and water and the air space
above such land and water with respect to which the State has
legislative jurisdiction.

--- Page 2083 ---
Section 1.04. Classes of Crimes; Violations
(1) An offense defined by this Code or by any other statute of
this State, for which a sentence of [death or of] imprisonment is
authorized, constitutes a crime. Crimes are classified as
felonies, misdemeanors or petty misdemeanors.
(2) A crime is a felony if it is so designated in this Code or if
persons convicted thereof may be sentenced [to death or] to
imprisonment for a term which, apart from an extended term, is
in excess of one year.
(3) A crime is a misdemeanor if it is so designated in this
Code or in a statute other than this Code enacted subsequent
thereto.
(4) A crime is a petty misdemeanor if it is so designated in
this Code or in a statute other than this Code enacted
subsequent thereto or if it is defined by a statute other than this
Code which now provides that persons convicted thereof may
be sentenced to imprisonment for a term of which the maximum
is less than one year.
(5) An offense defined by this Code or by any other statute of
this State constitutes a violation if it is so designated in this
Code or in the law defining the offense or if no other sentence
than a fine, or fine and forfeiture or other civil penalty is
authorized upon conviction or if it is defined by a statute other
than this Code which now provides that the offense shall not
constitute a crime. A violation does not constitute a crime and
conviction of a violation shall not give rise to any disability or
legal disadvantage based on conviction of a criminal offense.
(6) Any offense declared by law to constitute a crime, without
specification of the grade thereof or of the sentence authorized
upon conviction, is a misdemeanor.
(7) An offense defined by any statute of this State other than
this Code shall be classified as provided in this Section and the
sentence that may be imposed upon conviction thereof shall
hereafter be governed by this Code.
Section 1.05. All Offenses Defined by Statute; Application of
General Provisions of the Code

--- Page 2084 ---
(1) No conduct constitutes an offense unless it is a crime or
violation under this Code or another statute of this State.
p. 1216
p. 1217
(2) The provisions of Part I of the Code are applicable to
offenses defined by other statutes, unless the Code otherwise
provides.
(3) This Section does not affect the power of a court to
punish for contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law
for the enforcement of an order or a civil judgment or decree.
Section 1.06. Time Limitations
(1) A prosecution for murder may be commenced at any
time.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Section,
prosecutions for other offenses are subject to the following
periods of limitation:
(a) a prosecution for a felony of the first degree must be
commenced within six years after it is committed;
(b) a prosecution for any other felony must be
commenced within three years after it is committed;
(c) a prosecution for a misdemeanor must be
commenced within two years after it is committed;
(d) a prosecution for a petty misdemeanor or a violation
must be commenced within six months after it is committed.
(3) If the period prescribed in Subsection (2) has expired, a
prosecution may nevertheless be commenced for:
(a) any offense a material element of which is either fraud
or a breach of fiduciary obligation within one year after
discovery of the offense by an aggrieved party or by a
person who has legal duty to represent an aggrieved party
and who is himself not a party to the offense, but in no case
shall this provision extend the period of limitation otherwise
applicable by more than three years; and

--- Page 2085 ---
(b) any offense based upon misconduct in office by a
public officer or employee at any time when the defendant is
in public office or employment or within two years thereafter,
but in no case shall this provision extend the period of
limitation otherwise applicable by more than three years.
(4) An offense is committed either when every element
occurs, or, if a legislative purpose to prohibit a continuing course
of conduct plainly appears, at the time when the course of
conduct or the defendant’s complicity therein is terminated. Time
starts to run on the day after the offense is committed.
(5) A prosecution is commenced either when an indictment is
found [or an information filed] or when a warrant or other
process is issued, provided that such warrant or process is
executed without unreasonable delay.
(6) The period of limitation does not run:
(a) during any time when the accused is continuously
absent from the State or has no reasonably ascertainable
place of abode or work within the State, but in no case shall
this provision extend the period of limitation otherwise
applicable by more than three years; or
(b) during any time when a prosecution against the
accused for the same conduct is pending in this State.
p. 1217
p. 1218
Section 1.07. Method of Prosecution When Conduct
Constitutes More Than One Offense
(1) Prosecution for Multiple Offenses; Limitation on
Convictions. When the same conduct of a defendant may
establish the commission of more than one offense, the
defendant may be prosecuted for each such offense. He may
not, however, be convicted of more than one offense if:
(a) one offense is included in the other, as defined in
Subsection (4) of this Section; or

--- Page 2086 ---
(b) one offense consists only of a conspiracy or other
form of preparation to commit the other; or
(c) inconsistent findings of fact are required to establish
the commission of the offenses; or
(d) the offenses differ only in that one is defined to
prohibit a designated kind of conduct generally and the other
to prohibit a specific instance of such conduct; or
(e) the offense is defined as a continuing course of
conduct and the defendant’s course of conduct was
uninterrupted, unless the law provides that specific periods
of such conduct constitute separate offenses.
(2) Limitation on Separate Trials for Multiple Offenses.
Except as provided in Subsection (3) of this Section, a
defendant shall not be subject to separate trials for multiple
offenses based on the same conduct or arising from the same
criminal episode, if such offenses are known to the appropriate
prosecuting officer at the time of the commencement of the first
trial and are within the jurisdiction of a single court.
(3) Authority of Court to Order Separate Trials. When a
defendant is charged with two or more offenses based on the
same conduct or arising from the same criminal episode, the
Court, on application of the prosecuting attorney or of the
defendant, may order any such charge to be tried separately, if it
is satisfied that justice so requires.
(4) Conviction of Included Offense Permitted. A defendant
may be convicted of an offense included in an offense charged
in the indictment [or the information]. An offense is so included
when:
(a) it is established by proof of the same or less than all
the facts required to establish the commission of the offense
charged; or
(b) it consists of an attempt or solicitation to commit the
offense charged or to commit an offense otherwise included
therein; or
(c) it differs from the offense charged only in the respect
that a less serious injury or risk of injury to the same person,

--- Page 2087 ---
property or public interest or a lesser kind of culpability
suffices to establish its commission.
(5) Submission of Included Offense to Jury. The Court shall
not be obligated to charge the jury with respect to an included
offense unless there is a rational basis for a verdict acquitting
the defendant of the offense charged and convicting him of the
included offense.
Section 1.08. When Prosecution Barred by Former
Prosecution for the Same Offense [omitted]
Section 1.09. When Prosecution Barred by Former
Prosecution for Different Offense [omitted]
p. 1218
p. 1219
Section 1.10. Former Prosecution in Another Jurisdiction:
When a Bar [omitted]
Section 1.11. Former Prosecution Before Court Lacking
Jurisdiction or When Fraudulently Procured by the Defendant
[omitted]
Section 1.12. Proof Beyond a Reasonable Doubt; Affirmative
Defenses; Burden of Proving Fact When Not an Element of an
Offense; Presumptions
(1) No person may be convicted of an offense unless each
element of such offense is proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
In the absence of such proof, the innocence of the defendant is
assumed.
(2) Subsection (1) of this Section does not:
(a) require the disproof of an affirmative defense unless
and until there is evidence supporting such defense; or
(b) apply to any defense which the Code or another
statute plainly requires the defendant to prove by a
preponderance of evidence.

--- Page 2088 ---
(3) A ground of defense is affirmative, within the meaning of
Subsection (2)(a) of this Section, when:
(a) it arises under a section of the Code which so
provides; or
(b) it relates to an offense defined by a statute other than
the Code and such statute so provides; or
(c) it involves a matter of excuse or justification peculiarly
within the knowledge of the defendant on which he can fairly
be required to adduce supporting evidence.
(4) When the application of the Code depends upon the
finding of a fact which is not an element of an offense, unless
the Code otherwise provides:
(a) the burden of proving the fact is on the prosecution or
defendant, depending on whose interest or contention will be
furthered if the finding should be made; and
(b) the fact must be proved to the satisfaction of the
Court or jury, as the case may be.
(5) When the Code establishes a presumption with respect
to any fact which is an element of an offense, it has the following
consequences:
(a) when there is evidence of the facts which give rise to
the presumption, the issue of the existence of the presumed
fact must be submitted to the jury, unless the Court is
satisfied that the evidence as a whole clearly negatives the
presumed fact; and
(b) when the issue of the existence of the presumed fact
is submitted to the jury, the Court shall charge that while the
presumed fact must, on all the evidence, be proved beyond
a reasonable doubt, the law declares that the jury may
regard the facts giving rise to the presumption as sufficient
evidence of the presumed fact.
(6) A presumption not established by the Code or
inconsistent with it has the consequences otherwise accorded it
by law.
Section 1.13. General Definitions

--- Page 2089 ---
In this Code, unless a different meaning plainly is required:
p. 1219
p. 1220
(1) “statute” includes the Constitution and a local law or
ordinance of a political subdivision of the State;
(2) “act” or “action” means a bodily movement whether
voluntary or involuntary;
(3) “voluntary” has the meaning specified in Section 2.01;
(4) “omission” means a failure to act;
(5) “conduct” means an action or omission and its
accompanying state of mind, or, where relevant, a series of acts
and omissions;
(6) “actor” includes, where relevant, a person guilty of an
omission;
(7) “acted” includes, where relevant, “omitted to act”;
(8) “person,” “he” and “actor” include any natural person and,
where relevant, a corporation or an unincorporated association;
(9) “element of an offense” means (i) such conduct or (ii)
such attendant circumstances or (iii) such a result of conduct as
(a) is included in the description of the forbidden conduct
in the definition of the offense; or
(b) establishes the required kind of culpability; or
(c) negatives an excuse or justification for such conduct;
or
(d) negatives a defense under the statute of limitations;
or
(e) establishes jurisdiction or venue;
(10) “material element of an offense” means an element that
does not relate exclusively to the statute of limitations,
jurisdiction, venue or to any other matter similarly unconnected
with (i) the harm or evil, incident to conduct, sought to be
prevented by the law defining the offense, or (ii) the existence of
a justification or excuse for such conduct;

--- Page 2090 ---
(11) “purposely” has the meaning specified in Section 2.02
and equivalent terms such as “with purpose,” “designed” or “with
design” have the same meaning;
(12) “intentionally” or “with intent” means purposely;
(13) “knowingly” has the meaning specified in Section 2.02
and equivalent terms such as “knowing” or “with knowledge”
have the same meaning;
(14) “recklessly” has the meaning specified in Section 2.02
and equivalent terms such as “recklessness” or “with
recklessness” have the same meaning;
(15) “negligently” has the meaning specified in Section 2.02
and equivalent terms such as “negligence” or “with negligence”
have the same meaning;
(16) “reasonably believes” or “reasonable belief” designates
a belief which the actor is not reckless or negligent in holding.
ARTICLE 2. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF LIABILITY
Section 2.01. Requirement of Voluntary Act; Omission as
Basis of Liability; Possession as an Act
(1) A person is not guilty of an offense unless his liability is
based on conduct which includes a voluntary act or the omission
to perform an act of which he is physically capable.
p. 1220
p. 1221
(2) The following are not voluntary acts within the meaning of
this Section:
(a) a reflex or convulsion;
(b) a bodily movement during unconsciousness or sleep;
(c) conduct during hypnosis or resulting from hypnotic
suggestion;
(d) a bodily movement that otherwise is not a product of
the effort or determination of the actor, either conscious or
habitual.

--- Page 2091 ---
(3) Liability for the commission of an offense may not be
based on an omission unaccompanied by action unless:
(a) the omission is expressly made sufficient by the law
defining the offense; or
(b) a duty to perform the omitted act is otherwise
imposed by law.
(4) Possession is an act, within the meaning of this Section,
if the possessor knowingly procured or received the thing
possessed or was aware of his control thereof for a sufficient
period to have been able to terminate his possession.
Section 2.02. General Requirements of Culpability
(1) Minimum Requirements of Culpability. Except as
provided in Section 2.05, a person is not guilty of an offense
unless he acted purposely, knowingly, recklessly or negligently,
as the law may require, with respect to each material element of
the offense.
(2) Kinds of Culpability Defined.
(a) Purposely. A person acts purposely with respect to a
material element of an offense when:
(i) if the element involves the nature of his conduct or
a result thereof, it is his conscious object to engage in
conduct of that nature or to cause such a result; and
(ii) if the element involves the attendant
circumstances, he is aware of the existence of such
circumstances or he believes or hopes that they exist.
(b) Knowingly. A person acts knowingly with respect to a
material element of an offense when:
(i) if the element involves the nature of his conduct or
the attendant circumstances, he is aware that his conduct
is of that nature or that such circumstances exist; and
(ii) if the element involves a result of his conduct, he
is aware that it is practically certain that his conduct will
cause such a result.
(c) Recklessly. A person acts recklessly with respect to a
material element of an offense when he consciously

--- Page 2092 ---
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the
material element exists or will result from his conduct. The
risk must be of such a nature and degree that, considering
the nature and purpose of the actor’s conduct and the
circumstances known to him, its disregard involves a gross
deviation from the standard of conduct that a law-abiding
person would observe in the actor’s situation.
(d) Negligently. A person acts negligently with respect to
a material element of an offense when he should be aware
of a substantial and
p. 1221
p. 1222
unjustifiable risk that the material element exists or will result
from his conduct. The risk must be of such a nature and
degree that the actor’s failure to perceive it, considering the
nature and purpose of his conduct and the circumstances
known to him, involves a gross deviation from the standard
of care that a reasonable person would observe in the
actor’s situation.
(3) Culpability Required Unless Otherwise Provided. When
the culpability sufficient to establish a material element of an
offense is not prescribed by law, such element is established if a
person acts purposely, knowingly or recklessly with respect
thereto.
(4) Prescribed Culpability Requirement Applies to All
Material Elements. When the law defining an offense prescribes
the kind of culpability that is sufficient for the commission of an
offense, without distinguishing among the material elements
thereof, such provision shall apply to all the material elements of
the offense, unless a contrary purpose plainly appears.
(5) Substitutes for Negligence, Recklessness and
Knowledge. When the law provides that negligence suffices to
establish an element of an offense, such element also is
established if a person acts purposely, knowingly or recklessly.
When recklessness suffices to establish an element, such

--- Page 2093 ---
element also is established if a person acts purposely or
knowingly. When acting knowingly suffices to establish an
element, such element also is established if a person acts
purposely.
(6) Requirement of Purpose Satisfied if Purpose Is
Conditional. When a particular purpose is an element of an
offense, the element is established although such purpose is
conditional, unless the condition negatives the harm or evil
sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense.
(7) Requirement of Knowledge Satisfied by Knowledge of
High Probability. When knowledge of the existence of a
particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge is
established if a person is aware of a high probability of its
existence, unless he actually believes that it does not exist.
(8) Requirement of Wilfulness Satisfied by Acting Knowingly.
A requirement that an offense be committed wilfully is satisfied if
a person acts knowingly with respect to the material elements of
the offense, unless a purpose to impose further requirements
appears.
(9) Culpability as to Illegality of Conduct. Neither knowledge
nor recklessness or negligence as to whether conduct
constitutes an offense or as to the existence, meaning or
application of the law determining the elements of an offense is
an element of such offense, unless the definition of the offense
or the Code so provides.
(10) Culpability as Determinant of Grade of Offense. When
the grade or degree of an offense depends on whether the
offense is committed purposely, knowingly, recklessly or
negligently, its grade or degree shall be the lowest for which the
determinative kind of culpability is established with respect to
any material element of the offense.
Section 2.03. Causal Relationship Between Conduct and
Result; Divergence Between Result Designed or
Contemplated and Actual Result or Between Probable and
Actual Result
(1) Conduct is the cause of a result when:

--- Page 2094 ---
p. 1222
p. 1223
(a) it is an antecedent but for which the result in question
would not have occurred; and
(b) the relationship between the conduct and result
satisfies any additional causal requirements imposed by the
Code or by the law defining the offense.
(2) When purposely or knowingly causing a particular result
is an element of an offense, the element is not established if the
actual result is not within the purpose or the contemplation of
the actor unless:
(a) the actual result differs from that designed or
contemplated, as the case may be, only in the respect that a
different person or different property is injured or affected or
that the injury or harm designed or contemplated would have
been more serious or more extensive than that caused; or
(b) the actual result involves the same kind of injury or
harm as that designed or contemplated and is not too remote
or accidental in its occurrence to have a [just] bearing on the
actor’s liability or on the gravity of his offense.
(3) When recklessly or negligently causing a particular result
is an element of an offense, the element is not established if the
actual result is not within the risk of which the actor is aware or,
in the case of negligence, of which he should be aware unless:
(a) the actual result differs from the probable result only
in the respect that a different person or different property is
injured or affected or that the probable injury or harm would
have been more serious or more extensive than that caused;
or
(b) the actual result involves the same kind of injury or
harm as the probable result and is not too remote or
accidental in its occurrence to have a [just] bearing on the
actor’s liability or on the gravity of his offense.
(4) When causing a particular result is a material element of
an offense for which absolute liability is imposed by law, the

--- Page 2095 ---
element is not established unless the actual result is a probable
consequence of the actor’s conduct.
Section 2.04. Ignorance or Mistake
(1) Ignorance or mistake as to a matter of fact or law is a
defense if:
(a) the ignorance or mistake negatives the purpose,
knowledge, belief, recklessness or negligence required to
establish a material element of the offense; or
(b) the law provides that the state of mind established by
such ignorance or mistake constitutes a defense.
(2) Although ignorance or mistake would otherwise afford a
defense to the offense charged, the defense is not available if
the defendant would be guilty of another offense had the
situation been as he supposed. In such case, however, the
ignorance or mistake of the defendant shall reduce the grade
and degree of the offense of which he may be convicted to
those of the offense of which he would be guilty had the
situation been as he supposed.
(3) A belief that conduct does not legally constitute an
offense is a defense to a prosecution for that offense based
upon such conduct when:
p. 1223
p. 1224
(a) the statute or other enactment defining the offense is
not known to the actor and has not been published or
otherwise reasonably made available prior to the conduct
alleged; or
(b) he acts in reasonable reliance upon an official
statement of the law, afterward determined to be invalid or
erroneous, contained in (i) a statute or other enactment; (ii) a
judicial decision, opinion or judgment; (iii) an administrative
order or grant of permission; or (iv) an official interpretation
of the public officer or body charged by law with

--- Page 2096 ---
responsibility for the interpretation, administration or
enforcement of the law defining the offense.
(4) The defendant must prove a defense arising under
Subsection (3) of this Section by a preponderance of evidence.
Section 2.05. When Culpability Requirements Are
Inapplicable to Violations and to Offenses Defined by Other
Statutes; Effect of Absolute Liability in Reducing Grade of
Offense to Violation
(1) The requirements of culpability prescribed by Sections
2.01 and 2.02 do not apply to:
(a) offenses which constitute violations, unless the
requirement involved is included in the definition of the
offense or the Court determines that its application is
consistent with effective enforcement of the law defining the
offense; or
(b) offenses defined by statutes other than the Code,
insofar as a legislative purpose to impose absolute liability
for such offenses or with respect to any material element
thereof plainly appears.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of existing law and
unless a subsequent statute otherwise provides:
(a) when absolute liability is imposed with respect to any
material element of an offense defined by a statute other
than the Code and a conviction is based upon such liability,
the offense constitutes a violation; and
(b) although absolute liability is imposed by law with
respect to one or more of the material elements of an
offense defined by a statute other than the Code, the
culpable commission of the offense may be charged and
proved, in which event negligence with respect to such
elements constitutes sufficient culpability and the
classification of the offense and the sentence that may be
imposed therefor upon conviction are determined by Section
1.04 and Article 6 of the Code.
Section 2.06. Liability for Conduct of Another; Complicity

--- Page 2097 ---
(1) A person is guilty of an offense if it is committed by his
own conduct or by the conduct of another person for which he is
legally accountable, or both.
(2) A person is legally accountable for the conduct of another
person when:
(a) acting with the kind of culpability that is sufficient for
the commission of the offense, he causes an innocent or
irresponsible person to engage in such conduct; or
(b) he is made accountable for the conduct of such other
person by the Code or by the law defining the offense; or
p. 1224
p. 1225
(c) he is an accomplice of such other person in the
commission of the offense.
(3) A person is an accomplice of another person in the
commission of an offense if:
(a) with the purpose of promoting or facilitating the
commission of the offense, he
(i) solicits such other person to commit it; or
(ii) aids or agrees or attempts to aid such other
person in planning or committing it; or
(iii) having a legal duty to prevent the commission of
the offense, fails to make proper effort so to do; or
(b) his conduct is expressly declared by law to establish
his complicity.
(4) When causing a particular result is an element of an
offense, an accomplice in the conduct causing such result is an
accomplice in the commission of that offense, if he acts with the
kind of culpability, if any, with respect to that result that is
sufficient for the commission of the offense.
(5) A person who is legally incapable of committing a
particular offense himself may be guilty thereof if it is committed
by the conduct of another person for which he is legally

--- Page 2098 ---
accountable, unless such liability is inconsistent with the
purpose of the provision establishing his incapacity.
(6) Unless otherwise provided by the Code or by the law
defining the offense, a person is not an accomplice in an offense
committed by another person if:
(a) he is a victim of that offense; or
(b) the offense is so defined that his conduct is inevitably
incident to its commission; or
(c) he terminates his complicity prior to the commission of
the offense and
(i) wholly deprives it of effectiveness in the
commission of the offense; or
(ii) gives timely warning to the law enforcement
authorities or otherwise makes proper effort to prevent
the commission of the offense.
(7) An accomplice may be convicted on proof of the
commission of the offense and of his complicity therein, though
the person claimed to have committed the offense has not been
prosecuted or convicted or has been convicted of a different
offense or degree of offense or has an immunity to prosecution
or conviction or has been acquitted.
Section 2.07. Liability of Corporations, Unincorporated
Associations and Persons Acting, or Under a Duty to Act, in
Their Behalf
(1) A corporation may be convicted of the commission of an
offense if:
(a) the offense is a violation or the offense is defined by a
statute other than the Code in which a legislative purpose to
impose liability on corporations plainly appears and the
conduct is performed by an agent of the corporation acting in
behalf of the corporation within the scope of his office or
employment, except that if the law defining the offense
designates the agents for whose conduct the corporation is
accountable or the circumstances under which it is
accountable, such provisions shall apply; or

--- Page 2099 ---
p. 1225
p. 1226
(b) the offense consists of an omission to discharge a
specific duty of affirmative performance imposed on
corporations by law; or
(c) the commission of the offense was authorized,
requested, commanded, performed or recklessly tolerated by
the board of directors or by a high managerial agent acting in
behalf of the corporation within the scope of his office or
employment.
(2) When absolute liability is imposed for the commission of
an offense, a legislative purpose to impose liability on a
corporation shall be assumed, unless the contrary plainly
appears.
(3) An unincorporated association may be convicted of the
commission of an offense if:
(a) the offense is defined by a statute other than the
Code which expressly provides for the liability of such an
association and the conduct is performed by an agent of the
association acting in behalf of the association within the
scope of his office or employment, except that if the law
defining the offense designates the agents for whose
conduct the association is accountable or the circumstances
under which it is accountable, such provisions shall apply; or
(b) the offense consists of an omission to discharge a
specific duty of affirmative performance imposed on
associations by law.
(4) As used in this Section:
(a) “corporation” does not include an entity organized as
or by a governmental agency for the execution of a
governmental program;
(b) “agent” means any director, officer, servant, employee
or other person authorized to act in behalf of the corporation
or association and, in the case of an unincorporated
association, a member of such association;

--- Page 2100 ---
(c) “high managerial agent” means an officer of a
corporation or an unincorporated association, or, in the case
of a partnership, a partner, or any other agent of a
corporation or association having duties of such
responsibility that his conduct may fairly be assumed to
represent the policy of the corporation or association.
(5) In any prosecution of a corporation or an unincorporated
association for the commission of an offense included within the
terms of Subsection (1)(a) or Subsection (3)(a) of this Section,
other than an offense for which absolute liability has been
imposed, it shall be a defense if the defendant proves by a
preponderance of evidence that the high managerial agent
having supervisory responsibility over the subject matter of the
offense employed due diligence to prevent its commission. This
paragraph shall not apply if it is plainly inconsistent with the
legislative purpose in defining the particular offense.
(6) (a) A person is legally accountable for any conduct he
performs or causes to be performed in the name of the
corporation or an unincorporated association or in its behalf to
the same extent as if it were performed in his own name or
behalf.
(b) Whenever a duty to act is imposed by law upon a
corporation or an unincorporated association, any agent of
the corporation or association having primary responsibility
for the discharge of the duty is legally accountable for a
reckless omission to perform the required act to the same
extent as if the duty were imposed by law directly upon
himself.
p. 1226
p. 1227
(c) When a person is convicted of an offense by reason
of his legal accountability for the conduct of a corporation or
an unincorporated association, he is subject to the sentence
authorized by law when a natural person is convicted of an
offense of the grade and the degree involved.

--- Page 2101 ---
Section 2.08. Intoxication
(1) Except as provided in Subsection (4) of this Section,
intoxication of the actor is not a defense unless it negatives an
element of the offense.
(2) When recklessness establishes an element of the
offense, if the actor, due to self-induced intoxication, is unaware
of a risk of which he would have been aware had he been sober,
such unawareness is immaterial.
(3) Intoxication does not, in itself, constitute mental disease
within the meaning of Section 4.01.
(4) Intoxication which (a) is not self-induced or (b) is
pathological is an affirmative defense if by reason of such
intoxication the actor at the time of his conduct lacks substantial
capacity either to appreciate its criminality [wrongfulness] or to
conform his conduct to the requirements of law.
(5) Definitions. In this Section unless a different meaning
plainly is required:
(a) “intoxication” means a disturbance of mental or
physical capacities resulting from the introduction of
substances into the body;
(b) “self-induced intoxication” means intoxication caused
by substances which the actor knowingly introduces into his
body, the tendency of which to cause intoxication he knows
or ought to know, unless he introduces them pursuant to
medical advice or under such circumstances as would afford
a defense to a charge of crime;
(c) “pathological intoxication” means intoxication grossly
excessive in degree, given the amount of the intoxicant, to
which the actor does not know he is susceptible.
Section 2.09. Duress
(1) It is an affirmative defense that the actor engaged in the
conduct charged to constitute an offense because he was
coerced to do so by the use of, or a threat to use, unlawful force
against his person or the person of another, which a person of

--- Page 2102 ---
reasonable firmness in his situation would have been unable to
resist.
(2) The defense provided by this Section is unavailable if the
actor recklessly placed himself in a situation in which it was
probable that he would be subjected to duress. The defense is
also unavailable if he was negligent in placing himself in such a
situation, whenever negligence suffices to establish culpability
for the offense charged.
(3) It is not a defense that a woman acted on the command
of her husband, unless she acted under such coercion as would
establish a defense under this Section. [The presumption that a
woman, acting in the presence of her husband, is coerced is
abolished.]
(4) When the conduct of the actor would otherwise be
justifiable under Section 3.02, this Section does not preclude
such defense.
p. 1227
p. 1228
Section 2.10. Military Orders
It is an affirmative defense that the actor, in engaging in the
conduct charged to constitute an offense, does no more than
execute an order of his superior in the armed services which he
does not know to be unlawful.
Section 2.11. Consent
(1) In General. The consent of the victim to conduct charged
to constitute an offense or to the result thereof is a defense if
such consent negatives an element of the offense or precludes
the infliction of the harm or evil sought to be prevented by the
law defining the offense.
(2) Consent to Bodily Harm. When conduct is charged to
constitute an offense because it causes or threatens bodily
harm, consent to such conduct or to the infliction of such harm is
a defense if:

--- Page 2103 ---
(a) the bodily harm consented to or threatened by the
conduct consented to is not serious; or
(b) the conduct and the harm are reasonably foreseeable
hazards of joint participation in a lawful athletic contest or
competitive sport; or
(c) the consent establishes a justification for the conduct
under Article 3 of the Code.
(3) Ineffective Consent. Unless otherwise provided by the
Code or by the law defining the offense, assent does not
constitute consent if:
(a) it is given by a person who is legally incompetent to
authorize the conduct charged to constitute the offense; or
(b) it is given by a person who by reason of youth, mental
disease or defect or intoxication is manifestly unable or
known by the actor to be unable to make a reasonable
judgment as to the nature or harmfulness of the conduct
charged to constitute the offense; or
(c) it is given by a person whose improvident consent is
sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense; or
(d) it is induced by force, duress or deception of a kind
sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense.
Section 2.12. De Minimis Infractions
The Court shall dismiss a prosecution if, having regard to the
nature of the conduct charged to constitute an offense and the
nature of the attendant circumstances, it finds that the defendant’s
conduct:
(1) was within a customary license or tolerance, neither
expressly negatived by the person whose interest was infringed
nor inconsistent with the purpose of the law defining the offense;
or
(2) did not actually cause or threaten the harm or evil sought
to be prevented by the law defining the offense or did so only to
an extent too trivial to warrant the condemnation of conviction;
or

--- Page 2104 ---
(3) presents such other extenuations that it cannot
reasonably be regarded as envisaged by the legislature in
forbidding the offense.
Section 2.13. Entrapment
(1) A public law enforcement official or a person acting in
cooperation with such an official perpetrates an entrapment if for
the purpose of obtaining
p. 1228
p. 1229
evidence of the commission of an offense, he induces or
encourages another person to engage in conduct constituting
such offense by either:
(a) making knowingly false representations designed to
induce the belief that such conduct is not prohibited; or
(b) employing methods of persuasion or inducement
which create a substantial risk that such an offense will be
committed by persons other than those who are ready to
commit it.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection (3) of this Section, a
person prosecuted for an offense shall be acquitted if he proves
by a preponderance of evidence that his conduct occurred in
response to an entrapment. The issue of entrapment shall be
tried by the Court in the absence of the jury.
(3) The defense afforded by this Section is unavailable when
causing or threatening bodily injury is an element of the offense
charged and the prosecution is based on conduct causing or
threatening such injury to a person other than the person
perpetrating the entrapment.
ARTICLE 3. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF JUSTIFICATION
Section 3.01. Justification an Affirmative Defense; Civil
Remedies Unaffected
(1) In any prosecution based on conduct which is justifiable
under this Article, justification is an affirmative defense.

--- Page 2105 ---
(2) The fact that conduct is justifiable under this Article does
not abolish or impair any remedy for such conduct which is
available in any civil action.
Section 3.02. Justification Generally: Choice of Evils
(1) Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary to
avoid a harm or evil to himself or to another is justifiable,
provided that:
(a) the harm or evil sought to be avoided by such conduct
is greater than that sought to be prevented by the law
defining the offense charged; and
(b) neither the Code nor other law defining the offense
provides exceptions or defenses dealing with the specific
situation involved; and
(c) a legislative purpose to exclude the justification
claimed does not otherwise plainly appear.
(2) When the actor was reckless or negligent in bringing
about the situation requiring a choice of harms or evils or in
appraising the necessity for his conduct, the justification
afforded by this section is unavailable in a prosecution for any
offense for which recklessness or negligence, as the case may
be, suffices to establish culpability.
Section 3.03. Execution of Public Duty
(1) Except as provided in Subsection (2) of this Section,
conduct is justifiable when it is required or authorized by:
(a) the law defining the duties or functions of a public
officer or the assistance to be rendered to such officer in the
performance of his duties; or
(b) the law governing the execution of legal process; or
p. 1229
p. 1230
(c) the judgment or order of a competent court or tribunal;
or

--- Page 2106 ---
(d) the law governing the armed services or the lawful
conduct of war; or
(e) any other provision of law imposing a public duty.
(2) The other sections of this Article apply to:
(a) the use of force upon or toward the person of another
for any of the purposes dealt with in such sections; and
(b) the use of deadly force for any purpose, unless the
use of such force is otherwise expressly authorized by law or
occurs in the lawful conduct of war.
(3) The justification afforded by Subsection (1) of this Section
applies:
(a) when the actor believes his conduct to be required or
authorized by the judgment or direction of a competent court
or tribunal or in the lawful execution of legal process,
notwithstanding lack of jurisdiction of the court or defect in
the legal process; and
(b) when the actor believes his conduct to be required or
authorized to assist a public officer in the performance of his
duties, notwithstanding that the officer exceeded his legal
authority.
Section 3.04. Use of Force in Self-Protection
(1) Use of Force Justifiable for Protection of the Person.
Subject to the provisions of this Section and of Section 3.09, the
use of force upon or toward another person is justifiable when
the actor believes that such force is immediately necessary for
the purpose of protecting himself against the use of unlawful
force by such other person on the present occasion.
(2) Limitations on Justifying Necessity for Use of Force.
(a) The use of force is not justifiable under this Section:
(i) to resist an arrest which the actor knows is being
made by a peace officer, although the arrest is unlawful;
or
(ii) to resist force used by the occupier or possessor
of property or by another person on his behalf, where the
actor knows that the person using the force is doing so

--- Page 2107 ---
under a claim of right to protect the property, except that
this limitation shall not apply if:
(1) the actor is a public officer acting in the performance of
his duties or a person lawfully assisting him therein or a person
making or assisting in a lawful arrest; or
(2) the actor has been unlawfully dispossessed of the
property and is making a re-entry or recaption justified by
Section 3.06; or
(3) the actor believes that such force is necessary to protect
himself against death or serious bodily harm.
(b) The use of deadly force is not justifiable under this
Section unless the actor believes that such force is
necessary to protect himself against death, serious bodily
harm, kidnapping or sexual intercourse compelled by force
or threat; nor is it justifiable if:
(i) the actor, with the purpose of causing death or
serious bodily harm, provoked the use of force against
himself in the same encounter; or
(ii) the actor knows that he can avoid the necessity of
using such force with complete safety by retreating or by
surrendering possession
p. 1230
p. 1231
of a thing to a person asserting a claim of right thereto or
by complying with a demand that he abstain from any
action which he has no duty to take, except that:
(1) the actor is not obliged to retreat from his dwelling or
place of work, unless he was the initial aggressor or is assailed
in his place of work by another person whose place of work the
actor knows it to be; and
(2) a public officer justified in using force in the performance
of his duties or a person justified in using force in his assistance
or a person justified in using force in making an arrest or
preventing an escape is not obliged to desist from efforts to
perform such duty, effect such arrest or prevent such escape

--- Page 2108 ---
because of resistance or threatened resistance by or on behalf
of the person against whom such action is directed.
(c) Except as required by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this
Subsection, a person employing protective force may
estimate the necessity thereof under the circumstances as
he believes them to be when the force is used, without
retreating, surrendering possession, doing any other act
which he has no legal duty to do or abstaining from any
lawful action.
(3) Use of Confinement as Protective Force. The justification
afforded by this Section extends to the use of confinement as
protective force only if the actor takes all reasonable measures
to terminate the confinement as soon as he knows that he safely
can, unless the person confined has been arrested on a charge
of crime.
Section 3.05. Use of Force for the Protection of Other
Persons
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Section and of Section
3.09, the use of force upon or toward the person of another is
justifiable to protect a third person when:
(a) the actor would be justified under Section 3.04 in
using such force to protect himself against the injury he
believes to be threatened to the person whom he seeks to
protect; and
(b) under the circumstances as the actor believes them to
be, the person whom he seeks to protect would be justified
in using such protective force; and
(c) the actor believes that his intervention is necessary
for the protection of such other person.
(2) Notwithstanding Subsection (1) of this Section:
(a) when the actor would be obliged under Section 3.04
to retreat, to surrender the possession of a thing or to comply
with a demand before using force in self-protection, he is not
obliged to do so before using force for the protection of
another person, unless he knows that he can thereby secure
the complete safety of such other person; and

--- Page 2109 ---
(b) when the person whom the actor seeks to protect
would be obliged under Section 3.04 to retreat, to surrender
the possession of a thing or to comply with a demand if he
knew that he could obtain complete safety by so doing, the
actor is obliged to try to cause him to do so before using
force in his protection if the actor knows that he can obtain
complete safety in that way; and
p. 1231
p. 1232
(c) neither the actor nor the person whom he seeks to
protect is obliged to retreat when in the other’s dwelling or
place of work to any greater extent than in his own.
Section 3.06. Use of Force for the Protection of Property
(1) Use of Force Justifiable for Protection of Property.
Subject to the provisions of this Section and of Section 3.09, the
use of force upon or toward the person of another is justifiable
when the actor believes that such force is immediately
necessary:
(a) to prevent or terminate an unlawful entry or other
trespass upon land or a trespass against or the unlawful
carrying away of tangible, movable property, provided that
such land or movable property is, or is believed by the actor
to be, in his possession or in the possession of another
person for whose protection he acts; or
(b) to effect an entry or re-entry upon land or to retake
tangible movable property, provided that the actor believes
that he or the person by whose authority he acts or a person
from whom he or such other person derives title was
unlawfully dispossessed of such land or movable property
and is entitled to possession, and provided, further, that:
(i) the force is used immediately or on fresh pursuit
after such dispossession; or
(ii) the actor believes that the person against whom
he uses force has no claim of right to the possession of

--- Page 2110 ---
the property and, in the case of land, the circumstances,
as the actor believes them to be, are of such urgency that
it would be an exceptional hardship to postpone the entry
or re-entry until a court order is obtained.
(2) Meaning of Possession. For the purposes of Subsection
(1) of this Section:
(a) a person who has parted with the custody of property
to another who refuses to restore it to him is no longer in
possession, unless the property is movable and was and still
is located on land in his possession;
(b) a person who has been dispossessed of land does
not regain possession thereof merely by setting foot thereon;
(c) a person who has a license to use or occupy real
property is deemed to be in possession thereof except
against the licensor acting under claim of right.
(3) Limitations on Justifiable Use of Force.
(a) Request to Desist. The use of force is justifiable under
this Section only if the actor first requests the person against
whom such force is used to desist from his interference with
the property, unless the actor believes that:
(i) such request would be useless; or
(ii) it would be dangerous to himself or another person
to make the request; or
(iii) substantial harm will be done to the physical
condition of the property which is sought to be protected
before the request can effectively be made.
(b) Exclusion of Trespasser. The use of force to prevent
or terminate a trespass is not justifiable under this Section if
the actor knows that the
p. 1232
p. 1233
exclusion of the trespasser will expose him to substantial
danger of serious bodily harm.

--- Page 2111 ---
(c) Resistance of Lawful Re-entry or Recaption. The use
of force to prevent an entry or re-entry upon land or the
recaption of movable property is not justifiable under this
Section, although the actor believes that such re-entry or
recaption is unlawful, if:
(i) the re-entry or recaption is made by or on behalf of
a person who was actually dispossessed of the property;
and
(ii) it is otherwise justifiable under paragraph (1)(b) of
this Section.
(d) Use of Deadly Force. The use of deadly force is not
justifiable under this Section unless the actor believes that:
(i) the person against whom the force is used is
attempting to dispossess him of his dwelling otherwise
than under a claim of right to its possession; or
(ii) the person against whom the force is used is
attempting to commit or consummate arson, burglary,
robbery or other felonious theft or property destruction
and either:
(1) has employed or threatened deadly force against or in
the presence of the actor; or
(2) the use of force other than deadly force to prevent the
commission or the consummation of the crime would expose the
actor or another in his presence to substantial danger of serious
bodily harm.
(4) Use of Confinement as Protective Force. The justification
afforded by this Section extends to the use of confinement as
protective force only if the actor takes all reasonable measures
to terminate the confinement as soon as he knows that he can
do so with safety to the property, unless the person confined has
been arrested on a charge of crime.
(5) Use of Device to Protect Property. The justification
afforded by this Section extends to the use of a device for the
purpose of protecting property only if:
(a) the device is not designed to cause or known to
create a substantial risk of causing death or serious bodily

--- Page 2112 ---
harm; and
(b) the use of the particular device to protect the property
from entry or trespass is reasonable under the
circumstances, as the actor believes them to be; and
(c) the device is one customarily used for such a purpose
or reasonable care is taken to make known to probable
intruders the fact that it is used.
(6) Use of Force to Pass Wrongful Obstructor. The use of
force to pass a person whom the actor believes to be purposely
or knowingly and unjustifiably obstructing the actor from going to
a place to which he may lawfully go is justifiable, provided that:
(a) the actor believes that the person against whom he
uses force has no claim of right to obstruct the actor; and
(b) the actor is not being obstructed from entry or
movement on land which he knows to be in the possession
or custody of the person obstructing him, or in the
possession or custody of another person by whose authority
the obstructor acts, unless the circumstances, as the actor
believes them to be, are of such urgency that it would not be
reasonable to postpone the entry or movement on such land
until a court order is obtained; and
p. 1233
p. 1234
(c) the force used is not greater than would be justifiable
if the person obstructing the actor were using force against
him to prevent his passage.
Section 3.07. Use of Force in Law Enforcement
(1) Use of Force Justifiable to Effect an Arrest. Subject to the
provisions of this Section and of Section 3.09, the use of force
upon or toward the person of another is justifiable when the
actor is making or assisting in making an arrest and the actor
believes that such force is immediately necessary to effect a
lawful arrest.
(2) Limitations on the Use of Force.

--- Page 2113 ---
(a) The use of force is not justifiable under this Section
unless:
(i) the actor makes known the purpose of the arrest or
believes that it is otherwise known by or cannot
reasonably be made known to the person to be arrested;
and
(ii) when the arrest is made under a warrant, the
warrant is valid or believed by the actor to be valid.
(b) The use of deadly force is not justifiable under this
Section unless:
(i) the arrest is for a felony; and
(ii) the person effecting the arrest is authorized to act
as a peace officer or is assisting a person whom he
believes to be authorized to act as a peace officer; and
(iii) the actor believes that the force employed creates
no substantial risk of injury to innocent persons; and
(iv) the actor believes that:
(1) the crime for which the arrest is made involved
conduct including the use or threatened use of deadly
force; or
(2) there is a substantial risk that the person to be
arrested will cause death or serious bodily harm if his
apprehension is delayed.
(3) Use of Force to Prevent Escape from Custody. The use
of force to prevent the escape of an arrested person from
custody is justifiable when the force could justifiably have been
employed to effect the arrest under which the person is in
custody, except that a guard or other person authorized to act
as a peace officer is justified in using any force, including deadly
force, which he believes to be immediately necessary to prevent
the escape of a person from a jail, prison, or other institution for
the detention of persons charged with or convicted of a crime.
(4) Use of Force by Private Person Assisting an Unlawful
Arrest.
(a) A private person who is summoned by a peace officer
to assist in effecting an unlawful arrest, is justified in using

--- Page 2114 ---
any force which he would be justified in using if the arrest
were lawful, provided that he does not believe the arrest is
unlawful.
(b) A private person who assists another private person
in effecting an unlawful arrest, or who, not being summoned,
assists a peace officer in effecting an unlawful arrest, is
justified in using any force which he would be justified in
using if the arrest were lawful, provided that (i) he believes
the arrest is lawful, and (ii) the arrest would be lawful if the
facts were as he believes them to be.
(5) Use of Force to Prevent Suicide or the Commission of a
Crime.
p. 1234
p. 1235
(a) The use of force upon or toward the person of another
is justifiable when the actor believes that such force is
immediately necessary to prevent such other person from
committing suicide, inflicting serious bodily harm upon
himself, committing or consummating the commission of a
crime involving or threatening bodily harm, damage to or loss
of property or a breach of the peace, except that:
(i) any limitations imposed by the other provisions of
this Article on the justifiable use of force in self-protection,
for the protection of others, the protection of property, the
effectuation of an arrest or the prevention of an escape
from custody shall apply notwithstanding the criminality of
the conduct against which such force is used; and
(ii) the use of deadly force is not in any event
justifiable under this Subsection unless:
(1) the actor believes that there is a substantial
risk that the person whom he seeks to prevent from
committing a crime will cause death or serious bodily
harm to another unless the commission or the
consummation of the crime is prevented and that the

--- Page 2115 ---
use of such force presents no substantial risk of injury
to innocent persons; or
(2) the actor believes that the use of such force is
necessary to suppress a riot or mutiny after the rioters
or mutineers have been ordered to disperse and
warned, in any particular manner that the law may
require, that such force will be used if they do not
obey.
(b) The jurisdiction afforded by this Subsection extends to
the use of confinement as preventive force only if the actor
takes all reasonable measures to terminate the confinement
as soon as he knows that he safely can, unless the person
confined has been arrested on a charge of crime.
Section 3.08. Use of Force by Persons with Special
Responsibility for Care, Discipline or Safety of Others
The use of force upon or toward the person of another is
justifiable if:
(1) the actor is the parent or guardian or other person
similarly responsible for the general care and supervision of a
minor or a person acting at the request of such parent, guardian
or other responsible person and:
(a) the force is used for the purpose of safeguarding or
promoting the welfare of the minor, including the prevention
or punishment of his misconduct; and
(b) the force used is not designed to cause or known to
create a substantial risk of causing death, serious bodily
harm, disfigurement, extreme pain or mental distress or
gross degradation; or
(2) the actor is a teacher or a person otherwise entrusted
with the care or supervision for a special purpose of a minor
and:
(a) the actor believes that the force used is necessary to
further such special purpose, including the maintenance of
reasonable discipline in a school, class or other group, and
that the use of such force is consistent with the welfare of the
minor; and

--- Page 2116 ---
(b) the degree of force, if it had been used by the parent
or guardian of the minor, would not be unjustifiable under
Subsection (1)(b) of this Section; or
p. 1235
p. 1236
(3) the actor is the guardian or other person similarly
responsible for the general care and supervision of an
incompetent person; and:
(a) the force is used for the purpose of safeguarding or
promoting the welfare of the incompetent person, including
the prevention of his misconduct, or, when such incompetent
person is in a hospital or other institution for his care and
custody, for the maintenance of reasonable discipline in such
institution; and
(b) the force used is not designed to cause or known to
create a substantial risk of causing death, serious bodily
harm, disfigurement, extreme or unnecessary pain, mental
distress, or humiliation; or
(4) the actor is a doctor or other therapist or a person
assisting him at his direction, and:
(a) the force is used for the purpose of administering a
recognized form of treatment which the actor believes to be
adapted to promoting the physical or mental health of the
patient; and
(b) the treatment is administered with the consent of the
patient or, if the patient is a minor or an incompetent person,
with the consent of his parent or guardian or other person
legally competent to consent in his behalf, or the treatment is
administered in an emergency when the actor believes that
no one competent to consent can be consulted and that a
reasonable person, wishing to safeguard the welfare of the
patient, would consent; or
(5) the actor is a warden or other authorized official of a
correctional institution, and:

--- Page 2117 ---
(a) he believes that the force used is necessary for the
purpose of enforcing the lawful rules or procedures of the
institution, unless his belief in the lawfulness of the rule or
procedure sought to be enforced is erroneous and his error
is due to ignorance or mistake as to the provisions of the
Code, any other provision of the criminal law or the law
governing the administration of the institution; and
(b) the nature or degree of force used is not forbidden by
Article 303 or 304 of the Code; and
(c) if deadly force is used, its use is otherwise justifiable
under this Article; or
(6) the actor is a person responsible for the safety of a
vessel or an aircraft or a person acting at his direction, and
(a) he believes that the force used is necessary to
prevent interference with the operation of the vessel or
aircraft or obstruction of the execution of a lawful order,
unless his belief in the lawfulness of the order is erroneous
and his error is due to ignorance or mistake as to the law
defining his authority; and
(b) if deadly force is used, its use is otherwise justifiable
under this Article; or
(7) the actor is a person who is authorized or required by law
to maintain order or decorum in a vehicle, train or other carrier
or in a place where others are assembled, and:
(a) he believes that the force used is necessary for such
purpose; and
p. 1236
p. 1237
(b) the force used is not designed to cause or known to
create a substantial risk of causing death, bodily harm, or
extreme mental distress.
Section 3.09. Mistake of Law as to Unlawfulness of Force or
Legality of Arrest; Reckless or Negligent Use of Otherwise

--- Page 2118 ---
Justifiable Force; Reckless or Negligent Injury or Risk of
Injury to Innocent Persons
(1) The justification afforded by Sections 3.04 to 3.07,
inclusive, is unavailable when:
(a) the actor’s belief in the unlawfulness of the force or
conduct against which he employs protective force or his
belief in the lawfulness of an arrest which he endeavors to
effect by force is erroneous; and
(b) his error is due to ignorance or mistake as to the
provisions of the Code, any other provision of the criminal
law or the law governing the legality of an arrest or search.
(2) When the actor believes that the use of force upon or
toward the person of another is necessary for any of the
purposes for which such belief would establish a justification
under Sections 3.03 to 3.08 but the actor is reckless or negligent
in having such belief or in acquiring or failing to acquire any
knowledge or belief which is material to the justifiability of his
use of force, the justification afforded by those Sections is
unavailable in a prosecution for an offense for which
recklessness or negligence, as the case may be, suffices to
establish culpability.
(3) When the actor is justified under Sections 3.03 to 3.08 in
using force upon or toward the person of another but he
recklessly or negligently injures or creates a risk of injury to
innocent persons, the justification afforded by those Sections is
unavailable in a prosecution for such recklessness or
negligence towards innocent persons.
Section 3.10. Justification in Property Crimes
Conduct involving the appropriation, seizure or destruction of,
damage to, intrusion on or interference with property is justifiable
under circumstances which would establish a defense of privilege
in a civil action based thereon, unless:
(1) the Code or the law defining the offense deals with the
specific situation involved; or

--- Page 2119 ---
(2) a legislative purpose to exclude the justification claimed
otherwise plainly appears.
Section 3.11. Definitions
In this Article, unless a different meaning plainly is required:
(1) “unlawful force” means force, including confinement,
which is employed without the consent of the person against
whom it is directed and the employment of which constitutes an
offense or actionable tort or would constitute such offense or tort
except for a defense (such as the absence of intent, negligence,
or mental capacity; duress; youth; or diplomatic status) not
amounting to a privilege to use the force. Assent constitutes
consent, within the meaning of this Section, whether or not it
otherwise is legally effective, except assent to the infliction of
death or serious bodily harm.
p. 1237
p. 1238
(2) “deadly force” means force which the actor uses with the
purpose of causing or which he knows to create a substantial
risk of causing death or serious bodily harm. Purposely firing a
firearm in the direction of another person or at a vehicle in which
another person is believed to be constitutes deadly force. A
threat to cause death or serious bodily harm, by the production
of a weapon or otherwise, so long as the actor’s purpose is
limited to creating an apprehension that he will use deadly force
if necessary, does not constitute deadly force.
(3) “dwelling” means any building or structure, though
movable or temporary, or a portion thereof, which is for the time
being the actor’s home or place of lodging.
ARTICLE 4. RESPONSIBILITY
Section 4.01. Mental Disease or Defect Excluding
Responsibility
(1) A person is not responsible for criminal conduct if at the
time of such conduct as a result of mental disease or defect he

--- Page 2120 ---
lacks substantial capacity either to appreciate the criminality
[wrongfulness] of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the
requirements of law.
(2) As used in this Article, the terms “mental disease or
defect” do not include an abnormality manifested only by
repeated criminal or otherwise anti-social conduct.
Section 4.02. Evidence of Mental Disease or Defect
Admissible When Relevant to Element of the Offense; [Mental
Disease or Defect Impairing Capacity as Ground for
Mitigation of Punishment in Capital Cases]
(1) Evidence that the defendant suffered from a mental
disease or defect is admissible whenever it is relevant to prove
that the defendant did or did not have a state of mind which is
an element of the offense.
[(2) Whenever the jury or the Court is authorized to
determine or to recommend whether or not the defendant shall
be sentenced to death or imprisonment upon conviction,
evidence that the capacity of the defendant to appreciate the
criminality [wrongfulness] of his conduct or to conform his
conduct to the requirements of law was impaired as a result of
mental disease or defect is admissible in favor of sentence of
imprisonment.]
Section 4.03.Mental Disease or Defect Excluding
Responsibility Is Affirmative Defense; Requirement of Notice;
Form of Verdict and Judgment When Finding of
Irresponsibility Is Made
(1) Mental disease or defect excluding responsibility is an
affirmative defense.
(2) Evidence of mental disease or defect excluding
responsibility is not admissible unless the defendant, at the time
of entering his plea of not guilty or within ten days thereafter or
at such later time as the Court may for good cause permit, files
a written notice of his purpose to rely on such defense.
p. 1238

--- Page 2121 ---
p. 1239
(3) When the defendant is acquitted on the ground of mental
disease or defect excluding responsibility, the verdict and the
judgment shall so state.
Section 4.04. Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Fitness to
Proceed
No person who as a result of mental disease or defect lacks
capacity to understand the proceedings against him or to assist in
his own defense shall be tried, convicted or sentenced for the
commission of an offense so long as such incapacity endures.
Section 4.05. Psychiatric Examination of Defendant with
Respect to Mental Disease or Defect
(1) Whenever the defendant has filed a notice of intention to
rely on the defense of mental disease or defect excluding
responsibility, or there is reason to doubt his fitness to proceed,
or reason to believe that mental disease or defect of the
defendant will otherwise become an issue in the cause, the
Court shall appoint at least one qualified psychiatrist or shall
request the Superintendent of the ______ Hospital to designate
at least one qualified psychiatrist, which designation may be or
include himself, to examine and report upon the mental
condition of the defendant. The Court may order the defendant
to be committed to a hospital or other suitable facility for the
purpose of the examination for a period of not exceeding sixty
days or such longer period as the Court determines to be
necessary for the purpose and may direct that a qualified
psychiatrist retained by the defendant be permitted to witness
and participate in the examination.
(2) In such examination any method may be employed which
is accepted by the medical profession for the examination of
those alleged to be suffering from mental disease or defect.
(3) The report of the examination shall include the following:
(a) a description of the nature of the examination; (b) a
diagnosis of the mental condition of the defendant; (c) if the
defendant suffers from a mental disease or defect, an opinion as

--- Page 2122 ---
to his capacity to understand the proceedings against him and
to assist in his own defense; (d) when a notice of intention to
rely on the defense of irresponsibility has been filed, an opinion
as to the extent, if any, to which the capacity of the defendant to
appreciate the criminality [wrongfulness] of his conduct or to
conform his conduct to the requirements of law was impaired at
the time of the criminal conduct charged; and (e) when directed
by the Court, an opinion as to the capacity of the defendant to
have a particular state of mind which is an element of the
offense charged.
If the examination can not be conducted by reason of the
unwillingness of the defendant to participate therein, the
report shall so state and shall include, if possible, an opinion
as to whether such unwillingness of the defendant was the
result of mental disease or defect.
The report of the examination shall be filed [in triplicate]
with the clerk of the Court, who shall cause copies to be
delivered to the district attorney and to counsel for the
defendant.
p. 1239
p. 1240
Section 4.06. Determination of Fitness to Proceed; Effect of
Finding of Unfitness; Proceedings if Fitness is Regained[;
Post-Commitment Hearing]
(1) When the defendant’s fitness to proceed is drawn in
question, the issue shall be determined by the Court. If neither
the prosecuting attorney nor counsel for the defendant contests
the finding of the report filed pursuant to Section 4.05, the Court
may make the determination on the basis of such report. If the
finding is contested, the Court shall hold a hearing on the issue.
If the report is received in evidence upon such hearing, the party
who contests the finding thereof shall have the right to summon
and to cross-examine the psychiatrists who joined in the report
and to offer evidence upon the issue.

--- Page 2123 ---
(2) If the Court determines that the defendant lacks fitness to
proceed, the proceeding against him shall be suspended,
except as provided in Subsection (3) [Subsections (3) and (4)] of
this Section, and the Court shall commit him to the custody of
the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health or
Correction] to be placed in an appropriate institution of the
Department of Mental Hygiene [Public Health or Correction] for
so long as such unfitness shall endure. When the Court, on its
own motion or upon the application of the Commissioner of
Mental Hygiene [Public Health or Correction] or the prosecuting
attorney, determines, after a hearing if a hearing is requested,
that the defendant has regained fitness to proceed, the
proceeding shall be resumed. If, however, the Court is of the
view that so much time has elapsed since the commitment of
the defendant that it would be unjust to resume the criminal
proceeding, the Court may dismiss the charge and may order
the defendant to be discharged or, subject to the law governing
the civil commitment of persons suffering from mental disease
or defect, order the defendant to be committed to an appropriate
institution of the Department of Mental Hygiene [Public Health].
(3) The fact that the defendant is unfit to proceed does not
preclude any legal objection to the prosecution which is
susceptible of fair determination prior to trial and without the
personal participation of the defendant.
[Alternative: (3) At any time within ninety days after
commitment as provided in Subsection (2) of this Section, or at
any later time with permission of the Court granted for good
cause, the defendant or his counsel or the Commissioner of
Mental Hygiene [Public Health or Correction] may apply for a
special post-commitment hearing. If the application is made by
or on behalf of a defendant not represented by counsel, he shall
be afforded a reasonable opportunity to obtain counsel, and if
he lacks funds to do so, counsel shall be assigned by the Court.
The application shall be granted only if the counsel for the
defendant satisfies the Court by affidavit or otherwise that as an
attorney he has reasonable grounds for a good faith belief that

--- Page 2124 ---
his client has, on the facts and the law, a defense to the charge
other than mental disease or defect excluding responsibility.
[(4) If the motion for a special post-commitment hearing is
granted, the hearing shall be by the Court without a jury. No
evidence shall be offered at the hearing by either party on the
issue of mental disease or defect as a
p. 1240
p. 1241
defense to, or in mitigation of, the crime charged. After hearing,
the Court may in an appropriate case quash the indictment or
other charge, or find it to be defective or insufficient, or
determine that it is not proved beyond a reasonable doubt by
the evidence, or otherwise terminate the proceedings on the
evidence or the law. In any such case, unless all defects in the
proceedings are promptly cured, the Court shall terminate the
commitment ordered under Subsection (2) of this Section and
order the defendant to be discharged or, subject to the law
governing the civil commitment of persons suffering from mental
disease or defect, order the defendant to be committed to an
appropriate institution of the Department of Mental Hygiene
[Public Health].]
Section 4.07. Determination of Irresponsibility on Basis of
Report; Access to Defendant by Psychiatrist of His Own
Choice; Form of Expert Testimony When Issue of
Responsibility Is Tried
(1) If the report filed pursuant to Section 4.05 finds that the
defendant at the time of the criminal conduct charged suffered
from a mental disease or defect which substantially impaired his
capacity to appreciate the criminality [wrongfulness] of his
conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law,
and the Court, after a hearing if a hearing is requested by the
prosecuting attorney or the defendant, is satisfied that such
impairment was sufficient to exclude responsibility, the Court on

--- Page 2125 ---
motion of the defendant shall enter judgment of acquittal on the
ground of mental disease or defect excluding responsibility.
(2) When, notwithstanding the report filed pursuant to
Section 4.05, the defendant wishes to be examined by a
qualified psychiatrist or other expert of his own choice, such
examiner shall be permitted to have reasonable access to the
defendant for the purposes of such examination.
(3) Upon the trial, the psychiatrists who reported pursuant to
Section 4.05 may be called as witnesses by the prosecution, the
defendant or the Court. If the issue is being tried before a jury,
the jury may be informed that the psychiatrists were designated
by the Court or by the Superintendent of the ______ Hospital at
the request of the Court, as the case may be. If called by the
Court, the witness shall be subject to cross-examination by the
prosecution and by the defendant. Both the prosecution and the
defendant may summon any other qualified psychiatrist or other
expert to testify, but no one who has not examined the
defendant shall be competent to testify to an expert opinion with
respect to the mental condition or responsibility of the
defendant, as distinguished from the validity of the procedure
followed by, or the general scientific propositions stated by,
another witness.
(4) When a psychiatrist or other expert who has examined
the defendant testifies concerning his mental condition, he shall
be permitted to make a statement as to the nature of his
examination, his diagnosis of the mental condition of the
defendant at the time of the commission of the offense charged
and his opinion as to the extent, if any, to which the capacity of
the defendant to appreciate the criminality [wrongfulness] of his
conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law or
to have a particular state of mind which is an element of the
offense charged was impaired as a result
p. 1241
p. 1242

--- Page 2126 ---
of mental disease or defect at that time. He shall be permitted to
make any explanation reasonably serving to clarify his diagnosis
and opinion and may be cross-examined as to any matter
bearing on his competency or credibility or the validity of his
diagnosis or opinion.
Section 4.08. Legal Effect of Acquittal on the Ground of
Mental Disease or Defect Excluding Responsibility;
Commitment; Release or Discharge
(1) When a defendant is acquitted on the ground of mental
disease or defect excluding responsibility, the Court shall order
him to be committed to the custody of the Commissioner of
Mental Hygiene [Public Health] to be placed in an appropriate
institution for custody, care and treatment.
(2) If the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health] is
of the view that a person committed to his custody, pursuant to
paragraph (1) of this Section, may be discharged or released on
condition without danger to himself or to others, he shall make
application for the discharge or release of such person in a
report to the Court by which such person was committed and
shall transmit a copy of such application and report to the
prosecuting attorney of the county [parish] from which the
defendant was committed. The Court shall thereupon appoint at
least two qualified psychiatrists to examine such person and to
report within sixty days, or such longer period as the Court
determines to be necessary for the purpose, their opinion as to
his mental condition. To facilitate such examination and the
proceedings thereon, the Court may cause such person to be
confined in any institution located near the place where the
Court sits, which may hereafter be designated by the
Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health] as suitable for
the temporary detention of irresponsible persons.
(3) If the Court is satisfied by the report filed pursuant to
paragraph (2) of this Section and such testimony of the reporting
psychiatrists as the Court deems necessary that the committed
person may be discharged or released on condition without
danger to himself or others, the Court shall order his discharge

--- Page 2127 ---
or his release on such conditions as the Court determines to be
necessary. If the Court is not so satisfied, it shall promptly order
a hearing to determine whether such person may safely be
discharged or released. Any such hearing shall be deemed a
civil proceeding and the burden shall be upon the committed
person to prove that he may safely be discharged or released.
According to the determination of the Court upon the hearing,
the committed person shall thereupon be discharged or
released on such conditions as the Court determines to be
necessary, or shall be recommitted to the custody of the
Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health], subject to
discharge or release only in accordance with the procedure
prescribed above for a first hearing.
(4) If, within [five] years after the conditional release of a
committed person, the Court shall determine, after hearing
evidence, that the conditions of release have not been fulfilled
and that for the safety of such person or for the safety of others
his conditional release should be revoked, the Court shall
forthwith order him to be recommitted to the Commissioner of
Mental
p. 1242
p. 1243
Hygiene [Public Health], subject to discharge or release only in
accordance with the procedure prescribed above for a first
hearing.
(5) A committed person may make application for his
discharge or release to the Court by which he was committed,
and the procedure to be followed upon such application shall be
the same as that prescribed above in the case of an application
by the Commissioner of Mental Hygiene [Public Health].
However, no such application by a committed person need be
considered until he has been confined for a period of not less
than [six months] from the date of the order of commitment, and
if the determination of the Court be adverse to the application,
such person shall not be permitted to file a further application

--- Page 2128 ---
until [one year] has elapsed from the date of any preceding
hearing on an application for his release or discharge.
Section 4.09. Statements for Purposes of Examination or
Treatment Inadmissible Except on Issue of Mental Condition
[omitted]
Section 4.10. Immaturity Excluding Criminal Conviction;
Transfer of Proceedings to Juvenile Court
(1) A person shall not be tried for or convicted of an offense
if:
(a) at the time of the conduct charged to constitute the
offense he was less than sixteen years of age [, in which
case the Juvenile Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction]; or
(b) at the time of the conduct charged to constitute the
offense he was sixteen or seventeen years of age, unless:
(i) the Juvenile Court has no jurisdiction over him, or,
(ii) the Juvenile Court has entered an order waiving
jurisdiction and consenting to the institution of criminal
proceedings against him.
(2) No court shall have jurisdiction to try or convict a person
of an offense if criminal proceedings against him are barred by
Subsection (1) of this Section. When it appears that a person
charged with the commission of an offense may be of such an
age that criminal proceedings may be barred under Subsection
(1) of this Section, the Court shall hold a hearing thereon, and
the burden shall be on the prosecution to establish to the
satisfaction of the Court that the criminal proceeding is not
barred upon such grounds. If the Court determines that the
proceeding is barred, custody of the person charged shall be
surrendered to the Juvenile Court, and the case, including all
papers and processes relating thereto, shall be transferred.
ARTICLE 5. INCHOATE CRIMES
Section 5.01. Criminal Attempt

--- Page 2129 ---
(1) Definition of Attempt. A person is guilty of an attempt to
commit a crime if, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise
required for commission of the crime, he:
(a) purposely engages in conduct which would constitute
the crime if the attendant circumstances were as he believes
them to be; or
p. 1243
p. 1244
(b) when causing a particular result is an element of the
crime, does or omits to do anything with the purpose of
causing or with the belief that it will cause such result without
further conduct on his part; or
(c) purposely does or omits to do anything which, under
the circumstances as he believes them to be, is an act or
omission constituting a substantial step in a course of
conduct planned to culminate in his commission of the crime.
(2) Conduct Which May Be Held Substantial Step Under
Subsection (1)(c). Conduct shall not be held to constitute a
substantial step under Subsection (1)(c) of this Section unless it
is strongly corroborative of the actor’s criminal purpose. Without
negativing the sufficiency of other conduct, the following, if
strongly corroborative of the actor’s criminal purpose, shall not
be held insufficient as a matter of law:
(a) lying in wait, searching for or following the
contemplated victim of the crime;
(b) enticing or seeking to entice the contemplated victim
of the crime to go to the place contemplated for its
commission;
(c) reconnoitering the place contemplated for the
commission of the crime;
(d) unlawful entry of a structure, vehicle or enclosure in
which it is contemplated that the crime will be committed;
(e) possession of materials to be employed in the
commission of the crime, which are specially designed for

--- Page 2130 ---
such unlawful use or which can serve no lawful purpose of
the actor under the circumstances;
(f) possession, collection or fabrication of materials to be
employed in the commission of the crime, at or near the
place contemplated for its commission, where such
possession, collection or fabrication serves no lawful
purpose of the actor under the circumstances;
(g) soliciting an innocent agent to engage in conduct
constituting an element of the crime.
(3) Conduct Designed to Aid Another in Commission of a
Crime. A person who engages in conduct designed to aid
another to commit a crime which would establish his complicity
under Section 2.06 if the crime were committed by such other
person, is guilty of an attempt to commit the crime, although the
crime is not committed or attempted by such other person.
(4) Renunciation of Criminal Purpose. When the actor’s
conduct would otherwise constitute an attempt under
Subsection (1)(b) or (1)(c) of this Section, it is an affirmative
defense that he abandoned his effort to commit the crime or
otherwise prevented its commission, under circumstances
manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of his
criminal purpose. The establishment of such defense does not,
however, affect the liability of an accomplice who did not join in
such abandonment or prevention.
Within the meaning of this Article, renunciation of criminal
purpose is not voluntary if it is motivated, in whole or in part,
by circumstances, not present or apparent at the inception of
the actor’s course of conduct, which increase the probability
of detection or apprehension or which make more difficult the
accomplishment of the criminal purpose. Renunciation
p. 1244
p. 1245
is not complete if it is motivated by a decision to postpone
the criminal conduct until a more advantageous time or to

--- Page 2131 ---
transfer the criminal effort to another but similar objective or
victim.
Section 5.02. Criminal Solicitation
(1) Definition of Solicitation. A person is guilty of solicitation
to commit a crime if with the purpose of promoting or facilitating
its commission he commands, encourages or requests another
person to engage in specific conduct which would constitute
such crime or an attempt to commit such crime or which would
establish his complicity in its commission or attempted
commission.
(2) Uncommunicated Solicitation. It is immaterial under
Subsection (1) of this Section that the actor fails to communicate
with the person he solicits to commit a crime if his conduct was
designed to effect such communication.
(3) Renunciation of Criminal Purpose. It is an affirmative
defense that the actor, after soliciting another person to commit
a crime, persuaded him not to do so or otherwise prevented the
commission of the crime, under circumstances manifesting a
complete and voluntary renunciation of his criminal purpose.
Section 5.03. Criminal Conspiracy
(1) Definition of Conspiracy. A person is guilty of conspiracy
with another person or persons to commit a crime if with the
purpose of promoting or facilitating its commission he:
(a) agrees with such other person or persons that they or
one or more of them will engage in conduct which constitutes
such crime or an attempt or solicitation to commit such
crime; or
(b) agrees to aid such other person or persons in the
planning or commission of such crime or of an attempt or
solicitation to commit such crime.
(2) Scope of Conspiratorial Relationship. If a person guilty of
conspiracy, as defined by Subsection (1) of this Section, knows
that a person with whom he conspires to commit a crime has
conspired with another person or persons to commit the same
crime, he is guilty of conspiring with such other person or

--- Page 2132 ---
persons, whether or not he knows their identity, to commit such
crime.
(3) Conspiracy With Multiple Criminal Objectives. If a person
conspires to commit a number of crimes, he is guilty of only one
conspiracy so long as such multiple crimes are the object of the
same agreement or continuous conspiratorial relationship.
(4) Joinder and Venue in Conspiracy Prosecutions.
(a) Subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this
Subsection, two or more persons charged with criminal
conspiracy may be prosecuted jointly if:
(i) they are charged with conspiring with one another;
or
(ii) the conspiracies alleged, whether they have the
same or different parties, are so related that they
constitute different aspects of a scheme of organized
criminal conduct.
p. 1245
p. 1246
(b) In any joint prosecution under paragraph (a) of this
Subsection:
(i) no defendant shall be charged with a conspiracy in
any county [parish or district] other than one in which he
entered into such conspiracy or in which an overt act
pursuant to such conspiracy was done by him or by a
person with whom he conspired; and
(ii) neither the liability of any defendant nor the
admissibility against him of evidence of acts or
declarations of another shall be enlarged by such joinder;
and
(iii) the Court shall order a severance or take a
special verdict as to any defendant who so requests, if it
deems it necessary or appropriate to promote the fair
determination of his guilt or innocence, and shall take any
other proper measures to protect the fairness of the trial.

--- Page 2133 ---
(5) Overt Act. No person may be convicted of conspiracy to
commit a crime, other than a felony of the first or second
degree, unless an overt act in pursuance of such conspiracy is
alleged and proved to have been done by him or by a person
with whom he conspired.
(6) Renunciation of Criminal Purpose. It is an affirmative
defense that the actor, after conspiring to commit a crime,
thwarted the success of the conspiracy, under circumstances
manifesting a complete and voluntary renunciation of his
criminal purpose.
(7) Duration of Conspiracy. For purposes of Section 1.06(4):
(a) conspiracy is a continuing course of conduct which
terminates when the crime or crimes which are its object are
committed or the agreement that they be committed is
abandoned by the defendant and by those with whom he
conspired; and
(b) such abandonment is presumed if neither the
defendant nor anyone with whom he conspired does any
overt act in pursuance of the conspiracy during the
applicable period of limitation; and
(c) if an individual abandons the agreement, the
conspiracy is terminated as to him only if and when he
advises those with whom he conspired of his abandonment
or he informs the law enforcement authorities of the
existence of the conspiracy and of his participation therein.
Section 5.04. Incapacity, Irresponsibility or Immunity of Party
to Solicitation or Conspiracy
(1) Except as provided in Subsection (2) of this Section, it is
immaterial to the liability of a person who solicits or conspires
with another to commit a crime that:
(a) he or the person whom he solicits or with whom he
conspires does not occupy a particular position or have a
particular characteristic which is an element of such crime, if
he believes that one of them does; or
(b) the person whom he solicits or with whom he
conspires is irresponsible or has an immunity to prosecution

--- Page 2134 ---
or conviction for the commission of the crime.
(2) It is a defense to a charge of solicitation or conspiracy to
commit a crime that if the criminal object were achieved, the
actor would not be guilty of a crime under the law defining the
offense or as an accomplice under Section 2.06(5) or 2.06(6)(a)
or (b).
p. 1246
p. 1247
Section 5.05. Grading of Criminal Attempt, Solicitation and
Conspiracy; Mitigation in Cases of Lesser Danger; Multiple
Convictions Barred
(1) Grading. Except as otherwise provided in this Section,
attempt, solicitation and conspiracy are crimes of the same
grade and degree as the most serious offense which is
attempted or solicited or is an object of the conspiracy. An
attempt, solicitation or conspiracy to commit a [capital crime or
a] felony of the first degree is a felony of the second degree.
(2) Mitigation. If the particular conduct charged to constitute
a criminal attempt, solicitation or conspiracy is so inherently
unlikely to result or culminate in the commission of a crime that
neither such conduct nor the actor presents a public danger
warranting the grading of such offense under this Section, the
Court shall exercise its power under Section 6.12 to enter
judgment and impose sentence for a crime of lower grade or
degree or, in extreme cases, may dismiss the prosecution.
(3) Multiple Convictions. A person may not be convicted of
more than one offense defined by this Article for conduct
designed to commit or to culminate in the commission of the
same crime.
Section 5.06. Possessing Instruments of Crime; Weapons
(1) Criminal Instruments Generally. A person commits a
misdemeanor if he possesses any instrument of crime with
purpose to employ it criminally. “Instrument of crime” means:

--- Page 2135 ---
(a) anything specially made or specially adapted for
criminal use; or
(b) anything commonly used for criminal purposes and
possessed by the actor under circumstances which do not
negative unlawful purpose.
(2) Presumption of Criminal Purpose from Possession of
Weapon. If a person possesses a firearm or other weapon on or
about his person, in a vehicle occupied by him, or otherwise
readily available for use, it shall be presumed that he had the
purpose to employ it criminally, unless:
(a) the weapon is possessed in the actor’s home or place
of business;
(b) the actor is licensed or otherwise authorized by law to
possess such weapon; or
(c) the weapon is of a type commonly used in lawful
sport.
“Weapon” means anything readily capable of lethal use
and possessed under circumstances not manifestly
appropriate for lawful uses which it may have; the term
includes a firearm which is not loaded or lacks a clip or other
component to render it immediately operable, and
components which can readily be assembled into a weapon.
(3) Presumptions as to Possession of Criminal Instruments
in Automobiles. Where a weapon or other instrument of crime is
found in an automobile, it is presumed to be in the possession of
the occupant if there is but one. If there is more than one
occupant, it shall be presumed to be in the possession of all,
except under the following circumstances:
(a) where it is found upon the person of one of the
occupants;
(b) where the automobile is not a stolen one and the
weapon or instrument is found out of view in a glove
compartment, car trunk, or other
p. 1247
p. 1248

--- Page 2136 ---
enclosed customary depository, in which case it shall be
presumed to be in the possession of the occupant or
occupants who own or have authority to operate the
automobile;
(c) in the case of a taxicab, a weapon or instrument found
in the passengers’ portion of the vehicle shall be presumed
to be in the possession of all the passengers, if there are
any, and, if not, in the possession of the driver.
Section 5.07. Prohibited Offensive Weapons
A person commits a misdemeanor if, except as authorized by
law, he makes, repairs, sells, or otherwise deals in, uses or
possesses any offensive weapon. “Offensive weapon” means any
bomb, machine gun, sawed-off shotgun, firearm specially made or
specially adapted for concealment or silent discharge, any
blackjack, sandbag, metal knuckles, dagger, or other implement
for the infliction of serious bodily injury which serves no common
lawful purpose. It is a defense under this Section for the defendant
to prove by a preponderance of evidence that he possessed or
dealt with the weapon solely as a curio or in a dramatic
performance, or that he possessed it briefly in consequence of
having found it or taken it from an aggressor, or under
circumstances similarly negativing any purpose or likelihood that
the weapon would be used unlawfully. The presumptions provided
in Section 5.06(3) are applicable to prosecutions under this
Section.
ARTICLES 6-11. SENTENCING; AUTHORIZED DISPOSITION OF
PERSONS CONVICTED
[Articles 6-7 of the 1962 Code, dealing with sentencing and the
disposition of convicted persons, were withdrawn by the ALI in 2017.
Their replacements, adopted at the same time (Articles 6-11), are
omitted.]
PART II. DEFINITION OF SPECIFIC CRIMES
Offenses Involving Danger to the Person

--- Page 2137 ---
ARTICLE 210. CRIMINAL HOMICIDE
Section 210.0. Definitions
In Articles 210-213, unless a different meaning plainly is required:
(1) “human being” means a person who has been born and
is alive;
(2) “bodily injury” means physical pain, illness or any
impairment of physical condition;
(3) “serious bodily injury” means bodily injury which creates a
substantial risk of death or which causes serious, permanent
disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of
any bodily member or organ;
(4) “deadly weapon” means any firearm, or other weapon,
device, instrument, material or substance, whether animate or
inanimate, which in the manner it is used or is intended to be
used is known to be capable of producing death or serious
bodily injury.
p. 1248
p. 1249
Section 210.1. Criminal Homicide
(1) A person is guilty of criminal homicide if he purposely,
knowingly, recklessly or negligently causes the death of another
human being.
(2) Criminal homicide is murder, manslaughter or negligent
homicide.
Section 210.2. Murder
(1) Except as provided in Section 210.3(1)(b), criminal
homicide constitutes murder when:
(a) it is committed purposely or knowingly; or
(b) it is committed recklessly under circumstances
manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human life.
Such recklessness and indifference are presumed if the
actor is engaged or is an accomplice in the commission of,
or an attempt to commit, or flight after committing or

--- Page 2138 ---
attempting to commit robbery, rape or deviate sexual
intercourse by force or threat of force, arson, burglary,
kidnapping or felonious escape.
(2) Murder is a felony of the first degree [but a person
convicted of murder may be sentenced to death, as provided in
*
Section 210.6.].
Section 210.3. Manslaughter
(1) Criminal homicide constitutes manslaughter when:
(a) it is committed recklessly; or
(b) a homicide which would otherwise be murder is
committed under the influence of extreme mental or
emotional disturbance for which there is reasonable
explanation or excuse. The reasonableness of such
explanation or excuse shall be determined from the
viewpoint of a person in the actor’s situation under the
circumstances as he believes them to be.
(2) Manslaughter is a felony of the second degree.
Section 210.4. Negligent Homicide
(1) Criminal homicide constitutes negligent homicide when it
is committed negligently.
(2) Negligent homicide is a felony of the third degree.
Section 210.5. Causing or Aiding Suicide
(1) Causing Suicide as Criminal Homicide. A person may be
convicted of criminal homicide for causing another to commit
suicide only if he purposely causes such suicide by force,
duress or deception.
(2) Aiding or Soliciting Suicide as an Independent Offense. A
person who purposely aids or solicits another to commit suicide
is guilty of a felony of the second degree if his conduct causes
such suicide or an attempted suicide, and otherwise of a
misdemeanor.
p. 1249
p. 1250

--- Page 2139 ---
[Section 210.6. Sentence of Death for Murder; Further
**
Proceedings to Determine Sentence]
[This provision had suggested procedures to be used by
jurisdictions that choose to authorize the death penalty. The ALI
withdrew this provision in October 2009. The MPC no longer
includes a provision addressing this issue.]
ARTICLE 211. ASSAULT; RECKLESS ENDANGERING; THREATS
Section 211.0. Definitions
In this Article, the definitions given in Section 210.0 apply
unless a different meaning plainly is required.
Section 211.1. Assault
(1) Simple Assault. A person is guilty of assault if he:
(a) attempts to cause or purposely, knowingly or
recklessly causes bodily injury to another; or
(b) negligently causes bodily injury to another with a
deadly weapon; or
(c) attempts by physical menace to put another in fear of
imminent serious bodily injury.
Simple assault is a misdemeanor unless committed in a
fight or scuffle entered into by mutual consent, in which case
it is a petty misdemeanor.
(2) Aggravated Assault. A person is guilty of aggravated
assault if he:
(a) attempts to cause serious bodily injury to another, or
causes such injury purposely, knowingly or recklessly under
circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value
of human life; or
(b) attempts to cause or purposely or knowingly causes
bodily injury to another with a deadly weapon.
Aggravated assault under paragraph (a) is a felony of the
second degree; aggravated assault under paragraph (b) is a
felony of the third degree.
Section 211.2. Recklessly Endangering Another Person

--- Page 2140 ---
A person commits a misdemeanor if he recklessly engages in
conduct which places or may place another person in danger of
death or serious bodily injury. Recklessness and danger shall be
presumed where a person knowingly points a firearm at or in the
direction of another, whether or not the actor believed the firearm
to be loaded.
Section 211.3. Terroristic Threats
A person is guilty of a felony of the third degree if he threatens
to commit any crime of violence with purpose to terrorize another
or to cause evacuation of a building, place of assembly, or facility
of public transportation, or otherwise to cause serious public
inconvenience, or in reckless disregard of the risk of causing such
terror or inconvenience.
p. 1250
p. 1251
ARTICLE 212. KIDNAPPING AND RELATED OFFENSES;
COERCION
Section 212.0. Definitions
In this Article, the definitions given in Section 210.0 apply
unless a different meaning plainly is required.
Section 212.1. Kidnapping
A person is guilty of kidnapping if he unlawfully removes another
from his place of residence or business, or a substantial distance
from the vicinity where he is found, or if he unlawfully confines
another for a substantial period in a place of isolation, with any of
the following purposes:
(a) to hold for ransom or reward, or as a shield or hostage; or
(b) to facilitate commission of any felony or flight thereafter; or
(c) to inflict bodily injury on or to terrorize the victim or
another; or
(d) to interfere with the performance of any governmental or
political function.

--- Page 2141 ---
Kidnapping is a felony of the first degree unless the actor
voluntarily releases the victim alive and in a safe place prior to trial,
in which case it is a felony of the second degree. A removal or
confinement is unlawful within the meaning of this Section if it is
accomplished by force, threat or deception, or, in the case of a
person who is under the age of 14 or incompetent, if it is
accomplished without the consent of a parent, guardian or other
person responsible for general supervision of his welfare.
Section 212.2. Felonious Restraint
A person commits a felony of the third degree if he knowingly:
(a) restrains another unlawfully in circumstances exposing
him to risk of serious bodily injury; or
(b) holds another in a condition of involuntary servitude.
Section 212.3. False Imprisonment
A person commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly restrains
another unlawfully so as to interfere substantially with his liberty.
Section 212.4. Interference with Custody
(1) Custody of Children. A person commits an offense if he
knowingly or recklessly takes or entices any child under the age
of 18 from the custody of its parent, guardian or other lawful
custodian, when he has no privilege to do so. It is an affirmative
defense that:
(a) the actor believed that his action was necessary to
preserve the child from danger to its welfare; or
(b) the child, being at the time not less than 14 years old,
was taken away at its own instigation without enticement and
without purpose to commit a criminal offense with or against
the child.
Proof that the child was below the critical age gives rise to a
presumption that the actor knew the child’s age or acted in
reckless disregard thereof. The offense is a misdemeanor
unless the actor, not being a parent or person in equivalent
relation to the child, acted with knowledge that his conduct
would

--- Page 2142 ---
p. 1251
p. 1252
cause serious alarm for the child’s safety, or in reckless
disregard of a likelihood of causing such alarm, in which case
the offense is a felony of the third degree.
(2) Custody of Committed Persons. A person is guilty of a
misdemeanor if he knowingly or recklessly takes or entices any
committed person away from lawful custody when he is not
privileged to do so. “Committed person” means, in addition to
anyone committed under judicial warrant, any orphan, neglected
or delinquent child, mentally defective or insane person, or other
dependent or incompetent person entrusted to another’s
custody by or through a recognized social agency or otherwise
by authority of law.
Section 212.5. Criminal Coercion
(1) Offense Defined. A person is guilty of criminal coercion if,
with purpose unlawfully to restrict another’s freedom of action to
his detriment, he threatens to:
(a) commit any criminal offense; or
(b) accuse anyone of a criminal offense; or
(c) expose any secret tending to subject any person to
hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to impair his credit or
business repute; or
(d) take or withhold action as an official, or cause an
official to take or withhold action.
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution based on
paragraphs (b), (c) or (d) that the actor believed the
accusation or secret to be true or the proposed official action
justified and that his purpose was limited to compelling the
other to behave in a way reasonably related to the
circumstances which were the subject of the accusation,
exposure or proposed official action, as by desisting from
further misbehavior, making good a wrong done, refraining
from taking any action or responsibility for which the actor
believes the other disqualified.

--- Page 2143 ---
(2) Grading. Criminal coercion is a misdemeanor unless
the threat is to commit a felony or the actor’s purpose is
felonious, in which cases the offense is a felony of the third
degree.
*
ARTICLE 213. SEXUAL OFFENSES
Section 213.0. General Principles of Liability; Definitions
(1) This Article is governed by Part I of the 1962 Model Penal
Code, and the definitions given in Section 210.0, except that:
(a) Section 2.11 (the definition of “consent”) does not
apply to this article.
(b) Subsection (2) of Section 2.08 (Intoxication) does not
apply to this article. Instead, the general provisions of the
criminal law and rules of evidence of the jurisdiction govern
the materiality of the actor’s intoxication in determining the
actor’s culpability for an offense.
p. 1252
p. 1253
(2) Definitions
In this Article, unless a different definition is plainly required:
(a) “Sexual penetration” means an act involving
penetration, however slight, of the anus or genitalia by an
object or a body part, except when done for legitimate
medical, hygienic, or law-enforcement purposes.
(b) “Oral sex” means a touching of the anus or genitalia
of one person by the mouth or tongue of another person.
(c) “Sexual contact” means any of the following acts,
when the actor’s purpose is the sexual arousal, sexual
gratification, sexual humiliation, or sexual degradation of any
person:
(i) touching the clothed or unclothed genitalia, anus,
groin, breast, buttocks, or inner thigh of any person with
any body part or object; or

--- Page 2144 ---
(ii) touching any body part of any person with the
clothed or unclothed genitalia, anus, groin, breast,
buttocks, or inner thigh of any person; or
(iii) touching any clothed or unclothed body part of
any person with the ejaculate of any person.
The touching described in paragraph (c) includes the
actor touching another person, another person touching
the actor or a third party, or another person touching that
person’s own body. It does not include the actor touching
the actor’s own body.
(d) “Fondling” means prolonged contact with or
manipulation of the genitals, when the actor’s purpose is the
sexual arousal, sexual gratification, sexual humiliation, or
sexual degradation of any person. Fondling requires more
than a transient grope or grab. “To fondle” means to engage
in fondling.
(e) “Consent”
(i) “Consent” for purposes of Article 213 means a
person’s willingness to engage in a specific act of sexual
penetration, oral sex, or sexual contact.
(ii) Consent may be express or it may be inferred from
behavior — both action and inaction — in the context of
all the circumstances.
(iii) Neither verbal nor physical resistance is required
to establish that consent is lacking, but their absence
may be considered, in the context of all the
circumstances, in determining the issue of consent.
(iv) Notwithstanding subsection (2)(e)(ii) of this
Section, consent is ineffective when given by a person
incompetent to consent or under circumstances
precluding the free exercise of consent, as provided in
Sections 213.1, 213.2, 213.3, 213.4, 213.5, 213.7, 213.8,
and 213.9.
(v) Consent may be revoked or withdrawn any time
before or during the act of sexual penetration, oral sex, or
sexual contact. A clear verbal refusal — such as “No,”

--- Page 2145 ---
“Stop,” or “Don’t” — establishes the lack of consent or the
revocation or withdrawal of previous consent. Lack of
consent or revocation or withdrawal of consent may be
overridden by subsequent consent given prior to the act
of sexual penetration, oral sex, or sexual contact.
(f) Force.
(i) “Physical force or restraint” means a physical act or
physical restraint that inflicts more than negligible
physical harm, pain, or
p. 1253
p. 1254
discomfort or that significantly restricts a person’s ability
to move freely. More than negligible physical harm
includes but is not limited to a burn, black eye, or bloody
nose, and more than negligible pain or discomfort
includes but is not limited to the pain or discomfort
resulting from a kick, punch, or slap on the face.
(ii) “Aggravated physical force or restraint” means a
physical act or physical restraint that inflicts or is capable
of inflicting death, serious bodily injury, or extreme
physical pain, or that confines another for a substantial
period in a place of isolation other than under color of
law.
(g) “Actor” means a person more than 12 years old,
except that “actor” includes a person younger than 12 when
the charge is Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force
or Restraint (Section 213.1). “Actor” includes, where
relevant, a person guilty of an omission.
(h) “Registrable offense”
(i) “Registrable offense” means an offense that makes
a convicted person eligible for or subject to any of the
collateral consequences specified in Section 213.11.
(ii) No offense is a registrable offense under any
provision of law unless it is specifically so designated in
this Article or is committed in another jurisdiction, is a

--- Page 2146 ---
registrable offense in that jurisdiction, and would be a
registrable offense in this jurisdiction if it had been
committed in this jurisdiction.
Section 213.1 Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force
or Restraint
(1) Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or
Restraint. An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault by Aggravated
Physical Force or Restraint when:
(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or
perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because:
(i) the actor uses or explicitly or implicitly threatens to
use aggravated physical force or restraint against
anyone; and
(ii) the actor’s use of or threat to use aggravated
physical force or restraint causes the other person to
submit to or perform the act of sexual penetration or oral
sex; and
(c) the actor acts knowingly with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).
*
(2) Grading . Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force
or Restraint is a registrable offense. It is a felony of the third
degree [10-year maximum],
p. 1254
p. 1255
except that (1) the maximum term of imprisonment is five years
greater than that otherwise applicable to a felony of the third
degree; and (2) it is a felony of the second degree [20-year
maximum] if the actor violates subsection (1) of this Section and
in so doing:
(a) knowingly uses or explicitly or implicitly threatens to
use a deadly weapon and knows that this act causes the

--- Page 2147 ---
other person to submit to or perform the act of sexual
penetration or oral sex; or
(b) knowingly acts with one or more persons who:
(i) also engage in an act or acts of sexual penetration
or oral sex with the same victim at the same place at a
time contemporaneous with the actor’s violation of this
Section; or
(ii) assist in the use of or threat to use aggravated
physical force or restraint when the actor’s act of sexual
penetration or oral sex occurs; or
(c) recklessly causes serious bodily injury to any person.
(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section
213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the other person submitted to or performed
the act of sexual penetration or oral sex under the
circumstances described in subsection(1)(b). Submission,
acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise
indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when
occurring in a circumstance described in that subsection. If
applicable, the actor may raise an affirmative defense of Explicit
Prior Permission according to the terms of Section 213.10.
Section 213.2 Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint
(1) Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint. An actor is
guilty of Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint when:
(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or
perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because:
(i) the actor uses or explicitly or implicitly threatens to
use physical force or restraint against anyone; and
(ii) the actor’s use of or threat to use physical force or
restraint causes the other person to submit to or perform
the act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).

--- Page 2148 ---
(2) Grading. Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint is
a felony of the third degree [10-year maximum]. It is a
registrable offense when the actor has previously been
convicted of a felony sex offense.
(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section
213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the other person submitted to or performed
the act of sexual penetration or oral sex under the
circumstances described in subsection (1)(b). Submission,
acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise
indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when
occurring in a circumstance described in that subsection. If
applicable, the actor may raise an affirmative defense of Explicit
Prior Permission according to the terms of Section 213.10.
Section 213.3 Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated, Vulnerable,
or Legally Restricted Person
(1) Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated Person. An actor is
guilty of Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated Person when:
p. 1255
p. 1256
(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to
submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex;
and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the
time of the act, the other person:
(i) is sleeping, unconscious, or physically unable to
communicate lack of consent; or
(ii) lacks substantial capacity to appraise, control, or
remember the person’s own sexual conduct or that of
anyone else because of a substance administered to that
person, without that person’s knowledge or consent; and
the actor administered the incapacitating substance for
the purpose of causing that incapacity or knows that it
was surreptitiously administered by another for that
purpose; and

--- Page 2149 ---
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).
Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated Person is a felony of
the third degree [10-year maximum]. It is a registrable
offense when the actor has previously been convicted of a
felony sex offense.
(2) Sexual Assault of a Vulnerable Person. An actor is guilty
of Sexual Assault of a Vulnerable Person when:
(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to
submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex;
and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the
time of the act, the other person:
(i) has an intellectual, developmental, or mental
disability, or a mental illness, that makes the person
substantially incapable of appraising the nature of the
sexual activity involved, or of understanding the right to
give or withhold consent in sexual encounters, and the
actor has no similarly serious disability; or
(ii) is passing in and out of consciousness; or
(iii) lacks substantial capacity to communicate lack of
consent; or
(iv) is wholly or partly undressed, or in the process of
undressing, for the purpose of receiving nonsexual
professional or commercial services from the actor and
has not given the actor explicit prior permission to
engage in that act; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).
Sexual Assault of a Vulnerable Person is a felony of the
fourth degree [five-year maximum].
(3) Sexual Assault of a Legally Restricted Person. An actor is
guilty of Sexual Assault of Legally Restricted Person when:

--- Page 2150 ---
(a) the actor, who did not have a consensual sexually
intimate relationship with the other person at the time that a
state-imposed restriction on that person’s liberty began,
causes the other person to submit to or perform an act of
sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the
time of the act, the other person is:
(i) in custody, incarcerated, on probation, on parole,
under civil commitment, in a pretrial release or pretrial
diversion or treatment program, or in any other status
involving a state-imposed restriction on liberty; and
p. 1256
p. 1257
(ii) the actor is in a position of actual or apparent
authority or supervision over the restriction on the other
person’s liberty; and
(c) the actor acts knowingly with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).
Sexual Assault of a Legally Restricted Person is a felony
of the fifth degree [three-year maximum].
(4) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section
213.0(2)(e)(iv) when a condition or circumstance described in
subsections (1)(b), (2)(b), or (3)(b) existed at the time the other
person submitted to or performed the act of sexual penetration
or oral sex. Submission, acquiescence, or words or conduct that
would otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective
consent when occurring in a condition or circumstance
described in these subsections.
Section 213.4. Sexual Assault by Extortion
(1) Sexual Assault by Extortion. An actor is guilty of Sexual
Assault by Extortion when:
(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or
perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and

--- Page 2151 ---
(b) the act is without effective consent because the actor
explicitly or implicitly threatened:
(i) to accuse that person or anyone else of a criminal
offense or of a failure to comply with immigration
regulations; or
(ii) to take or withhold action as an official, or cause
an official to take or withhold action, whether or not the
purported official has actual authority to do so; or
(iii) to take any action or cause any consequence that
would cause submission to or performance of the act of
sexual penetration or oral sex by someone of ordinary
resolution in that person’s situation under all the
circumstances; and
(iv) the actor’s threat causes the other person to
submit to or perform the act of sexual penetration or oral
sex; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).
(2) Grading. Sexual Assault by Extortion is a felony of the
fourth degree [five-year maximum].
(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section
213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the other person submitted to or performed
the act of sexual penetration or oral sex because of a threat
described in subsection (1)(b). Submission, acquiescence, or
words or conduct that would otherwise indicate consent do not
constitute effective consent when occurring in a circumstance
described in that paragraph. If applicable, the actor may raise an
affirmative defense of Explicit Prior Permission under Section
213.10.
Section 213.5 Sexual Assault by Prohibited Deception
(1) An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault by Prohibited
Deception when:
(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or
perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and

--- Page 2152 ---
(b) the act is without effective consent because:
p. 1257
p. 1258
(i) the actor caused the other person to believe falsely
that the act had diagnostic, curative, or preventive
medical properties; or
(ii) the actor caused the other person to believe
falsely that the actor was someone else who was
personally known to that person; and
(iii) the actor’s deception causes the other person to
submit to or perform the act of sexual penetration or oral
sex; and
(c) the actor acts knowingly with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).
(2) Grading. Sexual Assault by Prohibited Deception is a
felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum].
(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section
213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the other person submitted to or performed
the act of sexual penetration or oral sex because of a
circumstance described in subsection (1)(b). Submission,
acquiescence, or words or conduct that would otherwise
indicate consent do not constitute effective consent when
occurring under a circumstance described in that paragraph.
Section 213.6. Sexual Assault in the Absence of Consent
(1) An actor is guilty of Sexual Assault in the Absence of
Consent when:
(a) the actor causes another person to submit to or
perform an act of sexual penetration or oral sex; and
(b) the other person does not consent to that act; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).

--- Page 2153 ---
(2) Grading. Sexual Assault in the Absence of Consent is a
felony of the fifth degree [three-year maximum], except that it is
a felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum] when:
(a) the other person has, by words or actions, expressly
communicated unwillingness to submit to or perform the act,
or the act is so sudden or unexpected that the other person
has no adequate opportunity to express unwillingness before
the act occurs; and
(b) the actor is reckless with respect to the attendant
circumstances specified in paragraph (a).
(3) If applicable, the actor may raise an affirmative defense
of Explicit Prior Permission under Section 213.10.
Section 213.7. Offensive Sexual Contact by Physical Force or
Restraint or Surreptitious Incapacitation; Offensive Sexual
Contact
(1) Offensive Sexual Contact by Physical Force or Restraint
or by Surreptitious Incapacitation. An actor is guilty of Offensive
Sexual Contact by Physical Force or Restraint or by
Surreptitious Incapacitation when:
(a) the actor knowingly engages in, or causes another
person to submit to or perform, an act of sexual contact with
any person; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because:
(i) the actor uses or explicitly or implicitly threatens to
use physical force or restraint against anyone, and that
conduct causes the other person to submit to or perform
the act of sexual contact; or
p. 1258
p. 1259
(ii) at the time of the act of sexual contact the other
person lacks substantial capacity to appraise, control, or
remember the person’s own sexual conduct or that of
anyone else because of a substance administered to that
person, without that person’s knowledge or consent; and

--- Page 2154 ---
the actor administered the incapacitating substance for
the purpose of causing that incapacity or knows that it
was surreptitiously administered by another for that
purpose; and
(c) reckless with respect to the conduct, attendant
circumstances, and results specified in paragraph (b).
Offensive Sexual Contact by Physical Force or Restraint
or by Surreptitious Incapacitation is a felony of the fifth
degree [three-year maximum].
(2) Offensive Sexual Contact. An actor is guilty of Offensive
Sexual Contact when:
(a) the actor knowingly engages in, or causes another
person to submit to or perform, an act of sexual contact with
anyone; and
(b) the other person did not consent to that act, and the
actor is reckless with respect to the lack of consent; or
(c) that act is without effective consent because:
(i) the other person is unaware that such act is
occurring, or is physically unable to communicate lack of
consent at the time of the act; and the actor is reckless
with respect to whether the other person is in that
condition at the time of the act; or
(ii) the act would be an offense as defined by Section
213.3(2) or (3), involving vulnerable or legally restricted
persons, had the act been one of sexual penetration or
oral sex; or
(iii) the act would be an offense as defined by Section
213.4, involving extortion, had the act been one of sexual
penetration or oral sex; or
(iv) the act would be an offense as defined by Section
213.5, involving prohibited deception, had the act been
one of sexual penetration or oral sex.
Offensive Sexual Contact is a petty misdemeanor [six-
month maximum].
(3) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section
213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the other person submitted to or performed

--- Page 2155 ---
the act of sexual contact under a circumstance described in
subsections (1)(b) or (2)(c). Submission, acquiescence, or
words or conduct that would otherwise indicate consent do not
constitute effective consent when occurring under a
circumstance described in those subsections. If applicable, an
actor charged with a violation of subsections (1)(b)(i), (2)(b), or
(2)(c)(iii) may raise an affirmative defense of Explicit Prior
Permission under Section 213.10.
Section 213.8. Sexual Offenses Involving Minors
(1) Sexual Assault of a Minor. An actor is guilty of Sexual
Assault of a Minor when:
(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to
submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex;
and
p. 1259
p. 1260
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the
time of the act:
(i) the other person is younger than 16; and
(ii) the actor is more than five years older than the
other person; and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).
Sexual Assault of a Minor is a felony of the fifth degree
[three-year maximum] except that it is a felony of the fourth
degree [five-year maximum] when at the time of the act the
actor is 21 or older, and it is a felony of the third degree [10-
year maximum] and a registrable offense when at the time of
the act the actor is 21 or older, the other person is younger
than 12, and the actor is reckless with respect to whether the
other person is younger than 12.
(2) Incestuous Sexual Assault of a Minor. An actor is guilty of
Incestuous Sexual Assault of a Minor when:

--- Page 2156 ---
(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to
submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex;
and
(b) at the time of the act, the actor is 18 or older and the
other person is younger than 18; and
(c) the act is without effective consent because at the
time of the act the actor is:
(i) a parent or grandparent of the other person,
including a biological, step, adoptive, or foster parent or
grandparent; or
(ii) the legal spouse, domestic partner, or sexual
partner of a person described by subparagraph (i); or
(iii) a legal guardian or de facto parent of the other
person, who resides intermittently or permanently in the
same dwelling as the other person; and
(d) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a), (b), and (c).
Incestuous Sexual Assault of a Minor is a felony of the
third degree [10-year maximum]. It is a registrable offense
when at the time of the act the other person is younger than
16.
(3) Exploitative Sexual Assault of a Minor. An actor is guilty
of Exploitative Sexual Assault of a Minor when:
(a) the actor engages in, or causes another person to
submit to or perform, an act of sexual penetration or oral sex;
and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the
time of the act:
(i) the other person is younger than 18; and
(ii) the actor is more than five years older than the
other person; and
(iii) the actor holds a formal position of authority over
the other person, such as a teacher, employer, religious
leader, treatment provider, administrator, or coach; and

--- Page 2157 ---
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the conduct,
attendant circumstances, and results specified in paragraphs
(a) and (b).
p. 1260
p. 1261
Exploitative Sexual Assault of a Minor is a felony of the
fifth degree [three-year maximum]. It is a defense to a
prosecution under Section 213.8(3) for the actor to prove by
a preponderance of the evidence that the actor’s position of
authority over the other person did not impair the other
person’s ability to form an independent judgment about
whether to consent to the act of sexual penetration or oral
sex.
(4) Fondling a Minor. An actor is guilty of Fondling a Minor
when:
(a) the actor knowingly fondles another person, or
knowingly causes another person to submit to or perform an
act of fondling with anyone; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the
time of the act:
(i) the other person is younger than 12 and the actor
is more than five years older than the other person; or
(ii) the other person is younger than 16 and the actor
is more than seven years older than the other person;
and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the attendant
circumstances described in subparagraph (b)(i) or (ii).
Grading. Fondling a Minor is a felony of the fifth degree
[three-year maximum], except that it is a felony of the fourth
degree [five-year maximum] when at the time of the act the
actor is 21 or older, the other person is younger than 12, and
the actor is reckless as to whether the other person is
younger than 12.
(5) Aggravated Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor. An
actor is guilty of Aggravated Offensive Sexual Contact with a

--- Page 2158 ---
Minor when:
(a) the actor knowingly engages in an act of sexual
contact with another person or causes another person to
submit to or perform an act of sexual contact; and
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the
time of the act:
(i) the other person is younger than 18; and
(ii) the actor is more than five years older than the
other person; and
(iii) the act, had it been an act of sexual penetration or
oral sex, would be an offense as defined by Section
213.1, 213.2, 213.3, 213.4, 213.5, or 213.8(2) or (3); and
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the attendant
circumstances described in subparagraphs (b)(i) and (ii).
Aggravated Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor is a
felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum].
(6) Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor. An actor is guilty
of Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor when:
(a) the actor knowingly engages in, or causes another
person to submit to or perform:
(i) an act of sexual contact; or
(ii) an act involving the touching of the tongue of
anyone to any body part or object, when that act is for the
purpose of anyone’s sexual arousal, sexual gratification,
sexual humiliation, or sexual degradation; and
p. 1261
p. 1262
(b) the act is without effective consent because at the
time of the act:
(i) the other person is younger than 12, and the actor
is more than five years older than the other person; or
(ii) the other person is younger than 16, and the actor
is more than seven years older than the other person;
and

--- Page 2159 ---
(c) the actor is reckless with respect to the attendant
circumstances described in subparagraph (b)(i) or (ii).
Offensive Sexual Contact with a Minor is a misdemeanor
[one-year maximum], except that it is a felony of the fifth
degree [three-year maximum] when at the time of the act the
actor is 21 or older, the other person is younger than 12, and
the actor is reckless with respect to whether the other person
is younger than 12.
(7) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section
213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the circumstances described in any of the
subsections (1) through (6) exist at the time of the act.
Submission, acquiescence, or words or conduct that would
otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective consent
when occurring under the circumstances described in any of
those subsections.
(8) [omitted]
[(9) [omitted]]
(10) [Bar against certain juvenile sexual offense felony
charges, delinquency adjudications or convictions when the
actor is less than 14 years old]. [omitted]
Section 213.9. Sex Trafficking
(1) Sex Trafficking. An actor is guilty of Sex Trafficking if the
actor knowingly recruits, entices, transports, transfers, harbors,
provides, isolates, or maintains a person by any means, with the
purpose of facilitating a commercial sex act involving that
person when:
(a) coercion is being, or will be, used to cause the person
to submit to or perform a commercial sex act, which
therefore will be without effective consent; and the actor
knows that coercion is being or will be used to cause the
person to submit to or perform that commercial sex act; or
(b) the person is younger than 18 and is being, or will be,
caused to submit to or perform a commercial sex act; and
the actor is reckless with respect to the risk that the person is
younger than 18 and is being, or will be, caused to submit to
or perform the commercial sex act.

--- Page 2160 ---
(2) Definitions. For purposes of Section 213.9(1):
(a) “Coercion” means:
(i) using or threatening to use physical force or
restraint against anyone;
(ii) taking, destroying, or threatening to take or
destroy the person’s money, credit or debit card,
passport, driver’s license, immigration document, or other
government-issued identification document, including a
document issued by a foreign government, or any travel
document pertaining to the person;
(iii) restricting or threatening to restrict the person’s
access to a substance that is a controlled substance
under the federal Controlled Substance Act, 21 U.S.C. §
801 et seq.;
p. 1262
p. 1263
(iv) administering or withholding a controlled
substance in circumstances that impair the person’s
physical or mental ability to avoid, evade, or flee from the
actor;
(v) using a scheme, plan, deception,
misrepresentation, or pattern of behavior for the purpose
of causing the person to believe that failing to submit to
or perform a commercial sex act would result in physical,
psychological, financial, or reputational harm to anyone
that is sufficiently serious to cause someone of ordinary
resolution who is of the same background, in the same
circumstances, and in the same physical and mental
condition as that person, to submit to or perform a
commercial sex act in order to avoid incurring that harm;
or
(vi) any combination of these circumstances.
(b) “Commercial Sex Act” means any act of sexual
penetration, oral sex, or sexual contact performed in
exchange, or the expectation of exchange, for money,

--- Page 2161 ---
property, services, or any other thing of value given to or
received by anyone.
(3) Grading. Sex Trafficking is a felony of the third degree
[10-year maximum].
(4) Effective consent. Consent is ineffective under Section
213.0(2)(e)(iv) when the circumstances described in subsection
(1) are present. Submission, acquiescence, or words or conduct
that would otherwise indicate consent do not constitute effective
consent when occurring under a circumstance described in that
subsection. If applicable, the actor may raise an affirmative
defense of Explicit Prior Permission under Section 213.10 when:
(a) a charge of Sex Trafficking is based on coercion
under subsection (1)(a); and
(b) the person giving such permission does so before that
person has been subjected to trafficking under subsection
(1) and before that person has been subjected to coercion
under subsection (1)(a).
Section 213.10. Affirmative Defense of Explicit Prior
Permission
(1) Except as provided in subsection (3), it is an affirmative
defense to a charge under this Article that the actor reasonably
believed that, in connection with the charged act of sexual
penetration, oral sex, or sexual contact, the other party
personally gave the actor explicit prior permission to use or
threaten to use physical force or restraint, or to inflict or threaten
to inflict any harm otherwise proscribed by Sections 213.1,
213.2, 213.4, 213.7, or 213.9, or to ignore the absence of
consent otherwise proscribed by Section 213.6.
(2) Permission is “explicit” under subsection (1) when it is
given orally or by written agreement:
(a) specifying that the actor may ignore the other party’s
expressions of unwillingness or other absence of consent;
(b) identifying the specific forms and extent of force,
restraint, or threats that are permitted; and
(c) stipulating the specific words or gestures that will
withdraw the permission.

--- Page 2162 ---
p. 1263
p. 1264
Permission given by gestures or other nonverbal conduct
signaling assent is not “explicit” under subsection (1).
(3) The defense provided by this Section is unavailable
when:
(a) the act of sexual penetration, oral sex, or sexual
contact occurs after the explicit permission was withdrawn,
and the actor is reckless with respect to whether the
permission was withdrawn;
(b) the actor relies on permission to use force or restraint
or ignore the absence of consent at a time when the other
party will be unconscious, asleep, or otherwise unable to
withdraw that permission;
(c) the actor recklessly engages in conduct that causes
or risks serious bodily injury; or
(d) at the time explicit permission is given, the other party
is, and the actor is reckless with respect to whether the other
party is:
(i) younger than 18;
(ii) giving that permission while subjected to physical
force or restraint;
(iii) giving that permission because of the use of or
threat to use physical force or restraint, or extortion as
defined by Section 213.4, if that party does not give the
permission;
(iv) lacking substantial capacity to appraise or control
his or her conduct as a result of intoxication, whether
voluntary or involuntary, and regardless of the identity of
the person who administered the intoxicants;
(v) incapacitated, vulnerable, or legally restricted, as
defined by Section 213.3;
(vi) subject to prohibited deception, as defined by
Section 213.5; or

--- Page 2163 ---
(vii) subject to trafficking, as defined by Section
213.9(1).
Section 213.11. Sentencing and Collateral Consequences of
Conviction
. . . .
(4) . . . Notwithstanding any contrary provisions of law,
collateral consequences applicable primarily to persons
convicted of a sexual offense, including the obligation to register
with law enforcement; associated duties; restrictions on
occupation and employment, education, and place of residence
applicable primarily to persons convicted of a sexual offense;
and other collateral consequences applicable primarily to
persons convicted of a sexual offense, are authorized and their
scope and implementation are delineated [in sections 213.11A-
J].
Section 213.11A. Registration for Law-Enforcement Purposes
(1) Offenses Committed in This Jurisdiction
(a) Except as provided in subsection (3), every person
convicted of an offense that is designated a registrable
offense in this Article must, in addition to any other sanction
imposed upon conviction, appear personally and register, at
the time specified in Section 213.11C, with the law-
enforcement authority designated by law in the [county]
where the person resides. . . .
p. 1264
p. 1265
(b) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no
conviction for an offense under this Article, or for any other
criminal offense in this jurisdiction, will require the person
convicted to register with law enforcement or other
governmental authority in a registry regime applicable
primarily to persons convicted of a sexual offense, unless
this Article designates that offense as a registrable offense.

--- Page 2164 ---
(2) Offenses Committed in Other Jurisdictions [omitted]
(3) Persons under the age of 18. No person may be subject
to the obligation to register under subsection (1) of this Section,
to other obligations or restrictions under this Section, or to
additional collateral consequences under Section 213.11I, on
the basis of a criminal conviction for an offense committed when
the person was under the age of 18, or on the basis of an
adjudication of delinquency based on conduct when the person
was under the age of 18; provided, however, that this subsection
(3) does not apply to a person convicted of a criminal offense of
Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or Restraint if the
person was at least 16 years old at the time of that offense.
(4) Retroactive Effect [omitted]
213.11B. Notification of the Obligation to Register and
Associated Duties [omitted]
213.11C. Time of Initial Registration [omitted]
213.11D. Information Required in Registration [omitted]
213.11E. Duty to Keep Registration Current [omitted]
213.11F. Duration of Registration Requirement
(1) Subject to the provisions of subsection (3) of this Section
and Section 213.11J, a person required to register must keep
the registration current for a period of 15 years, beginning on the
date when the registrant is released from custody after
conviction for the offense giving rise to the registration
requirement; or if the registrant is not sentenced to a term of
incarceration, beginning on the date when the registrant was
sentenced for that offense.
(2) At the expiration of that 15-year period, the duty to keep
that registration current will terminate; the person who had been
registered will not be subject to any further duties associated
with that registration requirement; and no public or private
agency other than a government law-enforcement agency shall

--- Page 2165 ---
thereafter be permitted access to the person’s registry
information.
(3) Early termination. If, during the first 10 years of the period
during which a person is required to keep registration
information current, the person:
(a) successfully completes any period of supervised
release, probation, or parole, and satisfies any financial
obligation such as a fine or restitution, other than a financial
obligation that the person, despite good-faith effort, has been
unable to pay; and
(b) successfully completes any required sex-offense
treatment program; and
p. 1265
p. 1266
(c) is not convicted of, or facing pending charges for, any
subsequent offense under this Article, or any subsequent
sexual offense in another jurisdiction that would be an
offense under this Article if committed in this jurisdiction;
then:
the duty to keep that registry information current will
terminate; the person who had been registered will not be
subject to any further duties associated with that registration
requirement; and subsequent access to registry information
will be governed by subsection (4).
(4) Access to Registry Information after Termination.
[omitted]
(5) Notice of Termination. [omitted]
(6) Certification. [omitted]
(7) Calculating Required Years [omitted]
213.11G. Failure to Register [omitted]
213.11H. Access to Registry Information
(1) Confidentiality

--- Page 2166 ---
(a) Each law-enforcement agency with which a person is
registered and each law-enforcement agency that receives
information about a registrant pursuant to Section
213.11D(4) must exercise due diligence to ensure that all
information about the registrant remains confidential, except
that relevant information about a specific registrant must be
made available to any government law-enforcement agency
that requests information to aid in the investigation of a
specific criminal offense.
(b) Any disclosure pursuant to paragraph (a) must
include a warning that:
(i) the law-enforcement agency receiving the
information must exercise due diligence to ensure that
the information remains confidential;
(ii) such information may be disclosed and used as
provided in paragraph (a), but otherwise must not be
disclosed to any person or public or private agency;
(iii) such information may be used only for the
purpose requested;
(iv) such information may not be used to injure,
harass, or commit a crime against the registrant or
anyone else; and
(v) any failure to comply with the confidentiality and
use-limitation requirements of paragraph (b) could result
in civil or criminal penalties.
(2) Unauthorized Disclosure of Registry Information. An actor
is guilty of Unauthorized Disclosure of Registry Information if:
(a) the actor, having received registry information as
provided in subsection (1), knowingly or recklessly discloses
that information, or permits that information to be disclosed,
to any person not authorized to receive it; or
(b) the actor obtains access to registry information by
computer trespassing or otherwise in violation of law and
subsequently knowingly or recklessly discloses that
information, or permits that information to be disclosed, to
any other person.

--- Page 2167 ---
Unauthorized Disclosure of Registry Information is a
felony of the fourth degree [five-year maximum].
p. 1266
p. 1267
213.11I. Additional Collateral Consequences of Conviction
. . . .
(2) Additional Collateral Consequences Precluded for
Persons Not Required to Register. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, no person shall be subject to an additional
collateral consequence . . . unless that person has been
convicted of a registrable offense and is required to register with
law enforcement under Section 213.11A.
(3) Additional Collateral Consequences Precluded for
Persons Required to Register. Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, a person required to register with law
enforcement under Section 213.11A must not be subject to any
government action notifying a community organization or entity
or a private party that the person resides, works, or studies in
the locality; and must not be subject to any government action
permitting a public or private agency, organization, or person to
access registry information, except as authorized by Section
213.11H.
(4) Additional Collateral Consequences Available for
Persons Required to Register.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person
required to register with law enforcement under Section 213.11A
may be subject to an additional collateral consequence not
specified in subsection (3), but only if an official designated by
law, after affording the person notice and an opportunity to
respond concerning the proposed additional collateral
consequence, determines that the additional collateral
consequence is manifestly required in the interest of public
safety, after due consideration of:
(a) the nature of the offense;

--- Page 2168 ---
(b) all other circumstances of the case;
(c) the person’s prior record; and
(d) the potential negative impacts of the burden,
restriction, requirement, or government action on the person,
on the person’s family, and on the person’s prospects for
rehabilitation and reintegration into society.
(5) Limitations. [omitted]
(6) Confidentiality. [omitted]
(7) Judicial Review.. [omitted]
213.11J. Discretionary Relief from Registration and Other
Sentencing Consequences and Collateral Consequences
[omitted]
Offenses Against Property
ARTICLE 220. ARSON, CRIMINAL MISCHIEF, AND OTHER
PROPERTY DESTRUCTION
Section 220.1. Arson and Related Offenses
(1) Arson. A person is guilty of arson, a felony of the second
degree, if he starts a fire or causes an explosion with the
purpose of:
(a) destroying a building or occupied structure of another;
or
(b) destroying or damaging any property, whether his
own or another’s, to collect insurance for such loss. It shall
be an affirmative defense to
p. 1267
p. 1268
prosecution under this paragraph that the actor’s conduct did
not recklessly endanger any building or occupied structure of
another or place any other person in danger of death or
bodily injury.
(2) Reckless Burning or Exploding. A person commits a
felony of the third degree if he purposely starts a fire or causes

--- Page 2169 ---
an explosion, whether on his own property or another’s, and
thereby recklessly:
(a) places another person in danger of death or bodily
injury; or
(b) places a building or occupied structure of another in
danger of damage or destruction.
(3) Failure to Control or Report Dangerous Fire. A person
who knows that a fire is endangering life or a substantial amount
of property of another and fails to take reasonable measures to
put out or control the fire, when he can do so without substantial
risk to himself, or to give a prompt fire alarm, commits a
misdemeanor if:
(a) he knows that he is under an official, contractual, or
other legal duty to prevent or combat the fire; or
(b) the fire was started, albeit lawfully, by him or with his
assent, or on property in his custody or control.
(4) Definitions. “Occupied structure” means any structure,
vehicle or place adapted for overnight accommodation of
persons, or for carrying on business therein, whether or not a
person is actually present. Property is that of another, for the
purposes of this section, if anyone other than the actor has a
possessory or proprietory interest therein. If a building or
structure is divided into separately occupied units, any unit not
occupied by the actor is an occupied structure of another.
Section 220.2. Causing or Risking Catastrophe
(1) Causing Catastrophe. A person who causes a
catastrophe by explosion, fire, flood, avalanche, collapse of
building, release of poison gas, radioactive material or other
harmful or destructive force or substance, or by any other
means of causing potentially widespread injury or damage,
commits a felony of the second degree if he does so purposely
or knowingly, or a felony of the third degree if he does so
recklessly.
(2) Risking Catastrophe. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor
if he recklessly creates a risk of catastrophe in the employment

--- Page 2170 ---
of fire, explosives or other dangerous means listed in
Subsection (1).
(3) Failure to Prevent Catastrophe. A person who knowingly
or recklessly fails to take reasonable measures to prevent or
mitigate a catastrophe commits a misdemeanor if:
(a) he knows that he is under an official, contractual or
other legal duty to take such measures; or
(b) he did or assented to the act causing or threatening
the catastrophe.
Section 220.3. Criminal Mischief
(1) Offense Defined. A person is guilty of criminal mischief if
he:
(a) damages tangible property of another purposely,
recklessly, or by negligence in the employment of fire,
explosives, or other dangerous means listed in Section
220.2(1); or
p. 1268
p. 1269
(b) purposely or recklessly tampers with tangible property
of another so as to endanger person or property; or
(c) purposely or recklessly causes another to suffer
pecuniary loss by deception or threat.
(2) Grading. Criminal mischief is a felony of the third degree
if the actor purposely causes pecuniary loss in excess of
$5,000, or a substantial interruption or impairment of public
communication, transportation, supply of water, gas or power, or
other public service. It is a misdemeanor if the actor purposely
causes pecuniary loss in excess of $100, or a petty
misdemeanor if he purposely or recklessly causes pecuniary
loss in excess of $25. Otherwise criminal mischief is a violation.
ARTICLE 221. BURGLARY AND OTHER CRIMINAL INTRUSION
Section 221.0. Definitions

--- Page 2171 ---
In this Article, unless a different meaning plainly is required:
(1) “occupied structure” means any structure, vehicle or
place adapted for overnight accommodation of persons, or for
carrying on business therein, whether or not a person is actually
present.
(2) “night” means the period between thirty minutes past
sunset and thirty minutes before sunrise.
Section 221.1. Burglary
(1) Burglary Defined. A person is guilty of burglary if he
enters a building or occupied structure, or separately secured or
occupied portion thereof, with purpose to commit a crime
therein, unless the premises are at the time open to the public or
the actor is licensed or privileged to enter. It is an affirmative
defense to prosecution for burglary that the building or structure
was abandoned.
(2) Grading. Burglary is a felony of the second degree if it is
perpetrated in the dwelling of another at night, or if, in the
course of committing the offense, the actor:
(a) purposely, knowingly or recklessly inflicts or attempts
to inflict bodily injury on anyone; or
(b) is armed with explosives or a deadly weapon.
Otherwise burglary is a felony of the third degree. An act
shall be deemed “in the course of committing” an offense if it
occurs in an attempt to commit the offense or in flight after
the attempt or commission.
(3) Multiple Convictions. A person may not be convicted both
for burglary and for the offense which it was his purpose to
commit after the burglarious entry or for an attempt to commit
that offense, unless the additional offense constitutes a felony of
the first or second degree.
Section 221.2. Criminal Trespass
(1) Buildings and Occupied Structures. A person commits an
offense if, knowing that he is not licensed or privileged to do so,
he enters or surreptitiously remains in any building or occupied
structure, or separately secured or

--- Page 2172 ---
p. 1269
p. 1270
occupied portion thereof. An offense under this Subsection is a
misdemeanor if it is committed in a dwelling at night. Otherwise
it is a petty misdemeanor.
(2) Defiant Trespasser. A person commits an offense if,
knowing that he is not licensed or privileged to do so, he enters
or remains in any place as to which notice against trespass is
given by:
(a) actual communication to the actor; or
(b) posting in a manner prescribed by law or reasonably
likely to come to the attention of intruders; or
(c) fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to
exclude intruders.
An offense under this Subsection constitutes a petty
misdemeanor if the offender defies an order to leave
personally communicated to him by the owner of the
premises or other authorized person. Otherwise it is a
violation.
(3) Defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution
under this Section that:
(a) a building or occupied structure involved in an offense
under Subsection (1) was abandoned; or
(b) the premises were at the time open to members of the
public and the actor complied with all lawful conditions
imposed on access to or remaining in the premises; or
(c) the actor reasonably believed that the owner of the
premises, or other person empowered to license access
thereto, would have licensed him to enter or remain.
ARTICLE 222. ROBBERY
Section 222.1. Robbery
(1) Robbery Defined. A person is guilty of robbery if, in the
course of committing a theft, he:
(a) inflicts serious bodily injury upon another; or

--- Page 2173 ---
(b) threatens another with or purposely puts him in fear of
immediate serious bodily injury; or
(c) commits or threatens immediately to commit any
felony of the first or second degree.
An act shall be deemed “in the course of committing a
theft” if it occurs in an attempt to commit theft or in flight after
the attempt or commission.
(2) Grading. Robbery is a felony of the second degree,
except that it is a felony of the first degree if in the course of
committing the theft the actor attempts to kill anyone, or
purposely inflicts or attempts to inflict serious bodily injury.
ARTICLE 223. THEFT AND RELATED OFFENSES
Section 223.0. Definitions
In this Article, unless a different meaning plainly is required:
(1) “deprive” means: (a) to withhold property of another
permanently or for so extended a period as to appropriate a
major portion of its economic
p. 1270
p. 1271
value, or with intent to restore only upon payment of reward or
other compensation; or (b) to dispose of the property so as to
make it unlikely that the owner will recover it.
(2) “financial institution” means a bank, insurance company,
credit union, building and loan association, investment trust or
other organization held out to the public as a place of deposit of
funds or medium of savings or collective investment.
(3) “government” means the United States, any State,
county, municipality, or other political unit, or any department,
agency or subdivision of any of the foregoing, or any corporation
or other association carrying out the functions of government.
(4) “movable property” means property the location of which
can be changed, including things growing on, affixed to, or
found in land, and documents although the rights represented

--- Page 2174 ---
thereby have no physical location. “Immovable property” is all
other property.
(5) “obtain” means: (a) in relation to property, to bring about
a transfer or purported transfer of a legal interest in the property,
whether to the obtainer or another; or (b) in relation to labor or
service, to secure performance thereof.
(6) “property” means anything of value, including real estate,
tangible and intangible personal property, contract rights,
choses-in-action and other interests in or claims to wealth,
admission or transportation tickets, captured or domestic
animals, food and drink, electric or other power.
(7) “property of another” includes property in which any
person other than the actor has an interest which the actor is not
privileged to infringe, regardless of the fact that the actor also
has an interest in the property and regardless of the fact that the
other person might be precluded from civil recovery because the
property was used in an unlawful transaction or was subject to
forfeiture as contraband. Property in possession of the actor
shall not be deemed property of another who has only a security
interest therein, even if legal title is in the creditor pursuant to a
conditional sales contract or other security agreement.
Section 223.1. Consolidation of Theft Offenses; Grading;
Provisions Applicable to Theft Generally
(1) Consolidation of Theft Offenses. Conduct denominated
theft in this Article constitutes a single offense. An accusation of
theft may be supported by evidence that it was committed in any
manner that would be theft under this Article, notwithstanding
the specification of a different manner in the indictment or
information, subject only to the power of the Court to ensure fair
trial by granting a continuance or other appropriate relief where
the conduct of the defense would be prejudiced by lack of fair
notice or by surprise.
(2) Grading of Theft Offenses.
(a) Theft constitutes a felony of the third degree if the
amount involved exceeds $500, or if the property stolen is a
firearm, automobile, airplane, motorcycle, motorboat or other

--- Page 2175 ---
motor-propelled vehicle, or in the case of theft by receiving
stolen property, if the receiver is in the business of buying or
selling stolen property.
p. 1271
p. 1272
(b) Theft not within the preceding paragraph constitutes a
misdemeanor, except that if the property was not taken from
the person or by threat, or in breach of a fiduciary obligation,
and the actor proves by a preponderance of the evidence
that the amount involved was less than $50, the offense
constitutes a petty misdemeanor.
(c) The amount involved in a theft shall be deemed to be
the highest value, by any reasonable standard, of the
property or services which the actor stole or attempted to
steal. Amounts involved in thefts committed pursuant to one
scheme or course of conduct, whether from the same person
or several persons, may be aggregated in determining the
grade of the offense.
(3) Claim of Right. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution
for theft that the actor:
(a) was unaware that the property or service was that of
another; or
(b) acted under an honest claim of right to the property or
service involved or that he had a right to acquire or dispose
of it as he did; or
(c) took property exposed for sale, intending to purchase
and pay for it promptly, or reasonably believing that the
owner, if present, would have consented.
(4) Theft from Spouse. It is no defense that theft was from
the actor’s spouse, except that misappropriation of household
and personal effects, or other property normally accessible to
both spouses, is theft only if it occurs after the parties have
ceased living together.
Section 223.2. Theft by Unlawful Taking or Disposition

--- Page 2176 ---
(1) Movable Property. A person is guilty of theft if he
unlawfully takes, or exercises unlawful control over, movable
property of another with purpose to deprive him thereof.
(2) Immovable Property. A person is guilty of theft if he
unlawfully transfers immovable property of another or any
interest therein with purpose to benefit himself or another not
entitled thereto.
Section 223.3. Theft by Deception
A person is guilty of theft if he purposely obtains property of
another by deception. A person deceives if he purposely:
(1) creates or reinforces a false impression, including false
impressions as to law, value, intention or other state of mind; but
deception as to a person’s intention to perform a promise shall
not be inferred from the fact alone that he did not subsequently
perform the promise; or
(2) prevents another from acquiring information which would
affect his judgment of a transaction; or
(3) fails to correct a false impression which the deceiver
previously created or reinforced, or which the deceiver knows to
be influencing another to whom he stands in a fiduciary or
confidential relationship; or
(4) fails to disclose a known lien, adverse claim or other legal
impediment to the enjoyment of property which he transfers or
encumbers in consideration for the property obtained, whether
such impediment is or is not valid, or is or is not a matter of
official record.
p. 1272
p. 1273
The term “deceive” does not, however, include falsity as to
matters having no pecuniary significance, or puffing by statements
unlikely to deceive ordinary persons in the group addressed.
Section 223.4. Theft by Extortion

--- Page 2177 ---
A person is guilty of theft if he obtains property of another by
threatening to:
(1) inflict bodily injury on anyone or commit any other
criminal offense; or
(2) accuse anyone of a criminal offense; or
(3) expose any secret tending to subject any person to
hatred, contempt or ridicule, or to impair his credit or business
repute; or
(4) take or withhold action as an official, or cause an official
to take or withhold action; or
(5) bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other
collective unofficial action, if the property is not demanded or
received for the benefit of the group in whose interest the actor
purports to act; or
(6) testify or provide information or withhold testimony or
information with respect to another’s legal claim or defense; or
(7) inflict any other harm which would not benefit the actor.
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution based on paragraphs
(2), (3) or (4) that the property obtained by threat of accusation,
exposure, lawsuit or other invocation of official action was honestly
claimed as restitution or indemnification for harm done in the
circumstances to which such accusation, exposure, lawsuit or
other official action relates, or as compensation for property or
lawful services.
Section 223.5. Theft of Property Lost, Mislaid, or Delivered by
Mistake
A person who comes into control of property of another that he
knows to have been lost, mislaid, or delivered under a mistake as
to the nature or amount of the property or the identity of the
recipient is guilty of theft if, with purpose to deprive the owner
thereof, he fails to take reasonable measures to restore the
property to a person entitled to have it.
Section 223.6. Receiving Stolen Property

--- Page 2178 ---
(1) Receiving. A person is guilty of theft if he purposely
receives, retains, or disposes of movable property of another
knowing that it has been stolen, or believing that it has probably
been stolen, unless the property is received, retained, or
disposed with purpose to restore it to the owner. “Receiving”
means acquiring possession, control or title, or lending on the
security of the property.
(2) Presumption of Knowledge. The requisite knowledge or
belief is presumed in the case of a dealer who:
(a) is found in possession or control of property stolen
from two or more persons on separate occasions; or
(b) has received stolen property in another transaction
within the year preceding the transaction charged; or
(c) being a dealer in property of the sort received,
acquires it for a consideration which he knows is far below its
reasonable value.
p. 1273
p. 1274
“Dealer” means a person in the business of buying or selling goods
including a pawnbroker.
Section 223.7. Theft of Services
(1) A person is guilty of theft if he purposely obtains services
which he knows are available only for compensation, by
deception or threat, or by false token or other means to avoid
payment for the service. “Services” includes labor, professional
service, transportation, telephone or other public service,
accommodation in hotels, restaurants or elsewhere, admission
to exhibitions, use of vehicles or other movable property. Where
compensation for service is ordinarily paid immediately upon the
rendering for such service, as is the case of hotels and
restaurants, refusal to pay or absconding without payment or
offer to pay gives rise to a presumption that the service was
obtained by deception as to intention to pay.

--- Page 2179 ---
(2) A person commits theft if, having control over the
disposition of services of others, to which he is not entitled, he
knowingly diverts such services to his own benefit or to the
benefit of another not entitled thereto.
Section 223.8. Theft by Failure to Make Required Disposition
of Funds Received
A person who purposely obtains property upon agreement, or
subject to a known legal obligation, to make specified payment or
other disposition, whether from such property or its proceeds or
from his own property to be reserved in equivalent amount, is
guilty of theft if he deals with the property obtained as his own and
fails to make the required payment or disposition. The foregoing
applies notwithstanding that it may be impossible to identify
particular property as belonging to the victim at the time of the
actor’s failure to make the required payment or disposition. An
officer or employee of the government or of a financial institution is
presumed: (i) to know any legal obligation relevant to his criminal
liability under this Section, and (ii) to have dealt with the property
as his own if he fails to pay or account upon lawful demand, or if
an audit reveals a shortage or falsification of accounts.
Section 223.9. Unauthorized Use of Automobiles and Other
Vehicles
A person commits a misdemeanor if he operates another’s
automobile, airplane, motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-
propelled vehicle without consent of the owner. It is an affirmative
defense to prosecution under this Section that the actor
reasonably believed that the owner would have consented to the
operation had he known of it.
ARTICLE 224. FORGERY AND FRAUDULENT PRACTICES
Section 224.0. Definitions
In this Article, the definitions given in Section 223.0 apply
unless a different meaning plainly is required.
Section 224.1. Forgery

--- Page 2180 ---
(1) Definition. A person is guilty of forgery if, with purpose to
defraud or injure anyone, or with knowledge that he is facilitating
a fraud or injury to be perpetrated by anyone, the actor:
p. 1274
p. 1275
(a) alters any writing of another without his authority; or
(b) makes, completes, executes, authenticates, issues or
transfers any writing so that it purports to be the act of
another who did not authorize that act, or to have been
executed at a time or place or in a numbered sequence other
than was in fact the case, or to be a copy of an original when
no such original existed; or
(c) utters any writing which he knows to be forged in a
manner specified in paragraphs (a) or (b).
“Writing” includes printing or any other method of
recording information, money, coins, tokens, stamps, seals,
credit cards, badges, trade-marks, and other symbols of
value, right, privilege, or identification.
(2) Grading. Forgery is a felony of the second degree if the
writing is or purports to be part of an issue of money, securities,
postage or revenue stamps, or other instruments issued by the
government, or part of an issue of stock, bonds or other
instruments representing interests in or claims against any
property or enterprise. Forgery is a felony of the third degree if
the writing is or purports to be a will, deed, contract, release,
commercial instrument, or other document evidencing, creating,
transferring, altering, terminating, or otherwise affecting legal
relations. Otherwise forgery is a misdemeanor.
Section 224.2. Simulating Objects of Antiquity, Rarity, Etc.
[omitted]
Section 224.3. Fraudulent Destruction, Removal or
Concealment of Recordable Instruments

--- Page 2181 ---
A person commits a felony of the third degree if, with purpose
to deceive or injure anyone, he destroys, removes or conceals any
will, deed, mortgage, security instrument or other writing for which
the law provides public recording.
Section 224.4. Tampering with Records
A person commits a misdemeanor if, knowing that he has no
privilege to do so, he falsifies, destroys, removes or conceals any
writing or record, with purpose to deceive or injure anyone or to
conceal any wrongdoing.
Section 224.5. Bad Checks
A person who issues or passes a check or similar sight order for
the payment of money, knowing that it will not be honored by the
drawee, commits a misdemeanor. For the purposes of this Section
as well as in any prosecution for theft committed by means of a
bad check, an issuer is presumed to know that the check or order
(other than a postdated check or order) would not be paid, if:
(1) the issuer had no account with the drawee at the time the
check or order was issued; or
(2) payment was refused by the drawee for lack of funds,
upon presentation within 30 days after issue, and the issuer
failed to make good within 10 days after receiving notice of that
refusal.
Section 224.6. Credit Cards
A person commits an offense if he uses a credit card for the
purpose of obtaining property or services with knowledge that:
p. 1275
p. 1276
(1) the card is stolen or forged; or
(2) the card has been revoked or cancelled; or
(3) for any other reason his use of the card is unauthorized
by the issuer.

--- Page 2182 ---
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under paragraph (3)
if the actor proves by a preponderance of the evidence that he had
the purpose and ability to meet all obligations to the issuer arising
out of his use of the card. “Credit card” means a writing, or other
evidence of an undertaking to pay for property or services
delivered or rendered to or upon the order of a designated person
or bearer. An offense under this Section is a felony of the third
degree if the value of the property or services secured or sought to
be secured by means of the credit card exceeds $500; otherwise it
is a misdemeanor.
Section 224.7. Deceptive Business Practices
A person commits a misdemeanor if in the course of business he:
(1) uses or possesses for use a false weight or measure, or
any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality
or quantity; or
(2) sells, offers or exposes for sale, or delivers less than the
represented quantity of any commodity or service; or
(3) takes or attempts to take more than the represented
quantity of any commodity or service when as buyer he
furnishes the weight or measure; or
(4) sells, offers or exposes for sale adulterated or mislabeled
commodities. “Adulterated” means varying from the standard of
composition or quality prescribed by or pursuant to any statute
providing criminal penalties for such variance, or set by
established commercial usage. “Mislabeled” means varying from
the standard of truth or disclosure in labeling prescribed by or
pursuant to any statute providing criminal penalties for such
variance, or set by established commercial usage; or
(5) makes a false or misleading statement in any
advertisement addressed to the public or to a substantial
segment thereof for the purpose of promoting the purchase or
sale of property or services; or
(6) makes a false or misleading written statement for the
purpose of obtaining property or credit; or
(7) makes a false or misleading written statement for the
purpose of promoting the sale of securities, or omits information

--- Page 2183 ---
required by law to be disclosed in written documents relating to
securities.
It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Section if
the defendant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that his
conduct was not knowingly or recklessly deceptive.
Section 224.8. Commercial Bribery and Breach of Duty to Act
Disinterestedly
(1) A person commits a misdemeanor if he solicits, accepts
or agrees to accept any benefit as consideration for knowingly
violating or agreeing to violate a duty of fidelity to which he is
subject as:
(a) partner, agent, or employee of another;
(b) trustee, guardian, or other fiduciary;
(c) lawyer, physician, accountant, appraiser, or other
professional adviser or informant;
p. 1276
p. 1277
(d) officer, director, manager or other participant in the
direction of the affairs of an incorporated or unincorporated
association; or
(e) arbitrator or other purportedly disinterested
adjudicator or referee.
(2) A person who holds himself out to the public as being
engaged in the business of making disinterested selection,
appraisal, or criticism of commodities or services commits a
misdemeanor if he solicits, accepts or agrees to accept any
benefit to influence his selection, appraisal or criticism.
(3) A person commits a misdemeanor if he confers, or offers
or agrees to confer, any benefit the acceptance of which would
be criminal under this Section.
Section 224.9. Rigging Publicly Exhibited Contest
(1) A person commits a misdemeanor if, with purpose to
prevent a publicly exhibited contest from being conducted in

--- Page 2184 ---
accordance with the rules and usages purporting to govern it,
he:
(a) confers or offers or agrees to confer any benefit upon,
or threatens any injury to a participant, official or other
person associated with the contest or exhibition; or
(b) tampers with any person, animal or thing.
(2) Soliciting or Accepting Benefit for Rigging. A person
commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly solicits, accepts or
agrees to accept any benefit the giving of which would be
criminal under Subsection (1).
(3) Participation in Rigged Contest. A person commits a
misdemeanor if he knowingly engages in, sponsors, produces,
judges, or otherwise participates in a publicly exhibited contest
knowing that the contest is not being conducted in compliance
with the rules and usages purporting to govern it, by reason of
conduct which would be criminal under this Section.
Section 224.10. Defrauding Secured Creditors
A person commits a misdemeanor if he destroys, removes,
conceals, encumbers, transfers or otherwise deals with property
subject to a security interest with purpose to hinder enforcement of
that interest.
Section 224.11. Fraud in Insolvency [omitted]
Section 224.12. Receiving Deposits in a Failing Financial
Institution [omitted]
Section 224.13. Misapplication of Entrusted Property and
Property of Government or Financial Institution [omitted]
Section 224.14. Securing Execution of Documents by
Deception
A person commits a misdemeanor if by deception he causes
another to execute any instrument affecting, purporting to affect, or
likely to affect the pecuniary interest of any person.
Offenses Against the Family

--- Page 2185 ---
p. 1277
p. 1278
ARTICLE 230. OFFENSES AGAINST THE FAMILY
Section 230.1. Bigamy and Polygamy
(1) Bigamy. A married person is guilty of bigamy, a
misdemeanor, if he contracts or purports to contract another
marriage, unless at the time of the subsequent marriage:
(a) the actor believes that the prior spouse is dead; or
(b) the actor and the prior spouse have been living apart
for five consecutive years throughout which the prior spouse
was not known by the actor to be alive; or
(c) a Court has entered a judgment purporting to
terminate or annul any prior disqualifying marriage, and the
actor does not know that judgment to be invalid; or
(d) the actor reasonably believes that he is legally eligible
to remarry.
(2) Polygamy. A person is guilty of polygamy, a felony of the
third degree, if he marries or cohabits with more than one
spouse at a time in purported exercise of the right of plural
marriage. The offense is a continuing one until all cohabitation
and claim of marriage with more than one spouse terminates.
This section does not apply to parties to a polygamous
marriage, lawful in the country of which they are residents or
nationals, while they are in transit through or temporarily visiting
this State.
(3) Other Party to Bigamous or Polygamous Marriage. A
person is guilty of bigamy or polygamy, as the case may be, if
he contracts or purports to contract marriage with another
knowing that the other is thereby committing bigamy or
polygamy.
Section 230.2. Incest
A person is guilty of incest, a felony of the third degree, if he
knowingly marries or cohabits or has sexual intercourse with an
ancestor or descendant, a brother or sister of the whole or half

--- Page 2186 ---
blood [or an uncle, aunt, nephew or niece of the whole blood].
“Cohabit” means to live together under the representation or
appearance of being married. The relationships referred to herein
include blood relationships without regard to legitimacy, and
relationship of parent and child by adoption.
Section 230.3. Abortion [omitted]
Section 230.4. Endangering Welfare of Children
A parent, guardian, or other person supervising the welfare of a
child under 18 commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly endangers
the child’s welfare by violating a duty of care, protection or
support.
Section 230.5. Persistent Non-Support
A person commits a misdemeanor if he persistently fails to
provide support which he can provide and which he knows he is
legally obliged to provide to a spouse, child or other dependent.
Offenses Against Public Administration
p. 1278
p. 1279
ARTICLE 240. BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION INFLUENCE
[OMITTED]
ARTICLE 241. PERJURY AND OTHER FALSIFICATION IN
OFFICIAL MATTERS [OMITTED]
ARTICLE 242. OBSTRUCTING GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS;
ESCAPES [OMITTED]
ARTICLE 243. ABUSE OF OFFICE [OMITTED]
Offenses Against Public Order and Decency
ARTICLE 250. RIOT, DISORDERLY CONDUCT, AND RELATED
OFFENSES

--- Page 2187 ---
Section 250.1. Riot; Failure to Disperse
(1) Riot. A person is guilty of riot, a felony of the third degree,
if he participates with [two] or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct:
(a) with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of
a felony or misdemeanor;
(b) with purpose to prevent or coerce official action; or
(c) when the actor or any other participant to the
knowledge of the actor uses or plans to use a firearm or any
other deadly weapon.
(2) Failure of Disorderly Persons to Disperse Upon Official
Order. Where [three] or more persons are participating in a
course of disorderly conduct likely to cause substantial harm or
serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, a peace officer or
other public servant engaged in executing or enforcing the law
may order the participants and others in the immediate vicinity
to disperse. A person who refuses or knowingly fails to obey
such an order commits a misdemeanor.
Section 250.2. Disorderly Conduct
(1) Offense Defined. A person is guilty of disorderly conduct
if, with purpose to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or
alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, he:
(a) engages in fighting or threatening, or in violent or
tumultuous behavior; or
(b) makes unreasonable noise or offensively coarse
utterance, gesture or display, or addresses abusive language
to any person present; or
(c) creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition
by any act which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
“Public” means affecting or likely to affect persons in a
place to which the public or a substantial group has access;
among the places included are highways, transport facilities,
schools, prisons, apartment houses, places of business or
amusement, or any neighborhood.

--- Page 2188 ---
(2) Grading. An offense under this section is a petty
misdemeanor if the actor’s purpose is to cause substantial harm
or serious inconvenience, or if he persists in disorderly conduct
after reasonable warning or request to desist. Otherwise
disorderly conduct is a violation.
p. 1279
p. 1280
Section 250.3. False Public Alarms
A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if he initiates or circulates
a report or warning of an impending bombing or other crime or
catastrophe, knowing that the report or warning is false or
baseless and that it is likely to cause evacuation of a building,
place of assembly, or facility of public transport, or to cause public
inconvenience or alarm.
Section 250.4. Harassment
A person commits a petty misdemeanor if, with purpose to harass
another, he:
(1) makes a telephone call without purpose of legitimate
communication; or
(2) insults, taunts or challenges another in a manner likely to
provoke violent or disorderly response; or
(3) makes repeated communications anonymously or at
extremely inconvenient hours, or in offensively coarse language;
or
(4) subjects another to an offensive touching; or
(5) engages in any other course of alarming conduct serving
no legitimate purpose of the actor.
Section 250.5. Public Drunkenness; Drug Incapacitation
A person is guilty of an offense if he appears in any public
place manifestly under the influence of alcohol, narcotics or other
drugs, not therapeutically administered, to the degree that he may
endanger himself or other persons or property, or annoy persons
in his vicinity. An offense under this Section constitutes a petty

--- Page 2189 ---
misdemeanor if the actor has been convicted hereunder twice
before within a period of one year. Otherwise the offense
constitutes a violation.
Section 250.6. Loitering or Prowling
A person commits a violation if he loiters or prowls in a place,
at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals
under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons
or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the
fact that the actor takes flight upon appearance of a peace officer,
refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal
himself or any object. Unless flight by the actor or other
circumstances makes it impracticable, a peace officer shall prior to
any arrest for an offense under this section afford the actor an
opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be
warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his
presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense
under this Section if the peace officer did not comply with the
preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial that the explanation
given by the actor was true and, if believed by the peace officer at
the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
Section 250.7. Obstructing Highways and Other Public
Passages
(1) A person, who, having no legal privilege to do so,
purposely or recklessly obstructs any highway or other public
passage, whether alone or with others, commits a violation, or,
in case he persists after warning by a law
p. 1280
p. 1281
officer, a petty misdemeanor. “Obstructs” means renders
impassable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard. No
person shall be deemed guilty of recklessly obstructing in
violation of this Subsection solely because of a gathering of

--- Page 2190 ---
persons to hear him speak or otherwise communicate, or solely
because of being a member of such a gathering.
(2) A person in a gathering commits a violation if he refuses
to obey a reasonable official request or order to move:
(a) to prevent obstruction of a highway or other public
passage; or
(b) to maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered
in dangerous proximity to a fire or other hazard.
An order to move, addressed to a person whose speech or
other lawful behavior attracts an obstructing audience, shall not be
deemed reasonable if the obstruction can be readily remedied by
police control of the size or location of the gathering.
Section 250.8. Disrupting Meetings and Processions
A person commits a misdemeanor if, with purpose to prevent or
disrupt a lawful meeting, procession or gathering, he does any act
tending to obstruct or interfere with it physically, or makes any
utterance, gesture or display designed to outrage the sensibilities
of the group.
Section 250.9. Desecration of Venerated Objects [omitted]
Section 250.10. Abuse of Corpse [omitted]
Section 250.11. Cruelty to Animals [omitted]
Section 250.12. Violation of Privacy [omitted]
ARTICLE 251. PUBLIC INDECENCY
Section 251.1. Open Lewdness
A person commits a petty misdemeanor if he does any lewd
act which he knows is likely to be observed by others who would
be affronted or alarmed.
Section 251.2. Prostitution and Related Offenses
(1) Prostitution. A person is guilty of prostitution, a petty
misdemeanor, if he or she:

--- Page 2191 ---
(a) is an inmate of a house of prostitution or otherwise
engages in sexual activity as a business; or
(b) loiters in or within view of any public place for the
purpose of being hired to engage in sexual activity.
“Sexual activity” includes homosexual and other deviate
sexual relations. A “house of prostitution” is any place where
prostitution or promotion of prostitution is regularly carried on
by one person under the control, management or supervision
of another. An “inmate” is a person who engages in
prostitution in or through the agency of a house of
prostitution. “Public place” means any place to which the
public or any substantial group thereof has access.
p. 1281
p. 1282
(2) Promoting Prostitution. A person who knowingly
promotes prostitution of another commits a misdemeanor or
felony as provided in Subsection (3). The following acts shall,
without limitation of the foregoing, constitute promoting
prostitution:
(a) owning, controlling, managing, supervising or
otherwise keeping, alone or in association with others, a
house of prostitution or a prostitution business; or
(b) procuring an inmate for a house of prostitution or a
place in a house of prostitution for one who would be an
inmate; or
(c) encouraging, inducing, or otherwise purposely
causing another to become or remain a prostitute; or
(d) soliciting a person to patronize a prostitute; or
(e) procuring a prostitute for a patron; or
(f) transporting a person into or within this state with
purpose to promote that person’s engaging in prostitution, or
procuring or paying for transportation with that purpose; or
(g) leasing or otherwise permitting a place controlled by
the actor, alone or in association with others, to be regularly
used for prostitution or the promotion of prostitution, or

--- Page 2192 ---
failure to make reasonable effort to abate such use by
ejecting the tenant, notifying law enforcement authorities, or
other legally available means; or
(h) soliciting, receiving, or agreeing to receive any benefit
for doing or agreeing to do anything forbidden by this
Subsection.
(3) Grading of Offenses Under Subsection (2). An offense
under Subsection (2) constitutes a felony of the third degree if:
(a) the offense falls within paragraph (a), (b) or (c) of
Subsection (2); or
(b) the actor compels another to engage in or promote
prostitution; or
(c) the actor promotes prostitution of a child under 16,
whether or not he is aware of the child’s age; or
(d) the actor promotes prostitution of his wife, child, ward
or any person for whose care, protection or support he is
responsible.
Otherwise the offense is a misdemeanor.
(4) Presumption from Living off Prostitutes. A person, other
than the prostitute or the prostitute’s minor child or other legal
dependent incapable of self-support, who is supported in whole
or substantial part by the proceeds of prostitution is presumed to
be knowingly promoting prostitution in violation of Subsection
(2).
(5) Patronizing Prostitutes. A person commits a violation if he
hires a prostitute to engage in sexual activity with him, or if he
enters or remains in a house of prostitution for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity.
(6) Evidence. On the issue whether a place is a house of
prostitution the following shall be admissible evidence: its
general repute; the repute of the persons who reside in or
frequent the place; the frequency, timing and duration of visits
by non-residents. Testimony of a person against his spouse
shall be admissible to prove offenses under this Section.
p. 1282

--- Page 2193 ---
p. 1283
Section 251.3. Loitering to Solicit Deviate Sexual Relations
A person is guilty of a petty misdemeanor if he loiters in or near
any public place for the purpose of soliciting or being solicited to
engage in deviate sexual relations.
Section 251.4. Obscenity [omitted]
PART III. TREATMENT AND CORRECTION [OMITTED]
PART IV. ORGANIZATION OF CORRECTION [OMITTED]
* The 1962 provision dealing with the death penalty, §210.6, was withdrawn in
2009. The 1962 provisions dealing with sentencing and the disposition of
convicted persons, §1.02(2) and Articles 6-7, were withdrawn in 2017 and
replaced with new text for §1.02(2) and Articles 6-11. In June 2021, the ALI
membership voted to withdraw the 1962 provision dealing with sexual offenses,
Article 213, and to replace it with new text for Article 213; those amendments are
to be formally issued by the ALI Council in January 2022. The MPC text included
here reflects these three sets of amendments.
1. See Sanford H. Kadish, Fifty Years of Criminal Law: An Opinionated Review,
87 Cal. L. Rev. 943, 947-948 (1999); Sanford H. Kadish, The Model Penal Code’s
Historical Antecedents, 19 Rutgers L. Rev. 521 (1988).
2. Kadish, Fifty Years, supra note 1, at 948-949.
* As amended, 2017.
* The brackets were meant to reflect the fact that the Institute took no position
on the desirability of the death penalty. — EDS.
** The brackets were meant to reflect the fact that the Institute took no position
on the desirability of the death penalty. — EDS.
* As amended, June 2021.
* The grading for offenses in amended Article 213 follows the grading structure
of MPC Article 6, as amended in 2017, which provides for five felony degrees and
two misdemeanor degrees. Amended Article 6 does not propose a maximum term
of imprisonment for each grading category, but instead mentions a term of years in
brackets as a rough point of departure for judgments of relative offense severity.
Amended Article 213 includes these bracketed terms of years for the same
reason. The Comment to amended Article 6 explains, “[M]aximum authorized

--- Page 2194 ---
terms are stated in brackets in part because judgments about the sanctions
appropriate to [each felony] degree are fundamental policy questions [to be
resolved] within each state.” Model Penal Code: Sentencing (Proposed Final Draft,
April 10, 2017), Section 6.06(6)(c), Comment k, p. 157.
p. 1283

--- Page 2195 ---
p. 1285

--- Page 2196 ---
T C
ABLE OF ASES
Principal cases are indicated by italics.
A
A, Re, 895
A & P Trucking Co.; United States v., 791
Aaron; People v., 543, 544
Abbell; United States v., 179
Abbot; People v., 455
Abbott; People v., 679
Abbott v. The Queen, 922
Abbott; State v., 849, 851
Abdul-Hussain; R. v., 921
Abuelhawa v. United States, 753
Acosta; People v., 284 Cal. Rptr. 117 (1991), 568, 571, 572, 577,
578, 589
Acosta; People v., 609 N.E.2d 518 (N.Y. 1993), 614
Adams; People v., 848
Adams; State v., 418
Addington v. Texas, 945
Adkins; Commonwealth v., 280
Agnew v. United States, 1046
Airedale NHS Trust v. Bland, 282
Akers; State v., 341
Alamo; People v., 1018
Albernaz v. United States, 750
Albertini; United States v., 368, 369
Alexander; United States v., 1005
Aleynikov; People v., 1073
Aleynikov; State v., 1072

--- Page 2197 ---
Allen v. State, 858, 860
Alleyne v. United States, 158, 1149
Almeida; Commonwealth v., 560
Alvarez; United States v., 625 F.2d 1196 (5th Cir. 1981), 721, 723
Alvarez; United States v., 755 F.2d 830 (11th Cir. 1985), 718, 720
Ambrose; United States v., 653
Anderson; People v., 447 P.2d 942 (Cal. 1968), 478, 479, 480
Anderson; People v., 252 P.3d 968 (Cal. 2011), 1023
Anderson v. Superior Court, 743, 744
Andrews; Commonwealth v., 947
Andrews v. United States, 859
Ansaldi; United States v., 363
Antick; People v., 563
Apodaca v. Oregon, 164
Aponte; People v., 606
Apple, Inc.; United States v., 724
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 158, 1148
Armstrong; State v., 979
Armstrong; United States v., 88, 102, 106, 107
Arnold; State v., 929
Arthur Andersen LLP; United States v., 768
Arzon; People v., 574, 576, 577, 578, 590
As. H., In re, 149
Ashley; People v., 267 P.2d 271 (Cal. 1954), 1041, 1042, 1044
Ashley; People v., 162 N.E.3d 200 (Ill. 2020), 624
A.T.C.; State v., 134
Atencio; Commonwealth v., 599, 600
Atkins v. State, 860
Atkins v. Virginia, 944, 1183, 1188, 1189, 1190, 1191, 1192
Avery; People v., 1086
Axelberg v. Commissioner of Pub. Safety, 883
Ayala v. Scott, 98
Azadian; United States v., 698
p. 1285

--- Page 2198 ---
p. 1286
B
B (A Minor) v. Director of Pub. Prosecutions, 323
Babbitt; People v., 979
Bache; Commonwealth v., 427
Bailey v. Commonwealth, 593
Bailey; United States v., 880
Bainbridge; R. v., 731
Bajakajian; United States v., 245
Baker; United States v., 10 F.3d 1374 (9th Cir. 1993), 704
Baker; United States v., 928 F.3d 291 (3d Cir. 2019), 1090
Baldwin v. New York, 164
Balint; United States v., 329, 330, 332, 334, 336, 337, 345, 371, 372
Ball; United States v., 176
Barber v. Superior Court, 280
Barela; State v., 445
Barker; The King v., 611, 619
Barnes; People v., 400
Barnes v. United States, 292
Barnett v. State, 553
Barnett; State v., 509
Barragan-Sierra; State v., 755
Barron v. Mayor of Balt., 161
Barry; Commonwealth v., 1039
Bartley v. Commonwealth, 273
Bass; United States v., 194
Bateman; R. v., 509
Batson v. Kentucky, 165, 166, 1198
Battalino v. People, 983
Bautista v. Small, 835
Baze v. Rees, 1182, 1183
Bazeley’s Case, 1026
Beardsley; People v., 261, 274

--- Page 2199 ---
Beaudry; State v., 341
Beaver; People v., 1017
Bechtel v. State, 979
Beck; People v., 606
Becker; State v., 947
Behrman; United States v., 332, 334
Bei Bei Shuai v. State, 211
Belcher, In re Detention of, 1103
Bell; Commonwealth v., 614, 615
Beltran; People v., 485, 487
Beneficial Fin. Co.; Commonwealth v., 776
Benniefield; State v., 318
Berger; State v., 247
Bernhardt; State v., 624
Berrigan; United States v., 642, 643, 645, 646, 647, 650
Berry; People v., 493
Bertling; United States v., 727
Betterman v. Montana, 1119
B.H.; State v., 913
Bigelow; State v., 937
Birreuta; People v., 583
Bishop; United States v., 361
Black; People v., 1127
Blackmon; United States v., 716
Blake v. United States, 951, 961
Blakely v. Washington, 158, 1148
Blankenship; United States v., 734
Blaszczak; United States v., 1071, 1072
Blaue; R. v., 592
Blixt; United States v., 1074
Bolden v. State, 716
Bonjour; State v., 885
Booker; United States v., 158, 1136, 1137, 1148, 1149
Booth; State v., 934

--- Page 2200 ---
Borden v. United States, 301
Bordenkircher v. Hayes, 129
Borelli; United States v., 745
Boro v. Superior Court, 431, 433, 434
Borough of. See name of borough
Bost v. United States, 740
Bottone; United States v., 1068, 1069, 1072, 1073
Bouie v. City of Columbia, 209, 212, 213, 214
Bourbonnaise v. State, 1041
Bowens; United States v., 696
Bowman; State v., 677
Boyle v. State, 501
Boyston; State v., 933
Bradshaw; State v., 280
Brady; People v., 571, 818
Brady v. United States, 108, 111, 112, 113, 115, 131
Bram v. United States, 110
Brammer; State v., 510
Brantley; United States v., 272
p. 1286
p. 1287
Braslaw; People v., 609
Bratty v. Attorney-General, 253, 944, 981
Braverman; United States v., 750
Brawner; United States v., 982, 988
Bridges; State v., 710, 716
Brigham; People v., 717
Brooks; People v., 478
Brooks; State v., 407, 409, 410
Brothers; People v., 535
Brown; Commonwealth v., 543
Brown v. Golden Valley, City of, 874
Brown; People v., 1085

--- Page 2201 ---
Brown v. Plata, 1100
Brown; R. v., 921
Brown v. State, 608
Brown v. United States, 816
Brown; United States v., 892 F.3d 385 (D.C. Cir. 2018), 1135
Brown; United States v., 945 F.3d 597 (1st Cir. 2019), 178
Brown; United States v., 811 F. Appx. 818 (4th Cir. 2020), 749
Bruce; State v., 246
Brugmann; Commonwealth v., 881
Bruguier; United States v., 337
Bruhn; State v., 942
Bruno; United States v., 744, 745, 751
Bryan v. MacPherson, 873, 874
Bryan; United States v., 1021
Bryant; State v., 373
Bucklew v. Precythe, 1183
Bullock; People v., 247
Bullock v. United States, 476
Burden; People v., 528
Burgess; R. v., 982
Burke; State v., 402
Burks; State v., 168
Burks v. United States, 141
Burrage v. United States, 573, 574
Burroughs; People v., 547
Burson v. Freeman, 180
Burton; People v., 551, 554
Burton; State v., 949
Bushell’s Case, 172
Buswell; Commonwealth v., 614
Butler; People v., 510
Byrd v. Skipper, 114
C

--- Page 2202 ---
Cabaltero; People v., 559
Cage v. Louisiana, 150
Caine; State v., 606
Caldwell v. Mississippi, 1197
California v. Ramos, 1198
Callanan v. United States, 705, 739
Callins v. Collins, 1180
Camerano; Commonwealth v., 733
Cameron; State v., 976
Campbell; Commonwealth v., 89 Mass. (7 Allen) 541 (Sup. Jud. Ct.
1863), 560
Campbell; Commonwealth v., 539 Pa. 212 (1994), 753
Campbell; People v., 584, 586, 587, 600
Campbell; United States v., 672
Canola; State v., 559, 561, 562
Canon; United States v., 677
Caracciola; Commonwealth v., 404
Cardwell; Commonwealth v., 276
Carlson; Commonwealth v., 592
Carmony; People v., 247
Carpenter v. United States, 1069, 1071
Carpenter; United States v., 748
Carrero; State v., 485
Carroll; Commonwealth v., 470, 472, 477, 478
Carroll; People v., 274
Carroll v. State, 740
Carter v. Commonwealth, 622
Carter; Commonwealth v., 590
Casassa; People v., 496
Castle; United States v., 755
Cavitt v. Cullen, 559
Ceballos; People v., 861, 864, 872
Chance; People v., 926
Chaney; State v., 47

--- Page 2203 ---
Chanthabouly; State v., 974
Chaplin v. United States, 1043
Chappell; Commonwealth v., 948
Chappell v. United States, 1064
Chavez; State v., 292
Cheek v. United States, 360, 362, 364, 368
Cheek; United States v., 362
Cheshire; R. v., 579
p. 1287
p. 1288
Chicago, City of v. Morales, 192, 216, 219, 225, 227, 228, 230, 232,
233, 623, 624, 705
Childress; People v., 676
Chiu; People v., 684
Chun; People v., 556
Church; United States v., 634, 635, 636
Churchill v. Walton, 735
Citizens United v. FEC, 767
City of. See name of city
Clapps; People v., 486
Clark v. Arizona, 984, 988
Class v. United States, 113
Cleveland v. United States, 1080
Coates v. Cincinnati, 220, 229
Cobb v. State, 937
Coddington; People v., 974
Cogdon Case, 255, 256
Coker v. Georgia, 1185, 1187, 1188
Collazzo; United States v., 319
Collins v. City of Harker Heights, 898
Collins; State v., 852
Coltherst; State v., 715
Comer v. State, 562

--- Page 2204 ---
Commonwealth v. See name of opposing party
Community Alternatives Mo., Inc.; State v., 779
Conatser; United States v., 277
Coney; R. v., 686
Connally v. General Constr. Co., 208
Connecticut v. Johnson, 178
Contento-Pachon; United States v., 918
Cooper Indus., Inc. v. Leatherman Tool Group, Inc., 246
County Court v. Allen, 160
Cox; State v., 478
Cox; United States v., 367, 368
Coyle; State v., 485
Craig; State v., 625
Crenshaw; State v., 972, 974, 976
Croft; United States v., 1064
Croy; People v., 680, 681
Cruzan v. Director, Mo. Dep’t of Health, 283, 896, 898, 899
Culverson v. State, 852
Cummings; People v., 1062
Cunningham; R. v., 285, 288, 289, 296, 316
Curley; State v., 826, 979
Curley v. United States, 148
Curtis; State v., 941
D
Dabney v. State, 860
Daniel B.; State v., 636
D’Aquino v. United States, 918
Datcher; United States v., 186
Davis v. Alaska, 457, 458
Davis v. City of Peachtree City, 340
Davis; People v., 561 N.E.2d 165 (Ill. 1990), 1064
Davis; People v., 872 P.2d 591 (Cal. 1994), 211
Davis; State v., 38 N.J.L. 176 (1875), 1086

--- Page 2205 ---
Davis; State v., 319 Mo. 1222, 6 S.W.2d 609 (1928), 633, 634
Davis; State v., 79 P.3d 64 (Ariz. 2003), 247
Davis v. United States, 160 U.S. 469 (1895), 153
Davis v. United States, 165 U.S. 373 (1897), 952, 953
Davis v. United States, 873 A.2d 1101 (D.C. 2005), 442
Dean v. United States, 318
Decato; State v., 942
Decina; People v., 257, 259
Deegan; United States v., 1138, 1145
Deer; State v., 254
Defreitas; United States v., 704
DeGrange; Pennsylvania v., 191
Delano; United States v., 1084
DeLawder; State v., 456
Delgado; United States v., 754, 757
Delgrosso; United States v., 309
Dellinger; People v., 526
DeMarco; Commonwealth v., 912
Denbo; People v., 398
Dennis v. State, 492
DeNormand; United States v., 1021
DeSacia v. State, 186, 187, 188
Desu; United States v., 740
Detention of. See name of party
Diaz; State v., 720
Dickerson v. State, 510, 944
p. 1288
p. 1289
Dillon; People v., 544
Dimora; United States v., 754
DiPetrillo; State v., 401, 405
Director of Pub. Prosecutions; R. (Purdy) v., 88, 902
Direct Sales Co. v. United States, 729, 730, 731, 734

--- Page 2206 ---
Disanto; State v., 620
Divers v. State, 1041o1126
Dix v. Superior Court, 96
Dixon v. United States, 159
Dixon; United States v., 914
Dlugash; People v., 639
Doe v. State, 189 P.3d 999 (Alaska 2008), 1104
Doe v. State, 111 A.3d 1077 (N.H. 2015), 1104
Doe v. United States, 95
Donahue; State v., 423
Dotterweich; United States v., 330, 336, 345, 371, 678, 792–793,
794, 796, 799
Dougherty; United States v., 171, 174, 175, 180, 185
Downs; People v., 151
D.P.P. v. Camplin, 505, 506
Dreiman v. State, 1071
Drew; Commonwealth v., 1043
Drum; Commonwealth v., 472
Dudley and Stephens; R. v., 9, 14, 15, 16, 847, 890, 891, 894, 895
Dufield; State v., 531
Duncan v. Louisiana, 160, 163, 164, 167, 170, 171, 179, 183, 186,
188
Dunn v. United States, 145
Dunne; Commonwealth v., 610
Dunphe; Commonwealth v., 978
Durham v. State, 870, 871
Durham v. United States, 996
Durland v. United States, 1043
Dusky v. United States, 941
Dymond; R. v., 1052
E
Eagleton; R. v., 611, 612
Earnest; Commonwealth v., 472
Earp; State v., 605

--- Page 2207 ---
Eason v. State, 485
Eaton; State v., 249
E.B. v. Verniero, 1104
Eddings v. Oklahoma, 1179, 1181, 1199
Egginton; R. v., 1019
Eicher; State v., 1063
Elder v. State, 865
Elliot; State v., 500
Elmi; State v., 584
Elonis v. United States, 294, 318, 625
Elzey; State v., 979
Enmund v. Florida, 1185, 1187, 1188, 1189
Erdemovic´; Prosecutor v., 922, 923
Erwin v. State, 851
Escobar De Bright; United States v., 758
Eugene, City of v. Adams, 886
Evans; People v., 279, 429, 434
Evans v. State, 843
Evans v. United States, 755
Evans; United States v., 1127
Everhart; State v., 522
Ewing v. California, 1151, 1156, 1157
Ex parte. See name of party
F
Falcone; United States v., 729, 730, 732, 734
Farley; People v., 555
Farnsworth v. Zerbst, 697
Farraj; United States v., 1074
Fasulo v. Arafeh, 945–946
Faulkner; R. v., 287, 288, 289, 316
Fearon; State v., 998
Federici; Commonwealth v., 944
Feely; R. v., 1087

--- Page 2208 ---
Felton; State v., 504
Fernandez; People v., 178
Ferry v. Ramsey, 156
Fichtner; People v., 1052, 1055, 1092
Finger v. State, 969
Fisch; United States v., 309
Fischer; Commonwealth v., 438
5 Star Feedlot, Inc.; State v., 259
Flanders v. Commonwealth, 549
Flattum; State v., 986
Fleming; United States v., 739 F.2d 945 (4th Cir. 1984), 528, 529,
530
Fleming; United States v., 23 C.M.R. 7 (1957), 917
p. 1289
p. 1290
Flores-Figueroa v. United States, 318, 1074
Floyd v. City of N.Y., 231, 232
Flute; United States v., 212
Fokker Servs., B.V.; United States v., 787
Fontes; People v., 886
Ford v. State, 548
Ford v. Wainwright, 942, 943, 944
Forrest; State v., 479, 486
Foster; Commonwealth v., 535
Foster; People v., 758
Foster v. State, 947
Foster; State v., 1148
Fountain; United States v., 662, 663, 733
Fowlin; Commonwealth v., 848, 849
Francis v. Franklin, 160, 292
Franklin; United States v., 738
Frazier v. State, 1044
Frazier v. Weatherholtz, 156

--- Page 2209 ---
Freed; United States v., 336, 736
Frendak v. United States, 944
Friedman v. Sebelius, 795
Frost; United States v., 1077
Fugit; United States v., 207
Fulcher v. State, 981
Fully Informed Jury Ass’n v. San Diego, 180
Furman v. Georgia, 1171, 1172, 1173, 1174, 1175, 1176, 1178, 1180,
1181, 1195, 1196, 1200
G
Gable-Wall Case (Giebelmauer), 521
Gagne v. Booker, 460
Gangahar; State v., 421
Garcia; People v., 937
Garcia v. State, 756, 758
Garcia; United States v., 725
Gardner v. Florida, 1118
Gardner v. People, 351
Gardner; United States v., 677
Gargus; State v., 274
Garland, Ex parte, 176
Garnett v. State, 325, 327
Garthus; United States v., 989
Gebardi v. United States, 698, 752, 753
Gel Spice Co.; United States v., 796
Gementera; United States v., 1104, 1108, 1109, 1110
Genson; State v., 345
Gentry; State v., 1065
Gerhart v. State, 1054
Giaccio v. Pennsylvania, 218
Gilbert; People v., 563, 590
Gilliam; United States v., 862, 863
Gillis; People v., 558

--- Page 2210 ---
Giovannetti; United States v., 310
Girard; United States v., 1066, 1071, 1072, 1075
Girouard v. State, 480, 485, 486, 491
Gladstone; State v., 658, 660, 668, 715
Gladue; R. v., 1146
Glenn; State v., 948
Global-Tech Appliances, Inc. v. SEB S.A., 307, 308, 309, 310
Glossip v. Gross, 1181, 1182, 1183, 1192
Glowacki; State v., 856
Godines; People v., 740
Goetz; People v., 805, 809, 815, 819
Goffer; United States v., 306
Gonzales v. Oregon, 900
Gonzales; State v., 493
Gonzalez; Commonwealth v., 852
Gonzalez; People v., 590
Goodhall; R. v., 1042
Gordon v. United States, 789, 790, 791
Gormley; Commonwealth v., 735
Gould; United States v., 979
Gounagias; State v., 494
Government of V.I. v. Dowling, 719
Graham v. Florida, 1151, 1156, 1159, 1160, 1161, 1190
Graham v. United States, 1040
Gray; United States v., 288
Greco; People v., 740
Green; State v., 541, 938, 940
Greenwood; State v., 168
Gregg v. Georgia, 47, 1157, 1172, 1177, 1178, 1180, 1181, 1186,
1192, 1195, 1196, 1197, 1200
Gregory; State v., 1202
Gribbins v. Commonwealth, 820
Griffin v. State, 726
Griffin; State v., 819

--- Page 2211 ---
p. 1290
p. 1291
Griffin; United States v., 707
Griffith v. State, 42, 43
Grullon; State v., 758
Grunewald v. United States, 738
Guest; State v., 327
Guffey; State v., 640
Guidant LLC; United States v., 783, 784, 785, 787
Guido; State v., 976, 978
Guminga; State v., 339, 341, 795
Guthrie; State v., 474, 477, 478
H
Ha v. State, 845, 846
Hackett; People v., 759
Hackler; People v., 1108
Haddock; State v., 426
Hale; State v., 849
Hall v. Florida, 1188, 1190
Hall; People v., 511, 514
Hanousek; United States v., 800
Harmelin v. Michigan, 237, 247, 1150, 1152, 1153, 1154, 1156, 1159,
1160
Harmon; People v., 877
Harper; United States v., 630
Harper, State ex rel. v. Zegeer, 998
Harrington; State v., 1049, 1052
Harris; Commonwealth v., 825 N.E.2d 58 (Mass. 2005), 459
Harris; Commonwealth v., 904 N.E.2d 478, 485 (Mass. App. Ct.
2009), 617
Harris; State v., 943
Harris v. United States, 1149
Harris; United States v., 755

--- Page 2212 ---
Harrison; State v., 544
Harrison v. United States, 703
Haskell, State ex rel. v. Spokane Cnty. Dist. Court, 889
Hatfield; United States v., 578
Hayes; State v., 636, 692, 694, 696, 700
Hayes; United States v., 203
Hazelwood; State v., 292, 294
Heicklen; United States v., 180
Heinemann; State v., 912
Helmedach; State v., 912
Henderson; People v., 546
Henson; Commonwealth v., 1044
Heras; United States v., 734
Herbst; United States v., 987
Heredia; United States v., 310
Hermanson v. State, 523
Hernandez; Commonwealth v., 423
Hernandez; People v., 393 P.2d 673 (Cal. 1964), 321, 322
Hernandez; People v., 624 N.E.2d 661 (N.Y. 1993), 562
Hernandez v. State, 843
Hernandez; State v., 442
Hernandez; United States v., 920
Herrera; People v., 988
Hess v. State, 443
Hicks v. United States, 655, 658, 689
Higgins; State v., 889
Hill; State v., 852
Hilton Hotels Corp.; United States v., 763, 769, 781
Hinckley; United States v., 948, 961, 963, 964, 969
Hines v. State, 547, 550
Hinkhouse; State v., 606, 609
Hitchcock v. Dugger, 1179
Holbron; State v., 608
Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project, 670

--- Page 2213 ---
Holland; Commonwealth v., 849
Holloway; State v., 327
Holmes; United States v., 12, 890
Holt v. Commonwealth, 1044
Holtschlag; People v., 541
Hood; People v., 925, 928, 929
Hopkins v. State, 365, 366
Horn; People v., 818
Hosnedl v. State, 815
Houston v. Hill, 221
Howard; People v., 547
Howard; United States v., 632
HSBC Bank USA, N.A.; United States v., 787
Hsu; United States v., 643
Hudson & Goodwin; United States v., 194
Hufstetler v. State, 1039, 1041
Hughes v. State, 944
Hulme v. State, 548
p. 1291
p. 1292
Humphrey; People v., 830
Humphrey v. Wilson, 247
Hurst v. Florida, 1118, 1201
Hutchins; Commonwealth v., 884
Hutto v. Davis, 238
Hyde v. United States, 613, 708
Hynes; State v., 1053
Hyrne; United States v., 24
I
Imbler v. Pachtman, 90
Iniguez; People v., 407
Inland Freight Lines v. United States, 790

--- Page 2214 ---
Inmates of Attica Corr. Facility v. Rockefeller, 90, 92, 94, 98, 99, 101
In re. See name of party
Intel Corp. Inv. Policy Comm. v. Sulyma, 307
International Minerals & Chem. Corp.; United States v., 362
Ireland; People v., 551, 552
J
Jackson; State v., 562
Jackson; United States v., 627
Jacobson v. United States, 695, 924
Jadowski; State v., 327
Jaffe; People v., 637, 640, 642, 645, 646, 647, 650
Jahnke v. State, 841, 842
Jamezic v. State, 948
Jamison v. Klem, 113
Janes; State v., 846
Jansen; State v., 692
Jarrott v. State, 1021
J.E.B. v. Alabama, 165
Jeffries v. State, 529
Jenner; State v., 981
Jennings; People v., 1086
Jewell; United States v., 305, 307, 308
J.H., In re, 421
Jimenez Recio; United States v., 738
Joel v. City of Orlando, 250
Johnson v. Athens-Clarke Cnty., 228
Johnson; People v., 563, 1109
Johnson; R. v., 495
Johnson; State v. (570 A.2d 395), 413
Johnson; United States v., 576 U.S. 591 (2015), 229
Johnson; United States v., 416 F.3d 464 (6th Cir. 2005), 912
Johnson v. Williams, 179
Johnston; People v., 616

--- Page 2215 ---
Jones; People v., 191 Cal. App. 2d 478 (1961), 863
Jones; People v., 207 Ill. 2d 122 (2003), 187
Jones v. City of L.A., 250, 1000
Jones v. State, 43 N.E.2d 1017 (Ind. 1942), 277
Jones v. State, 689 N.E.2d 722 (Ind. 1997), 606
Jones v. Mississippi, 1161
Jones; R. v., 1037
Jones; State v., 299 P.3d 219 (Idaho 2013), 398
Jones; State v., 786 S.E.2d 132 (S.C. 2016), 856
Jones; State v., 800 S.E.2d 54 (N.C. 2017), 1026
Jones; State v., 2019 Haw. App. LEXIS 372, 433 P.3d 124 (Haw. Ct.
App. 2019), 421
Jones; State v., 216 A.3d 907 (Md. 2019), 215
Jones; State v., 155 A.3d 492 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2017), 553
Jones v. United States, 463 U.S. 354 (1983), 945, 946, 947
Jones v. United States, 308 F.2d 307 (1962), 261, 262, 273, 580
Jones; United States v., 565 U.S. 400 (2012), 625
Jones; United States v., 677 F. Supp. 238 (S.D.N.Y. 1988), 1071
Jorgenson; State v., 1054, 1055
Joyce; United States v., 631
Jungers, United States v., 53
Jurek v. Texas, 1177
K
Kahler v. Kansas, 964, 968, 969, 974, 1001
Kahler; State v., 965
p. 1292
p. 1293
Kansas v. Crane, 959, 1002
Kansas v. Hendricks, 1103
Karani; United States v., 364
Keaton v. State, 560
Keeler v. Superior Court, 192, 207, 211, 212, 463

--- Page 2216 ---
Keita; Commonwealth v., 948
Keith v. Schaub, 986
Kellogg; People v., 1000
Kelly; State v., 478 A.2d 364 (N.J. 1984), 820, 825, 830, 832, 833,
837
Kelly; State v., 338 S.E.2d 405 (W. Va. 1985), 443
Kelly; State v., 727 S.E.2d 912 (N.C. Ct. App. 2012), 175
Kelly v. United States, 1084
Kennedy v. Louisiana, 1190, 1191
Kennedy v. Mendoza-Martinez, 1102
Kern; People v., 594
Kevorkian; People v., 585, 587, 588
Key, Ex parte, 215
Khan; R. v., 610
Kibbe; People v., 575, 576, 577
Kihnel; State v., 758
The King v. See name of opposing party
King v. Commonwealth, 536
King v. State, 642
Kingston; R. v., 935
Kisela v. Hughes, 872
Kissel; United States v., 701, 737
Klapper; People v., 1066
Kleinman; United States v., 178
Klimas; State v., 504
Knowles; United States v., 262
Knox; People v., 1053
Kolender v. Lawson, 218, 220, 221, 222, 224
Koon v. United States, 1136, 1140
Kopp; People v., 750
Kotteakos v. United States, 741, 744, 747
Kozlowski; People v., 1072
Krulewitch v. United States, 145, 703, 704, 705, 737, 738
Kuhns; State v., 865

--- Page 2217 ---
Kuntz, State ex rel. v. District Court, 274
L
Laborde; State v., 1018
Lafler v. Cooper, 115
Lagares; State v., 134
Lambert v. California, 370, 372, 373
Lane; State v., 579, 597
Laney v. United States, 858
Lanzetta v. New Jersey, 219
Lauria; People v., 662, 663, 728, 733, 734
LaValle; People v., 468
Law v. State, 360
Lawrence; R. v., 1019
Lawrence v. Texas, 48
Lawson; Commonwealth v., 948
Leavitt; State v., 373
Lee v. State, 609
Lee v. United States, 114
Lefkowitz; Commonwealth v., 437
Leidholm; State v., 831
Leland v. Oregon, 153
Leno; Commonwealth v., 882
Letterlough; People v., 1109
Levesque; Commonwealth v., 278, 279
Levin; United States v., 366
Levitt; People v., 41
Lewis; United States v., 106
Li; People v., 577
Liberta; People v., 448
Liebenow; Commonwealth v., 1029
Life Care Ctrs. of Am.; Commonwealth v., 775
Lingman; State v., 541
Linn v. State, 828

--- Page 2218 ---
Liparota v. United States, 336, 362
Lisa; State v., 279
Little; State v., 852
Lockett v. Ohio, 1179, 1180, 1181, 1186
Lockyer v. Andrade, 245
Long v. State, 1027
Longley v. State, 757
Lopez; Commonwealth v., 398, 442
Lopez; People v., 321, 323
Lopez; United States v., 913 F.3d 807 (9th Cir. 2019), 913
Lopez; United States v., 662 F. Supp. 1083 (N.D. Cal. 1987), 915
p. 1293
p. 1294
Louanis; State v., 1051
Loveland; United States v., 735
Lovely v. Cunningham, 1052
Lovely; State v., 410
Loven v. State, 981
Lovercamp; People v., 877, 878, 879, 880
Low; People v., 249
Luciano; People v., 715
Luedecke; R. v., 257
Luisi; United States v., 177
Luparello; People v., 680, 683, 684, 716, 717
Lutchman; United States v., 113
Lyle; State v., 1161
Lynch; United States v., 178
Lyons; United States v., 955, 959, 961, 962
M
MacDonald & Watson Waste Oil Co.; United States v., 797, 802
Macias; United States v., 251
Madison v. Alabama, 943, 1191

--- Page 2219 ---
Madoff; United States v., 1142, 1145
Magadini; Commonwealth v., 886
Magel; State v., 406
Maher v. People, 482, 485, 486, 487
Mahoney; State v., 835
Main; United States v., 580
Malach; People v., 1041
Malone; Commonwealth v., 524, 526
Malone; State v., 987
Mandujano; United States v., 628
Manning v. Caldwell, 1001
Manzano; United States v., 175
Maple Heights, City of v. Ephraim, 342
Margiotta; United States v., 1077
Markman; Commonwealth v., 921
Marrero; People v., 350, 355, 358, 359, 368
Marti; State v., 598
Martin v. City of Boise, 250, 1000
Martin v. Ohio, 157, 849
Martin v. State, 248, 249, 997
Martin; State v., 573 A.2d 1359 (N.J. 1990), 562
Martin; State v., 859 N.W.2d 600 (S.D. 2015), 476
Martin; State v., 852 S.E.2d 834 (Ga. 2020), 715
Martinez; State v., 271
Martinez; United States v., 16 F.3d 202 (7th Cir. 1994), 565
Martinez; United States v., 921 F.3d 452 (5th Cir. 2019), 696
Masciantonio v. R., 503
Mathews v. Superior Court, 432, 433
Mathis v. United States, 621
Matos; People v., 595
Mattison; People v., 555
Mauricio; State v., 494
Mayberry; Commonwealth v., 525
Mayes v. State, 860

--- Page 2220 ---
Mays; People v., 671
M.C. v. Bulgaria, 100, 442
McBoyle v. United States, 195, 204
McCarthy v. State, 987
McClain v. State, 982
McClain; State v., 503, 504
McClendon; State v., 942
McCleskey v. Kemp, 225, 1170, 1192, 1199, 1200, 1203
McCoy; People v., 700
McCullough v. State, 149
McDermott; United States v., 245 F.3d 133 (2d Cir. 2001), 747
McDermott; United States v., 277 F.3d 240 (2d Cir. 2002), 749
McDonald; State v., 973
McDonald v. United States, 978, 979
McDonnell v. United States, 1082, 1083, 1084
McElroy v. People, 1032
McFadden; State v., 320 N.W.2d 608 (Iowa 1982), 598, 600, 679
McFadden; State v., 2015 Haw. App. LEXIS 457, 417, 419, 422
McFarland v. American Sugar Rfg. Co., 154
McGautha v. California, 1170, 1171
McGee; People v., 714
McGraw; State v., 1065
McKeown; State v., 660
McKown; State v., 523
McMillan v. Kelly, 684
p. 1294
p. 1295
McMillan v. Pennsylvania, 1149
McMillan v. State, 921
McNair; United States v., 754
McNally v. United States, 1044, 1076, 1077, 1079, 1080, 1081, 1083
McNeal; People v., 616
McQuirter v. State, 616, 618, 619, 626

--- Page 2221 ---
McVay; State v., 673, 676
M.E. v. T.J., 829
Means v. United States, 1041
Meiners v. State, 494
Mejia; State v., 1093
Melchert-Dinkel; State v., 588
Melvin; Commonwealth v., 1109
Mempa v. Rhay, 1118
Metrish v. Lancaster, 216
Mier-Garces; United States v., 749
Millan; State v., 721
Miller v. Alabama, 1160, 1161
Miller; Commonwealth v., 190
Miller; People v., 2 Cal. 2d 527 (1935), 620
Miller; People v., 297 N.E.2d 85 (N.Y. 1973), 554
Miller v. State, 216
Miller; State v., 1062, 1064
Miller; United States v., 1090
Minor; People v., 588
Miranda; State v., 275
Miselis; United States v., 637
Missouri v. Frye, 114, 115
Mitchneck; Commonwealth v., 1033, 1034, 1035, 1036
Mlinarich; Commonwealth v., 407, 408
M’Naghten’s Case, 256, 949, 954, 960, 962, 963, 965, 967, 968,
973, 974, 975, 976, 977, 978, 987, 996
Mochan; Commonwealth v., 190, 192, 193
Moe; United States v., 755
Molina-Martinez v. United States, 1148
Monroe; People v., 852
Montana v. Egelhoff, 932, 933
Montgomery v. Louisana, 1161
Montoya; State v., 573
Moon v. State, 550

--- Page 2222 ---
Moore v. Lowe, 701
Moore v. McKune, 818
Moore; United States v., 486 F.2d 1139 (D.C. Cir. 1973), 1002
Moore; United States v., 921 F.2d 207 (9th Cir. 1990), 631
Morales; People v., 433
Morfin; State v., 179
Morgan; R. v., 442
Morgan; State v., 974
Morhall; R. v., 506
Morissette v. United States, 285, 322, 331, 336, 337, 338, 353, 789,
956, 997, 1029
Morock; State v., 1027
Morris; R. v., 1019
Morris; United States v., 747
Morrison v. Olson, 93
Morse; United States v., 734
Moser; State v., 345
Moylan; United States v., 172
M.T.S., State in Interest of, 412, 416, 417, 422, 426, 434, 443
Mulcahy v. The Queen, 726
Mullaney v. Wilbur, 151, 154, 155, 158, 984
Municipal Court; People v., 94
Muniz; Commonwealth v., 1104
Muniz; State v., 302
Muro; State v., 573
Murphy v. Raoul, 250
Murrin; State v., 929
Muskett; United States v., 369
Mutina; Commonwealth v., 947–948
N
Nash; People v., 562
Nash v. United States, 228
Navarro; People v., 926

--- Page 2223 ---
Neeley v. Commonwealth, 458, 459
Neely; State v., 693, 694
Nelson; State v., 1071
Nelson v. United States, 1045
Nemeth; State v., 843
Nesler; People v., 490
Neumann; State v., 523
New England Grocers Supply Co.; United States v., 796, 797
Newsome v. State, 175
p. 1295
p. 1296
New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 163
Newton; People v., 251, 260
New York v. Strauss-Kahn, 84
New York Cent. & Hudson River R.R. Co. v. United States, 761, 763,
764, 769
New York Trust Co. v. Eisner, 1017
Nicholson v. State, 549
Nolan v. State, 1024, 1026, 1060
Norman; State v., 518, 837, 842, 844, 845, 846, 847, 848
North Carolina v. Pearce, 130, 131
Northern Ireland v. Lynch, 916
Nye & Nissen v. United States, 659
O
Oakland Cannabis Buyers’ Coop.; United States v., 885
Ocasio v. United States, 203, 755
Odom v. Matteo, 873
Olan v. United States, 1071
Oliver; State v., 442
Olivo; People v., 1019
Olsen; People v., 320, 323, 536
O’Neill; United States v., 1135

--- Page 2224 ---
Ontiveros; United States v., 369
Oros; People v., 479
Ortega; State v., 543
Orthofix, Inc.; United States v., 787
Ortiz; United States v., 292
Oviedo; United States v., 644, 646, 649
Owens v. State, 327
Oxford v. Moss, 1075, 1076
P
Padilla v. Kentucky, 114
Palsgraf v. Long Island R. Co., 570
Panetti v. Quarterman, 943, 944, 1191
Papachristou v. City of Jacksonville, 226, 227, 233
Park v. Huff, 719
Park; United States v., 791, 796, 797, 799
Parker; Commonwealth v., 1044
Parks; R. v., 256
Paroline v. United States, 572
Patrick v. State, 492
Patterson v. New York, 152, 156, 157, 159, 497, 803
Patterson; People v., 546, 549
Patterson; State v., 522
Patton; United States v., 1040
Paul; State v., 175
Payne v. Tennessee, 41, 1180
Peairs; State v., 866
Peak; Commonwealth v., 598
Pear; The King v., 1038
Pena v. State, 600
Pena Pinedo v. Commonwealth, 1093
Pendergraft; United States v., 1053
Penny; People v., 510
Penny v. State, 1027

--- Page 2225 ---
Penry v. Lynaugh, 1179, 1184, 1186, 1187, 1189
Peoni; United States v., 659
People v. See name of opposing party
Perez; State v., 565
Perez-Cervantes; State v., 597
Perez-Vargas; United States v., 369, 370
Perry; People v., 1064
Perry; State v., 944
Pestinikas; Commonwealth v., 262
Petersen, In re, 1109, 1110
Peterson; United States v., 804, 805, 856, 858
Philadelphia Nat’l Bank; United States v., 200
Phillip Morris USA v. Williams, 246
Phillips v. City of Cincinnati, 250
Phillips; People v., 545, 547
Picotte; State v., 215
Pierce; Commonwealth v., 518–519
Pierotti; United States v., 309
Pierson; People v., 516
Pinkerton v. United States, 653, 684, 685, 707, 710, 711, 712, 713,
714, 715, 716, 717, 718, 719, 720, 721, 724, 737, 739
Pino-Perez; United States v., 654
Pittman; State v., 488
Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 898, 899
Plastow; State v., 215
Plumhoff v. Rickard, 870
Plumlee; State v., 862
Polizzi; United States v., 185
Polouizzi; United States v., 186
p. 1296
p. 1297
Polzin; State v., 1033, 1034, 1035
Pomianek; State v., 229

--- Page 2226 ---
Pope v. State, 263, 272, 274, 280
Porter; The King v., 950
Porter v. State, 820, 843
Powell; People v., 735
Powell v. Texas, 966, 969, 992, 998, 999, 1000, 1001, 1003
Powell; United States v., 187
Pratt; State v., 220 P. 505 (Kan. 1923), 1089
Pratt; State v., 454 P.3d 875 (Wash. Ct. App. 2019), 257
Price v. State, 187
Priest v. State, 187
Prince v. Massachusetts, 523
Prince; R. v., 312, 314, 315, 316, 318, 319, 324, 325, 327, 356
Prindle; People v., 527
Procter & Gamble Co.; United States v., 1079
Proffitt v. Florida, 1177, 1179
Prosecutor v. See name of opposing party
Pugh; Commonwealth v., 509
Q
Quality Egg, LLC; United States v., 797
Qualls; United States v., 369
Queen/Regina v. See name of opposing party
R
R./Regina or Rex v. See name of opposing party
R. v. R., 449
Rafferty; State v., 917
Ragen; United States v., 229
Ragland; State v., 175, 176, 178
Raines; State v., 605
Rainey v. Wengler, 257
Raley v. Ohio, 367, 373
Ramos v. Louisiana, 164, 166
Randall; United States v., 740
Rasmussen; State v., 883

--- Page 2227 ---
Rauf v. State, 1163
Redline; Commonwealth v., 560, 564
Reed; State v., 442
Reese; United States v., 220
Regent Office Supply Co.; United States v., 1048, 1049
Regina v. See name of opposing party
Rehaif v. United States, 359
Reichard; People v., 921
Reid; People v., 1057, 1091, 1092
Reitze; State v., 262
Rendelman; State v., 1053
Rex v. See name of opposing party
Reynolds v. State, 443
Rice v. Paladin Enters., 637
Richards; R. v., 699
Richland Cnty. Magistrate’s Court, In re, 94
Richter; State v., 913, 917
Richter; United States v., 1112
Riggins; State v., 1026, 1031, 1033
Riggs v. State, 485
Rios; People v., 577
Rizzo; People v., 612, 614, 615, 630, 633
R.L.C.; United States v., 203
Roark v. State, 880
Robbins; State v., 851
Roberts v. Louisiana, 1178
Roberts v. People, 925
Roberts; People v., 585, 586
Roberts; State v., 974
Robertson; People v., 555, 556
Robinson v. California, 990, 994, 995, 996, 997, 998, 1000, 1001,
1003
Roche; Commonwealth v., 476
Rochin v. California, 164

--- Page 2228 ---
Rodgers; United States v., 369
Rodrigues-Gonzales; State v., 583
Rodriguez v. Panarello, 873
Rodriguez; United States v., 123
Roe v. Wade, 48
Roebuck; Commonwealth v., 674, 676
Rogers v. State, 833, 848
Rogers v. Tennessee, 194, 212, 215
Rogers; United States v., 1119
Rojas; People v., 642
Roldan; State v., 758
Rolon; People v., 691
Roman; United States v., 633
Romero; People v., 819, 831
p. 1297
p. 1298
Rooney; State v., 621
Root; Commonwealth v., 595, 597, 598, 599, 679
Roper v. Simmons, 1157, 1158, 1160, 1189, 1190, 1191
Rose v. State, 553
Rosemond v. United States, 663, 667, 677, 684
Ross v. State, 616
Roth v. United States, 698
Roy; People v., 730
Roy v. United States, 682
Rubio; People v., 608
Rucker; State v., 624
Rudder v. State, 702
Ruffin; United States v., 696, 697
Ruggiero; United States v., 339
Rummel v. Estelle, 237, 238, 1152, 1154
Rundo; United States v., 637
Rusk; State v., 393, 398, 399, 406, 407

--- Page 2229 ---
Russell; Commonwealth v., 150
Russell; People v., 678, 679, 713
Ruzic; R. v., 919
Ryan; People v., 571
S
Salemme; People v., 621
Salerno; United States v., 81
Sall; United States v., 708
Sanchez; Commonwealth v., 1188
Sanders; State v., 608
Sands; Commonwealth v., 842, 846
Sangha; Commonwealth v., 94
Santillanes v. New Mexico, 294
Santobello v. New York, 116, 121
Santos; United States v., 206
Sault Ste. Marie, City of; R. v., 343
Sawyer; State v., 615
Sayles; State v., 175
Schloendorff v. Society of N.Y. Hosp., 897
Schmuhl v. Commonwealth, 934
Schofield; State v., 1148
Schoon; United States v., 887
Schroeder; State v., 844, 845, 846
Schwartz; State v., 1072
Schwartz; United States v., 1064
Scott v. Harris, 870, 871
Scott; People v., 582, 609
Scott v. United States, 123
Scotti; United States v., 733
Scriva; R. v., 494, 495
Scruggs; State v., 218
Sears; People v., 555
Sekhar v. United States, 1064

--- Page 2230 ---
Sell v. United States, 941
Serné; R. v., 532, 535
Serr; United States v., 740
Serravo; People v., 975
Sessions v. Dimaya, 224
Sexson; State v., 586
Sexton; State v., 921
Shabazz; State v., 579, 580
Shannon v. United States, 185, 186, 947
Sharron; United States v., 917
Shattuck; State v., 1148
Shaw v. Director of Pub. Prosecutions, 192, 705
Shaw; State v., 856
Shelton v. Secretary, Dep’t of Corrs., 346
Shelton v. United States, 111
Sheppard; United States v., 455
Sherry; Commonwealth v., 435, 441
Shimmen’s Case, 303
Shushan v. United States, 1079
Shuttlesworth v. Birmingham, 219, 227
Silver; United States v., 1082, 1084
Simcock; Commonwealth v., 441
Simino; State v., 553
Simonovich; State v., 492
Simpson; United States v., 704
Sinclair v. State, 969
Singleton v. State, 943, 944
Sisuphan; People v., 1089
Skiff; People v., 571
Skilling v. United States, 1077, 1081, 1082, 1083
Skipper v. South Carolina, 1179
Smallwood v. State, 604, 606, 609, 677
Smiley; State v., 853
Smith v. Commonwealth, 191

--- Page 2231 ---
Smith v. Doe, 1104
Smith v. Goguen, 223
Smith; People v., 35 Cal. 3d 798 (1984), 556
p. 1298
p. 1299
Smith; People v., 47 Cal. 4th 733 (Cal. 2005), 583
Smith; R. v., 262
Smith; State v., 426 A.2d 38 (N.J. 1981), 449
Smith; State v., 621 A.2d 493 (N.J. Super. 1993), 641
Smith; State v., 592 S.E.2d 302 (S.C. 2004), 273
Smith; State v., 178 P.3d 672 (Kan. Ct. App. 2008), 427
Smith; State v., 317 Conn. 338 (2015), 1093
Smith; United States v., 1011
Smith v. United States, 508 U.S. 223 (1993), 205
Smith v. United States, 568 U.S. 106 (2014), 740
Smith, Commonwealth ex rel. v. Myers, 560
Smith (David); R. v., 357, 358, 359, 364
Smith (Morgan); R. v., 505, 506
Smith-Parker; State v., 178
Snyder; Doe v., 1104
Solem v. Helm, 238, 239, 240, 241, 248, 1152, 1154
Sotelo-Urena; People v., 819
Soto; State v., 159
Southwark, Borough of v. Williams, 885
Spencer v. Texas, 144
Spruiell; State v., 553
Spurlin; People v., 495
Stafford; United States v., 1072
Stamp; People v., 534, 535, 578
Stanciel; People v., 691
Standard Oil Co. v. United States, 765
Standefer; United States v., 698
Stanford v. Kentucky, 1189

--- Page 2232 ---
Staples v. Commonwealth, 274, 691
Staples v. United States, 335, 337, 338
Stasio; State v., 927, 928, 929
Stasiun; Commonwealth v., 715
State v. See name of opposing party
State ex rel. See name of related party
State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co. v. Campbell, 246
State in Interest of. See name of party
Steele; People v., 505
Steen v. Appellate Div., Superior Court, 94
Stein; State v., 716
Stein; United States v., 772
Steiner v. United States, 667
Stevens; State v., 398
Stewart; People v., 550, 575
Stewart; R. v., 1074, 1075
Stewart; State v., 624 N.W.2d 585 (Minn. 2001), 495
Stewart; State v., 211 A.3d 371 (Md. 2019), 1024
Stoltie v. California, 151
Stone; People v., 929
Strasburg; State v., 969
Stripling v. State, 1188
Strong; People v., 302
Stuart; People v., 626
Stubbendieck; State v., 588
Sturdivant; State v., 555
Suding v. State, 758
Sumner v. Shuman, 1178
Sun-Diamond Growers of Cal.; United States v., 770
Swafford; United States v., 746
Swisher v. Commonwealth, 929
Sydnor v. State, 866, 867
T

--- Page 2233 ---
Tally; State ex rel. Attorney Gen. v., 688, 689, 690
Tanner; United States v., 1082
Tapia v. United States, 24, 1119
Tate; State v., 852
Taylor v. Louisiana, 165
Taylor; People v., 527
Taylor v. State, 560, 561
Taylor; State v., 640
Taylor v. Superior Ct., 563, 682
Taylor; United States v., 207
Tenement House Dep’t v. McDevitt, 333
Tennessee v. Garner, 872
Terrell v. State, 1017, 1018
Territory v. Manton, 262
Terry v. Ohio, 230, 623
Thacker v. Commonwealth, 607
Thomas; People v., 607
Thomas; R. v., 730
p. 1299
p. 1300
Thomas; State v., 541
Thomas; United States v., 178, 179
Thompkins; People v., 492
Thompson; State v., 65 P.3d 420 (Ariz. 2003), 477
Thompson; State v., 735 N.W.2d 818 (Neb. 2007), 1147
Thorne; People v., 1029
Tison v. Arizona, 1188, 1189
Tollefson; United States v., 345
Tomlins; People v., 855
Topolewski v. State, 1019, 1021
Torres; Commonwealth v., 403, 406
Torres v. United States, 185
Torres-Ramirez; United States v., 746

--- Page 2234 ---
Toscano; State v., 906, 917
Tot v. United States, 154
Tower; State v., 1063
Townsend; State v., 833
Trop v. Dulles, 1172, 1173
Tufunga; People v., 1092
Turner v. Murray, 1199
Turner; State v., 492
Turner; United States v., 738
Turney v. Pugh, 180
Turney v. State, 179
Twine; United States v., 987
Twitchell; Commonwealth v., 366
Tyrell; The Queen v., 698
Tyrrell; Commonwealth v., 473
Tyson v. State, 445
U
Underwood, In re, 99
Unger; People v., 876, 880, 881, 915
Union Pac. R. Co. v. Botsford, 897
United States v. See name of opposing party
United States Gypsum Co.; United States v., 739
Unnamed Petitioners, State ex rel. v. Connors, 94
V
Vaden v. State, 693, 694, 695
Vaillancourt; The Queen v., 544
Van Elsen; United States v., 1090
Vargas; United States v., 749
Varner v. Stovall, 843
Varszegi; State v., 357, 358, 359, 364
Vasquez; Commonwealth v., 404, 921
Vasquez; United States v., 1124, 1127
Veach; United States v., 929

--- Page 2235 ---
Venable v. Johnson, 493
Vera Cruz v. City of Escondido, 873
Verdugo; People v., 495
Victor v. Nebraska, 150
Vigilante; State v., 504
Vinter v. United Kingdom, 1161
Voisine v. United States, 288
W
Wade v. United States, 980
Wagner v. State, 621
Waine; State v., 177
Walker; People v., 473 N.Y.S.2d 460 (App. Div. 1984), 501
Walker; People v., 42 N.E.3d 688 (N.Y. 2015), 844
Walker v. Superior Court, 523, 524
Walker; United States v., 117
Wallace; Commonwealth v., 404
Walls; United States v., 718
Walton v. Arizona, 1180
Walton; State v., 720
Walton; United States v., 151
Waltower; United States v., 1135
Ward; State v., 889
Warme; United States v., 1066
Warner-Lambert Co.; People v., 576, 577, 578
Washington v. Glucksberg, 588, 898, 900, 901
Washington; People v., 537, 546
Watson; People v., 465, 530
Watson; United States v., 1112
Watts; United States v., 1130
Weaver; State v., 1026
Webber; Commonwealth v., 99
Webster; Commonwealth v., 150
Weiand v. State, 856

--- Page 2236 ---
Weiger; People v., 1090
Weishaupt v. Commonwealth, 449
Weiss; People v., 351
Welansky; Commonwealth v., 506, 509, 775
p. 1300
p. 1301
Werlein; State v., 980
Werner v. State, 835
Wetmore; People v., 987, 988
Weyrauch v. United States, 1082
Wheat; United States v., 754
Wheatley; R. v., 1037
Whitaker; State v., 921
White, In re, 546
White; R. v., 612
White v. State, 608
White; State v., 499, 500
White Calf; United States v., 929
Whitfield v. United States, 727
Wiesenfeld Warehouse Co.; United States v., 794
Wilcox v. Jeffery, 685, 687, 689
Wiley; United States v., 454
Wilkerson; United States v., 179
Willard-Freckleton; State v., 1026
Williams; Commonwealth v., 1 A.2d 812 (Pa. Super. 1938), 541
Williams; Commonwealth v., 63 Cal. 2d 452 (1965), 545
Williams; Commonwealth v., 439 A.2d 765 (Pa. Super. 1982), 439,
440, 441
Williams v. Florida, 164
Williams v. New York, 24, 1114, 1117, 1118, 1119, 1148
Williams; People v., 1014
Williams; R. v., [1953] 1 Q.B. 660, 1088, 1089
Williams; R. v., [1987] 3 All ER 411, 324

--- Page 2237 ---
Williams v. State, 1028
Williams; State v., 484 P.2d 1167 (Wash. Ct. App. 1971), 515, 517,
518, 522, 523, 528
Williams; State v., 254 So. 2d 548 (Fla. App. 1971), 564, 565
Williams; United States v., 636
Wilson v. People, 694, 695
Wilson; People v., 551, 552, 553, 554, 555
Wilson v. State, 759
Wilson; State v., 660
Wilson; United States v., 373
Wiltberger; United States v., 194
Winship, In re, 146, 150, 153, 154, 155, 157
Wisconsin v. Oakley, 1111
Wisconsin Pub. Intervenor v. Mortier, 205
Wood v. Main, 946
Woods; United States v., 1112
Woodson v. North Carolina, 1132, 1178, 1179, 1180
Woodward v. United States, 1082
Woody; United States v., 175
X
X-Citement Video, Inc.; United States v., 337, 338
Y
Yang; United States v., 642
Yates v. State, 939, 940
Yates v. United States, 354 U.S. 298 (1957), 727
Yates v. United States, 574 U.S. 528 (2015), 195, 203, 204, 205, 206
Yishmael; State v., 345
Young v. State, 428 So. 2d 155 (Ala. Crim. App. 1982), 476
Young v. State, 992 P.2d 332 (Okla. Crim. App. 1998), 42, 43
Young; State v., 622
Young; United States v., 615
Youngberg v. Romeo, 897
Yun Hseng Liao v. Junious, 257

--- Page 2238 ---
Z
Zeller; People v., 1044
Zhang; The Queen v., 503, 505
Zhang; United States v., 1069
p. 1301

--- Page 2239 ---
p. 1303

--- Page 2240 ---
T A
ABLE OF UTHORITIES
Abrams, Abigail, Assisted Suicide Law in Germany Passes Despite
Concerns over Nazi Association, IB Times (Nov. 6, 2015) . . . 901
Abrams, Norman, Internal Policy: Guiding the Exercise of
Prosecutorial Discretion, 19 UCLA L. Rev. 1 (1971) . . . 87
Abrams, Norman, The Material Support Terrorism Offenses:
Perspectives Derived from the (Early) Model Penal Code, 1 J.
Nat’l Security L. & Pol’y 5 (2005) . . . 669
Acker, James R. & Wu, Sishi, “I Did It, But I Didn’t”: When Rejected
Affirmative Defenses Produce Wrongful Convictions, 98 Neb. L.
Rev. 578 (2020) . . . 256
Adelman, Justin, Thesis, Somebody’s Watching Me: Examining the
Impact of Probation Officer Caseloads on Revocation Rates
(2019) . . . 75
Adelsberg, Sam, The Chilling Effect of the “Material Support” Law on
Humanitarian Aid: Causes, Consequences, and Proposed
Reforms, 4 Harv. Nat’l Sec. J. 282 (2013) . . . 671
Aiken, Jane & Goldwasser, Katherine, The Perils of Empowerment,
20 Cornell J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 139 (2010) . . . 827
Albin, Ramona C., Appropriating Women’s Thoughts: The
Admissibility of Sexual Fantasies and Dreams Under the Consent
Exception to Rape Shield Laws, 68 U. Kan. L. Rev. 617 (2020) . .
. 458–459
Alexander, Larry, Criminal Liability for Omissions, in Criminal Law
Theory (Stephen Shute & A.P. Simester eds., 2002) . . . 279
Alexander, Larry, Inculpatory and Exculpatory Mistakes and the
Fact/Law Distinction, 12 Law & Phil. 33 (1993) . . . 650
Alexander, Larry, Insufficient Concern: A Unified Conception of
Criminal Culpability, 88 Cal. L. Rev. 931 (2000) . . . 304, 662
Alexander, Larry, Reconsidering the Relationship Among Voluntary
Acts, Strict Liability, and Negligence in Criminal Law, in Crime,

--- Page 2241 ---
Culpability, and Remedy (Ellen Frankel Paul, Fred D. Miller Jr., &
Jeffrey Paul eds., 1990) . . . 343
Alexander, Larry, The Supreme Court, Dr. Jekyll, and the Due
Process of Proof, 1996 Sup. Ct. Rev. 191 . . . 933
Alexander, Larry & Ferzan, Kimberly Kessler, Crime and Culpability
(2009) . . . 308, 520, 582, 612
Alexander, Larry & Kessler, Kimberly D., Mens Rea and Inchoate
Crimes, 87 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1139 (1997) . . . 611
Alexis, Alexei, Bipartisan Senate Group Urges FTC, DOJ to
Investigate, Prosecute “Stalking Apps,” 90 Crim. L. Rep. 169
(Nov. 2, 2011) . . . 625
Allen, Francis, The Borderland of Criminal Justice (1964) . . . 1120
Allen, Francis, The Erosion of Legality in American Criminal Justice:
Some Latter-Day Adventures of the Nulla Poena Principle, 29
Ariz. L. Rev. 387 (1987) . . . 1084
p. 1303
p. 1304
Allen, Ronald J., Clark v. Arizona: Much (Confused) Ado About
Nothing, 4 Ohio St. L.J. 135 (2006) . . . 988
Allen, Ronald J., Forward: Montana v. Egelhoff — Reflections on the
Limits of Legislative Imagination and Judicial Authority, 87 J.
Crim. L. & Criminology 633 (1997) . . . 933
Allen, Ronald J., The Restoration of In re Winship: A Comment on
Burdens of Persuasion in Criminal Cases After Patterson v. New
York, 76 Mich. L. Rev. 30 (1977) . . . 156
Alschuler, Albert W., Book Review, 12 Crim. L. Bull. 629 (1976) . . .
121
Alschuler, Albert W., Courtroom Misconduct by Prosecutors and Trial
Judges, 50 Tex. L. Rev. 629 (1972) . . . 146
Alschuler, Albert W., The Defense Attorney’s Role in Plea
Bargaining, 84 Yale L.J. 1179 (1975) . . . 121
Alschuler, Albert W., The Prosecutor’s Role in Plea Bargaining, 36 U.
Chi. L. Rev. 50 (1968) . . . 119, 121

--- Page 2242 ---
Alschuler, Albert W., The Supreme Court, the Defense Attorney, and
the Guilty Plea, 47 U. Colo. L. Rev. 1 (1975) . . . 111, 116
Alschuler, Albert W., The Trial Judge’s Role in Plea Bargaining, Part
I, 76 Colum. L. Rev. 1059 (1976) . . . 121
Alschuler, Albert W., Two Ways to Think About the Punishment of
Corporations, 46 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1359 (2009) . . . 767
Alschuler, Albert W. & Schulhofer, Stephen J., Antiquated
Procedures or Bedrock Rights? A Response to Professors
Meares and Kahan, 1998 U. Chi. Legal. F. 215 . . . 233
American Bar Association, Criminal Justice Mental Health Standards
(approved Feb. 9, 1983) . . . 962
American Bar Association, Criminal Justice Standards: The
Prosecution Function (4th ed. 2015) . . . 84, 87, 943
American Bar Association, Internal Exile: Collateral Consequences
of Conviction in Federal Laws and Regulations (2009) . . . 113
American Bar Association, Model Rules of Professional Conduct,
Rule 3.8 (5th ed. 2003) . . . 84
American Bar Association, Report to the House of Delegates
(National Task Force on Stand Your Ground Laws) (Feb. 2015) . .
. 812, 855
American Bar Association, Standards: Pleas of Guilty (3d ed. 1999) .
. . 116, 123
American Bar Association, Statement on the Insanity Defense, 140
Am. J. Psychiatry 6 (1983) . . . 962
American Law Institute, Current State of the Law — Consent Only
Offenses (July 2018) . . . 393
American Psychiatric Association, Statement on the Insanity
Defense, 140 Am. J. Psychiatry 6 (1983) . . . 956, 978
Andenaes, Johannes, The General Part of the Criminal Law of
Norway (1965) . . . 892
Anderson, D. Mark, Wet Laws, Drinking Establishments and Violent
Crime, 128 Econ. J. 1333 (2017) . . . 930
Anderson, Greta, U.S. Publishes New Regulations on Campus
Sexual Assault, Inside Higher Ed (May 7, 2020) . . . 452
p. 1304

--- Page 2243 ---
p. 1305
Anderson, Michelle J., Campus Sexual Assault Adjudication and
Resistance to Reform, 125 Yale L.J. 1940 (2016) . . . 452
Anderson, Michelle J., Diminishing the Legal Impact of Negative
Social Attitudes Toward Acquaintance Rape Victims, 13 New
Crim. L. Rev. 644 (2010) . . . 456
Anderson, Michelle J., From Chastity Requirement to Sexuality
License: Sexual Consent and a New Rape Shield Law, 70 Geo.
Wash. L. Rev. 51 (2002) . . . 456
Anderson, Michelle J., Marital Immunity, Intimate Relationships, and
Improper Inferences: A New Law on Sexual Offenses by
Intimates, 54 Hastings L.J. 1465 (2003) . . . 449
Anderson, Michelle J., Negotiating Sex, 78 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1401
(2005) . . . 425
Anderson, Michelle J., Sex Education and Rape, 17 Mich. J. Gender
& L. 83 (2010) . . . 451
Anouk, Bosma, Prison-Based Rehabilitation: Predictors of Offender
Treatment Participation and Treatment Completion, 62 Crime &
Delinquency 1095 (2016) . . . 26
Appleman, Laura I., The Lost Meaning of the Jury Trial Right, 84 Ind.
L.J. 397 (2009) . . . 168–169
Archibald, Bruce P., The Constitutionalization of the General Part of
Criminal Law, 67 Can. Bar Rev. 403 (1998) . . . 1001
Arenella, Peter, The Diminished Capacity and Diminished
Responsibility Defenses: Two Children of a Doomed Marriage, 77
Colum. L. Rev. 827 (1977) . . . 986
Arenella, Peter, Reflections on Current Proposals to Abolish or
Reform the Insanity Defense, 8 Am. J.L. & Med. 271 (1982) . . .
962
Arenson, Kenneth J., The Paradox of Disallowing Duress as a
Defence to Murder, 78 J. Crim. L. 65 (2014) . . . 921
Arkles, Gabriel, Regulating Prison Sexual Violence, 7 Northeastern
L.J. 69 (2015) . . . 384
Arlen, Jennifer, The Failure of the Organizational Sentencing
Guidelines, 66 U. Miami L. Rev. 321 (2012) . . . 786

--- Page 2244 ---
Arlen, Jennifer, The Potentially Perverse Effects of Corporate
Criminal Liability, 23 J. Legal Stud. 833 (1994) . . . 768
Arlen, Jennifer & Kahan, Marcel, Corporate Governance Regulation
Through Nonprosecution, 84 U. Chi. L. Rev. 323 (2017) . . . 774
Arlen, Jennifer & Kraakman, Reinier, Controlling Corporate
Misconduct: An Analysis of Corporate Liability Regimes, 72
N.Y.U. L. Rev. 687 (1997) . . . 786
Armour, Jody D., Race Ipsa Loquitur: Of Reasonable Racists,
Intelligent Bayesians, and Involuntary Negrophobes, 46 Stan. L.
Rev. 781 (1994) . . . 813
Armour, Jody D., Where Bias Lives in the Criminal Law and Its
Processes: How Judges and Jurors Socially Construct Black
Criminals, 45 Am. J. Crim. L. 203 (2018) . . . 477
Arnold, David, Dobbie, Will & Yang, Crystal S., Racial Bias in Bail
Decisions, NBER Working Paper No. W23421 (May 24, 2017) . .
. 81
Ashworth, A.J., The Doctrine of Provocation, 35 Cambridge L.J. 292
(1976) . . . 487
Austin, J.L., A Plea For Excuses, 57 Proceedings Aristotelian Soc’y
1 (1956–1957) . . . 803
Ayres, Ian & Waldfogel, Joel, A Market Test for Race Discrimination
in Bail Setting, 46 Stan. L. Rev. 987 (1994) . . . 81
p. 1305
p. 1306
Baer, Miriam Hechler, Cooperation’s Cost, 88 Wash. U. L. Rev. 903
(2011) . . . 124
Baker, Katharine K., Why Rape Should Not (Always) Be a Crime,
100 Minn. L. Rev. 221 (2015) . . . 451
Baldus, David C., Equal Justice and the Death Penalty (1990) . . .
1199
Balmer, Thomas A., Some Thoughts on Proportionality, 87 Or. L.
Rev. 783 (2008) . . . 248
Bandes, Susan A. All Bathwater, No Baby: Expressive Theories of
Punishment and the Death Penalty, 116 Mich. L. Rev. 905 (2018)

--- Page 2245 ---
. . . 45
Bandes, Susan A. & Salerno, Jessica M., Emotion, Proof and
Prejudice: The Cognitive Science of Gruesome Photos and
Victim Impact Statements, 46 Ariz. St. L.J. 1003 (2014) . . . 42
Banner, Stuart, The Death Penalty: An American History (2003) . . .
1168
Barkow, Anthony S. & George, Beth, Prosecuting Political
Defendants, 44 Ga. L. Rev. 953 (2010) . . . 85
Barkow, Rachel E., Administering Crime, 52 UCLA L. Rev. 715
(2005) . . . 1114
Barkow, Rachel E., Can Prosecutors End Mass Incarceration?, 119
Mich. L. Rev. 1365 (2021) . . . 69, 98
Barkow, Rachel E., Categorizing Graham, 23 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 49
(2010) . . . 1190
Barkow, Rachel E., The Court of Life and Death: The Two Tracks of
Constitutional Sentencing Law and the Case for Uniformity, 107
Mich. L. Rev. 1145 (2009) . . . 1160, 1180
Barkow, Rachel E., Federalism and Criminal Law: What the Feds
Can Learn from the States, 109 Mich. L. Rev. 519 (2011) . . . 88
Barkow, Rachel E., Federalism and the Politics of Sentencing, 105
Colum. L. Rev. 1276 (2005) . . . 1133
Barkow, Rachel E., Institutional Design and the Policing of
Prosecutors: Lessons from Administrative Law, 61 Stan. L. Rev.
869 (2009) . . . 89, 139
Barkow, Rachel E., Life Without Parole and the Hope for Real
Sentencing Reform 190, in Life Without Parole (Austin Sarat &
Charles J. Ogletree eds., 2012) . . . 26
Barkow, Rachel E., Prisoners of Politics: Breaking the Cycle of Mass
Incarceration (2019) . . . 32, 69, 139
Barkow, Rachel E., Recharging the Jury: The Criminal Jury’s
Constitutional Role in an Era of Mandatory Sentencing, 152 U.
Pa. L. Rev. 33 (2003) . . . 186
Barkow, Rachel E., Using the Corporate Prosecution and Sentencing
Model for Individuals: The Case for a Unified Federal Approach,
83 Law & Contemp. Probs. 159 (2021) . . . 788

--- Page 2246 ---
Barkow, Rachel E. & Osler, Mark, Designed to Fail: The President’s
Deference to the Department of Justice in Advancing Criminal
Justice Reform, 59 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 387 (2017) . . . 1150
Barkow, Rachel E. & Osler, Mark, Restructuring Clemency: The Cost
of Ignoring Clemency and a Plan for Renewal, 82 U. Chi. L. Rev.
1 (2015) . . . 1150
Bartol, Curt R. & Bartol, Anne M., Introduction to Forensic
Psychology, 163 (3d ed. 2012) . . . 941
Batey, Robert, Book Review (Paul Robinson’s Criminal Law), 73
Notre Dame L. Rev. 781 (1998) . . . 629
Batra, Rishi Raj, Judicial Participation in Plea Bargaining: A Dispute
Resolution Perspective, 76 Ohio St. L.J. 565 (2015) . . . 117
p. 1306
p. 1307
Baughman, Shima B. & Wright, Megan S., Prosecutors and Mass
Incarceration, 94 S. Cal. L. Rev. (forthcoming July 2021) . . . 78
Bazelon, David, The Morality of the Criminal Law, 49 S. Cal. L. Rev.
385 (1976) . . . 1006
Bazelon, David, The Morality of the Criminal Law: A Rejoinder to
Professor Morse, 49 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1269 (1976) . . . 1006
Bazelon, Emily, Charged: The New Movement to Transform
American Prosecution and End Mass Incarceration (2019) . . . 68,
90, 98
Beagle, Ashley N.B., Modern Stalking Laws: A Survey of State Anti-
Stalking Statutes, 14 Chap. L. Rev. 457 (2011) . . . 625
Beale, Joseph, Retreat from a Murderous Assault, 16 Harv. L. Rev.
567 (1903) . . . 851
Beale, Sara Sun, Is Corporate Criminal Liability Unique?, 44 Am.
Crim. L. Rev. 1503 (2007) . . . 767, 768
Beale, Sara Sun, A Response to Critics of Corporate Criminal
Liability, 46 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1481 (2009) . . . 788
Bedau, Hugo, The Courts, the Constitution, and Capital Punishment
(1977) . . . 1164

--- Page 2247 ---
Beecher-Menas, Erica & Garcia-Rill, Edgar, Actus Reus, Mens Rea,
and Brain Science: What Do Volition and Intent Really Mean?,
106 Ky. L.J. 265 (2018) . . . 959
Behtz, Sarah Anne, Justice for All?: Victim Satisfaction with
Restorative Justice Conferences (Dec. 2004) . . . 97
Bellamy, Alex J., Supreme Emergencies and the Protection of Non-
Combatants in War, 80 Int’l Aff. 829 (2004) . . . 894
Bellin, Jeffrey, The Inverse Relationship Between the
Constitutionality and Effectiveness of New York City “Stop and
Frisk,” 94 B.U. L. Rev. 1495 (2014) . . . 231
Bellin, Jeffrey, Is Punishment Relevant After All? A Prescription for
Informing Juries of the Consequence of Conviction, 90 B.U. L.
Rev. 2223 (2010) . . . 185
Bellin, Jeffrey, Locked In: The True Causes of Mass Incarceration
and How to Achieve Real Reform, 116 Mich. L. Rev. 835 (2018) .
. . 133
Belt, Rabia, When God Demands Blood: Unusual Minds and the
Troubled Juridical Ties of Religion, Madness, and Culpability, 69
U. Miami L. Rev. 755 (2015) . . . 976
Ben-Moshe, Liat, The Tension Between Abolition and Reform, in The
End of Prisons: Reflections from the Decarceration Movement
(M. Nagel & A.J. Nocella eds., 2013) . . . 56, 64
Bennet, Elizabeth O., Neuroscience and Criminal Law: Have We
Been Getting It Wrong for Centuries and Where Do We Go from
Here?, 85 Fordham L. Rev. 437 (2016) . . . 959
Bennett, Mark W., Confronting Cognitive “Anchoring Effect” and
“Blind Spot” Biases in Federal Sentencing: A Modest Solution for
Reforming a Fundamental Flaw, 104 J. Crim. & Criminology 489
(2014) . . . 1136
Bentham, Jeremy, An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation (1789) . . . 16
Bentham, Jeremy, Principles of Penal Law in J. Bentham’s Works,
Pt. II, bk. 1 (J. Bowring ed., 1843) . . . 16, 234
Bentham, Jeremy, The Theory of Legislation (1975) . . . 17
Bentham, Jeremy & Mill, John Stuart, The Utilitarians (Dolphin
Books, 1961) . . . 16

--- Page 2248 ---
p. 1307
p. 1308
Berdejo, Carlos, Criminalizing Race: Racial Disparities in Plea-
Bargaining, 59 B.C. L. Rev. 1187 (2018) . . . 127
Bergelson, Vera, Does Fault Matter? 12 Crim. L. & Phil. 375 (2018) .
. . 349
Bergelson, Vera, Duress Is No Excuse, 15 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 395
(2018) . . . 914
Bergelson, Vera, A Fair Punishment for Humbert Humbert: Strict
Liability and Affirmative Defenses, 14 New Crim. L. Rev. 55
(2011) . . . 920
Bergelson, Vera, Justification or Excuse? Exploring the Meaning of
Provocation, 42 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 307 (2009) . . . 486, 488
Bergelson, Vera, The Meaning of Consent, 12 Ohio St. J. Crim. L.
171 (2014) . . . 419
Bergelson, Vera, Sex and Sensibility: The Meaning of Sexual
Consent, in Tatjana Hoernle ed., Sexual Assault and Rape —
What Can We Learn from and for Law Reform? (forthcoming
2022) . . . 420
Berger, Vivian, Man’s Trial, Woman’s Tribulation: Rape Cases in the
Courtroom, 77 Colum. L. Rev. 1 (1977) . . . 456
Berger, Vivian, Rape Law Reform at the Millennium, 3 Buff. Crim. L.
Rev. 513 (2000) . . . 424
Berk, Richard, New Claims About Executions and General
Deterrence: Déjà Vu All over Again?, 2 J. Empirical Legal Stud.
303 (2005) . . . 1164
Berman, Mitchell N., The Evidentiary Theory of Blackmail: Taking
Motives Seriously, 65 U. Chi. L. Rev. 795 (1998) . . . 1059
Berman, Mitchell N., Punishment and Justification, 118 Ethics 258
(2008) . . . 48
Berman, Mitchell N. & Farrell, Ian P., Provocation Manslaughter as
Partial Justification and Partial Excuse, 52 Wm. & Mary L. Rev.
1027 (2011) . . . 486
Berry, Kate, Brennan Ctr., How Judicial Elections Impact Criminal
Cases (2015) . . . 73, 74

--- Page 2249 ---
Bibas, Stephanos, Designing Plea Bargaining from the Ground Up:
Accuracy and Fairness Without Trials as Backstops, 57 Wm. &
Mary L. Rev. 1055 (2016) . . . 139
Bibas, Stephanos, Plea Bargaining Outside the Shadow of Trial, 117
Harv. L. Rev. 2463 (2004) . . . 119, 127
Bibas, Stephanos, Transparency and Participation in Criminal
Procedure, 81 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 911 (2006) . . . 1134
Bibas, Stephanos, Schanzenbach, Max M., & Tiller, Emerson H.,
Policing Politics at Sentencing, 103 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1371 (2009) . .
. 1149
Bierlein, Matthew, Policing the Wireless World: Access Liability in the
Open Wi-Fi Era, 67 Ohio St. L.J. 1123 (2006) . . . 1066
Binder, Guyora, The Culpability of Felony Murder, 83 Notre Dame L.
Rev. 965 (2008) . . . 536
Binder, Guyora, The Origin of American Felony-Murder Rules, 57
Stan. L. Rev. 59 (2004) . . . 535
Binder, Guyora & Chiesa, Luis, The Puzzle of Inciting Suicide, 56
Am. Crim. L. Rev. 65 (2019) . . . 591
Binder, Guyora & Smith, Nicholas J., Framed: Utilitarianism and
Punishment of the Innocent, 32 Rutgers L.J. 115 (2001) . . . 17
Birdsong, Leonard, The Felony Murder Doctrine Revisited, 33 Ohio
N.U. L. Rev. 497 (2007) . . . 562
Bishop, Criminal Law (7th Ed.) . . . 639
p. 1308
p. 1309
Bittner, Egon, The Functions of the Police in Modern Society (1970) .
. . 868
Blackstone, William, Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765) .
. . 148, 152, 260, 386
Blackstone, William, Commentaries on the Laws of England (1769) .
. . 1166
Blackstone, William, Commentaries on the Laws of England (1966
ed.) . . . 652

--- Page 2250 ---
Bloch, Kate E. & Gould, Jeffrey, Legal Indeterminacy in Insanity
Cases: Clarifying Wrongfulness and Applying a Triadic Approach
to Forensic Evaluations, 67 Hastings L.J. 913 (2016) . . . 962,
974
Blum, George L., Validity of State Stalking Statutes, A.L.R.7th 6
(2015) . . . 623
Blume, John H. & Helm, Rebecca K., The Unexonerated: Factually
Innocent Defendants Who Plead Guilty, 100 Cornell L. Rev. 157
(2014) . . . 129
Blumoff, Theodore Y., A Jurisprudence for Punishing Attempts
Asymmetrically, 6 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 951 (2003) . . . 603
Blumoff, Theodore Y., On the Nature of the Action-Omission
Network, 24 Ga. St. U. L. Rev. 1003 (2008) . . . 267
Blumoff, Theodore Y., The Problems with Blaming, in Law, Mind, and
Brain (M. Freeman & O. Goodenough eds., 2009) . . . 1007
Blumoff, Theodore Y., Rationality, Insanity, and the Insanity Defense:
Reflections on the Limits of Reason, 39 Law & Psychol. Rev. 161
(2014) . . . 940
Bogira, Steve, Courtroom 302 (2005) . . . 74
Boland, Mary L., Taking Aim at the High-Tech Stalker, Criminal
Justice (ABA Criminal Justice Section) (Spring 2005) . . . 625
Boldt, Richard, The Construction of Responsibility in the Criminal
Law, 140 U. Pa. L. Rev. 2245 (1992) . . . 1005
Bonnie, The Moral Basis of the Insanity Defense, 69 A.B.A. J. 194
(1983) . . . 956
Boorse, Christopher, Premenstrual Syndrome and Criminal
Responsibility, in Premenstrual Syndrome (B.E. Ginsburg & B.F.
Carter eds., 1987) . . . 979
Borum, R. & Fulero, S.M., Empirical Research on the Insanity
Defense and Attempted Reforms, 23 Law & Hum. Behav. 375
(1999) . . . 963
Boudin, Chesa, Children of Incarcerated Parents: The Child’s
Constitutional Right to the Family Relationship, 101 J. Crim. L. &
Criminology 77 (2011) . . . 1145
Bowers, Josh, Grand-Jury Nullification: Black Power in the Charging
Decision, in Criminal Law Conversations (Paul H. Robinson et al.

--- Page 2251 ---
eds., 2009) . . . 183
Bowers, Josh, Legal Guilt, Normative Innocence, and the Equitable
Decision Not to Prosecute, 110 Colum. L. Rev. 1655 (2010) . . .
86
Bowers, Josh, Punishing the Innocent, 156 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1117
(2008) . . . 126
Bowers, Josh, Upside-Down Injuries, 111 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1655 (2017)
. . . 168
Bowers, William J., Death Sentencing in Black and White, 3 U. Pa. J.
Const. L. 171 (2001) . . . 1201
Bowers, William J. & Pierce, Glenn, Deterrence or Brutalization:
What Is the Effect of Executions?, 26 Crime & Delinquency 453
(1980) . . . 1164
Bowman, Frank O., III, The Failure of the Federal Sentencing
Guidelines: A Structural Analysis, 105 Colum. L. Rev. 1315
(2005) . . . 1129
Boyer, Allen D., Crime, Cannibalism and Joseph Conrad: The
Influence of Regina v. Dudley and Stephens on Lord Jim, 20 Loy.
L.A. L. Rev. 9 (1986) . . . 14
Boyne, Shawn Marie, Procedural Economy in Pre-Trial Procedure:
Developments in Germany and the United States, 24 S. Cal.
Interdisc. L.J. 329 (2015) . . . 100
p. 1309
p. 1310
Bradley, Craig M., Criminal Procedure: A Worldwide Study (2d ed.
2007) . . . 74
Brady, James, Strict Liability Offenses: A Justification, 8 Crim. L.
Bull. 217 (1972) . . . 347
Braga, Anthony, The Effects of Hot Spots Policing on Crime: An
Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis, 31 Just. Q. 633
(2014) . . . 230
Braithwaite, John, Crime, Shame and Reintegration (1989) . . . 1107
Braithwaite, John, Restorative Justice and Responsive Regulation
(2002) . . . 1114

--- Page 2252 ---
Brakel, Jan, After the Verdict: Dispositional Decisions Regarding
Criminal Defendants Acquitted by Reason of Insanity, 37 DePaul
L. Rev. 181 (1988) . . . 945, 946
Brand-Ballard, Jeffrey, Moral Emotions and Culpability for Resultant
Harm, 42 Rutgers L.J. 315 (2011) . . . 582
Brennan Center for Justice, Spending by Outside Groups in Judicial
Races Hits Record High, Secret Money Dominates (Nov. 15,
2016) . . . 74
Brenner, Susan W., RICO, CCE, and Other Complex Crimes: The
Transformation of American Criminal Law, 2 Wm. & Mary Bill Rts.
J. 239 (1993) . . . 706
Brett, Peter, An Inquiry into Criminal Guilt (1963) . . . 314
Breyer, Stephen, The Federal Sentencing Guidelines and the Key
Compromises upon Which They Rest, 17 Hofstra L. Rev. 1
(1988) . . . 1129
Breyer, Stephen, On the Uses of Legislative History in Interpreting
Statutes, 65 S. Cal. L. Rev. 845 (1992) . . . 206
Brickey, Kathleen F., From Enron to WorldCom and Beyond: Life and
Crime After Sarbanes-Oxley, 81 Wash. U. L.Q. 357 (2003) . . .
801
Brickey, Kathleen F., Rethinking Corporate Liability Under the Model
Penal Code, 19 Rutgers L.J. 593 (1988) . . . 780, 781
Bridges, Khiara M., Race, Pregnancy, and the Opioid Epidemic:
White Privilege and the Criminalization of Opioid Use During
Pregnancy, 133 Harv. L. Rev. 770 (2020) . . . 212
Bright, Stephen B., Counsel for the Poor: The Death Sentence Not
for the Worst Crime But for the Worst Lawyer, 103 Yale L.J. 1835
(1994) . . . 1169
Brink, David O., The Nature and Significance of Culpability, 13 Crim.
L. & Phil. 347 (2019) . . . 920
Broeder, Dale W., The Functions of the Jury — Facts or Fictions?, 21
U. Chi. L. Rev. 386 (1947) . . . 168
Bronsteen, John, Buccafusco, Christopher, & Masur, Jonathan,
Happiness and Punishment, 76 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1037 (2009) . . .
1147

--- Page 2253 ---
Brown, Darryl K., Criminal Enforcement Redundancy: Oversight of
Decisions Not to Prosecute, 103 Minn. L. Rev. 843 (2018) . . .
100
Brown, Darryl K., Judicial Power to Regulate Plea Bargaining, 57
Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1225 (2016) . . . 116
Brown, Darryl K., Jury Nullification Within the Rule of Law, 81 Minn.
L. Rev. 1149 (1997) . . . 183
Brown, Mary Patrice & Bunnell, Stevan E., Negotiating Justice:
Prosecutorial Perspectives on Federal Plea Bargaining in the
District of Columbia, 43 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1063 (2006) . . . 133
Brown, Richard Maxwell, No Duty to Retreat (1991) . . . 851
Brown, Shanee, Impunity for the Incorrigible Psychopath?:
Neurobiological Abnormalities Do Not Exempt Psychopaths from
Criminal Responsibility, 7 Charlotte L. Rev. 239 (2016) . . . 980
p. 1310
p. 1311
Brown, Sharon M. & Wittner, Nicholas J., Criminal Law (1978 Annual
Survey of Michigan Law), 25 Wayne L. Rev. 335 (1978) . . . 946–
947
Bryden, David P., Redefining Rape, 3 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 317 (2000) .
. . 399, 400, 412, 416
Bryden, David P. & Lengnick, Sonja, Rape in the Criminal Justice
System, 87 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1194 (1997) . . . 455
Buchhandler-Raphael, Michal, Compassionate Homicide, 98 Wash.
U. L. Rev. 189 (2020) . . . 486
Buchhandler-Raphael, Michal, The Conundrum of Voluntary
Intoxication and Sex, 82 Brook. L. Rev. 1031 (2017) . . . 427
Buchhandler-Raphael, Michal, Criminalizing Coerced Submission in
the Workplace and in the Academy, 19 Colum. J. Gender & L.
409 (2010) . . . 428
Buchhandler-Raphael, Michal, Fear-Based Provocation, 67 Am. U.
L. Rev. 1719 (2018) . . . 485
Buchhandler-Raphael, Michal, Loss of Self-Control, Dual-Process
Theories, and Provocation, 88 Fordham L. Rev. 1815 (2020) . . .

--- Page 2254 ---
485
Buchhandler-Raphael, Michal, Overcriminalizing Speech, 36
Cardozo L. Rev. 1667 (2015) . . . 633
Buckley, Marion, Stalking Laws — Problem or Solution?, 9 Wis.
Women’s L.J. 23 (1994) . . . 626
Bucy, Pamela H., Corporate Ethos: A Standard for Imposing
Corporate Criminal Liability, 75 Minn. L. Rev. 1095 (1991) . . . 782
Buell, Samuel W., The Blaming Function of Entity Criminal Liability,
81 Ind. L.J. 473 (2006) . . . 766
Buell, Samuel W., The Court’s Fraud Dud, 6 Duke J. Const. L. &
Pub. Pol’y 31 (2010) . . . 1083
Buell, Samuel W., Good Faith and Law Evasion, 58 UCLA L. Rev.
611 (2011) . . . 1037
Buell, Samuel W., Novel Criminal Fraud, 81 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1971
(2006) . . . 1045
Buell, Samuel W., The Responsibility Gap in Corporate Crime, 12
Crim. L. & Phil. 471 (2018) . . . 800–801
Buell, Samuel W., The Upside of Overbreadth, 83 N.Y.U. L. Rev.
1491 (2008) . . . 672
Bureau of Justice Statistics.See U.S. Dept. of Justice
Burger, C.J., The State of the Judiciary — 1970, 56 A.B.A. J. 929
(1970) . . . 121
Burke, Alafair S., Prosecutorial Passion, Cognitive Bias, and Plea
Bargaining, 91 Marq. L. Rev. 183 (2007) . . . 127
Burke, Alafair S., Rational Actors, Self-Defense, and Duress: Making
Sense, Not Syndromes, Out of the Battered Woman, 81 N.C. L.
Rev. 211 (2002) . . . 836, 913
Burns, Robert P., The Death of the American Trial (2009) . . . 166
Busch, Ruth, Domestic Violence and Restorative Justice Initiatives:
Who Pays If We Get It Wrong, in Restorative Justice and Family
Violence 223 (Heather Strang & John Braithwaite eds., 2002) . . .
453
Butler, Brooke, The Role of Death Qualification in Capital Trials
Involving Juvenile Defendants, 37 J. Applied Soc. Psychol. 549
(2007) . . . 1201

--- Page 2255 ---
Butler, Paul, Racially Based Jury Nullification: Black Power in the
Criminal Justice System, 105 Yale L.J. 677 (1995) . . . 181
Buzawa, Eve S. & Buzawa, Carl G., Domestic Violence: The
Criminal Justice Response (3d ed. 2003) . . . 828
p. 1311
p. 1312
Cahill, Michael T., Attempt by Omission, 94 Iowa L. Rev. 1208 (2009)
. . . 633
Cahill, Michael T., Attempt, Reckless Homicide, and the Design of
the Criminal Law, 78 U. Colo. L. Rev. 879 (2007) . . . 608
Cahill, Michael T., Punishment Decisions at Conviction: Recognizing
the Jury as Fault-Finder, 2005 U. Chi. Legal F. 91 . . . 185
Cahill, Michael T., Punishment Pluralism, in Retributivism: Essays on
Theory and Policy (Mark D. White ed., 2011) . . . 48
Caldwell, Beth, The Twice Diminished Culpability of Juvenile
Accomplices to Felony Murder, 11 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 905 (2021) .
. . 544
Capers, I. Bennett, The Prosecutor’s Turn, 57 Wm. & Mary L. Rev.
1277 (2016) . . . 115
Capers, I. Bennett, Real Rape Too, 99 Cal. L. Rev. 1259 (2011) . . .
383
Capers, I. Bennett, Real Women, Real Rape, 60 UCLA L. Rev. 826
(2013) . . . 458
Capers, I. Bennett, The Unintentional Rapist, 87 Wash. U. L. Rev.
1345 (2010) . . . 618, 626
Carmickle, Rachel L., (Comment), Postpartum Illness and
Sentencing: Why the Insanity Defense Is Not Enough for Mothers
with Postpartum Depression, Anxiety, and Psychosis, 37 J. Legal
Med. 579 (2017) . . . 979
Carpenter, Catherine L., Of the Enemy Within, the Castle Doctrine,
and Self-Defense, 86 Marq. L. Rev. 653 (2003) . . . 855
Carpenter, Catherine L., On Statutory Rape, Strict Liability, and the
Public Welfare Offense Model, 53 Am. U. L. Rev. 313 (2003) . . .
327, 328

--- Page 2256 ---
Carter, Derrick Augustus, To Catch the Lion, Tether the Goat:
Entrapment, Conspiracy, and Sentencing Manipulation, 42 Akron
L. Rev. 135 (2009) . . . 696
Carter, Stephen L., When Victims Happen to Be Black, 97 Yale L.J.
420 (1988) . . . 810
Cassell, Paul G., Crime Victims’ Rights During Criminal
Investigations?, 104 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 59 (2014) . . . 95
Cassell, Paul G. & Garvin, Margaret, Protecting Crime Victims in
State Constitutions: The Example of the New Marsy’s Law for
Florida, 110 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 99 (2020) . . . 41
Cavallaro, Rosanna, A Big Mistake: Eroding the Defense of Mistake
of Fact About Consent in Rape, 86 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 815
(1996) . . . 445
Center for Disease Control, National Center for Injury Prevention and
Control, Division of Violence Prevention, National Intimate
Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010 Findings on
Victimization by Sexual Orientation (2010) . . . 384
Center for Health and Justice at Treatment Alternatives for Safe
Communities, A National Survey of Criminal Justice Diversion
Programs and Initiatives (2013) . . . 90
Center on the Administration of Criminal Law, NYU School of Law,
The Mercy Lottery: A Review of the Obama Administration’s
Clemency Initiative (2018) . . . 1150
Chaflin, Aaron & McCrary, Justin, Criminal Deterrence: A Review of
the Literature, 55 J. Econ. Literature 5 (2017) . . . 18
Chamallas, Martha, Consent, Equality, and the Legal Control of
Sexual Conduct, 61 S. Cal. L. Rev. 777 (1988) . . . 412
Charles Colson Task Force on Federal Corrections, Transforming
Prisons, Restoring Lives (Jan. 2016) . . . 31, 1127, 1133
p. 1312
p. 1313
Charlow, Robin, Bad Acts in Search of a Mens Rea: Anatomy of a
Rape, 71 Fordham L. Rev. 263 (2002) . . . 442

--- Page 2257 ---
Charlow, Robin, The Effect of Race-Based Jury Nullification on
Batson, in Criminal Law Conversations (Paul H. Robinson et al.
eds., 2009) . . . 183
Charlow, Robin, Willful Ignorance and Criminal Culpability, 70 Tex. L.
Rev. 1351 (1992) . . . 309
Cherkassky, Lisa, Kennedy and Unlawful Act Manslaughter: An
Unorthodox Application of Doctrine of Causation, 72 J. Crim. L.
387 (2008) . . . 600
Chernoff, Nina W., Wrong About the Right: How Courts Undermine
the Fair Cross-Section Guarantee by Confusing it with Equal
Protection, 64 Hastings L.J. 141 (2012) . . . 165
Chiesa, Luis E., Comparative Analysis as an Antidote to Tunnel
Vision in Criminal Law Reform: The Example of Complicity, 70
Rutgers U. L. Rev. 1117 (2018) . . . 655
Chiesa, Luis E., Duress, Demanding Heroism, and Proportionality,
41 Vand. J. Transnat’l L. 741 (2008) . . . 923
Chiesa, Luis E., The Model Penal Code, Mass Incarceration, and the
Racialization of American Criminal Law, 25 Geo. Mason L. Rev.
605 (2018) . . . 619, 630
Chiesa, Luis E., Solving the Riddle of Rape-by-Deception, 35 Yale L.
& Pol’y Rev. 407 (2017) . . . 434
Chiesa, Luis E., When an Offense Is Not an Offense: Rethinking the
Supreme Court’s Reasonable Doubt Jurisprudence, 44 Creighton
L. Rev. 647 (2011) . . . 157
Chin, Gabriel J., Unjustified: The Practical Irrelevance of the
Justification/Excuse Distinction, 43 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 79
(2009) . . . 488
Chiu, Elaine M., The Challenge of Motive in the Criminal Law, 8 Buff.
Crim. L. Rev. 653 (2005) . . . 301
Chiu, Elaine M., Culture as Justification, Not Excuse, 43 Am. Crim.
L. Rev. 1317 (2006) . . . 375
Christiansen, Matthew R. & Eskridge, William N., Jr., Congressional
Overrides of Supreme Court Statutory Interpretation Decisions,
1967–2011, 92 Tex. L. Rev. 1317 (2014) . . . 206
Christie, George C., The Defense of Necessity Considered from the
Legal and Moral Points of View, 48 Duke L.J. 975 (1999) . . . 894

--- Page 2258 ---
Christopher, Russell L., Time and Punishment, 66 Ohio St. L.J. 269
(2005) . . . 157
Christopher, Russell L.& Christopher, Kathryn H., Adult
Impersonation: Rape by Fraud as a Defense to Statutory Rape,
101 Nw. U. L. Rev. 75 (2007) . . . 434
Chung, Susanna Y., Prison Overcrowding: Standards in Determining
Eighth Amendment Violations, 68 Fordham L. Rev. 2351 (2000) .
. . 1100
Ciociola, Gabriel D.M., Misprision of Felony and Its Progeny, 41
Brandeis L.J. 697 (2003) . . . 270, 271, 272
Citron, Danielle Keats, Spying, Inc., 72 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 1243
(2015) . . . 625
Clark, Sherman J., The Courage of Our Convictions, 97 Mich. L.
Rev. 2381 (1999) . . . 177
Coates, Ta-Nehisi, Trayvon Martin and the Irony of American Justice,
The Atlantic (July 15, 2013) . . . 811
Coenen, Dan T., Freedom of Speech and the Criminal Law, 97 B.U.
L. Rev. 1533 (2017) . . . 591
p. 1313
p. 1314
Coffee, John C., Jr., From Tort to Crime: Some Reflections on the
Criminalization of Fiduciary Breaches and the Problematic Line
Between Law and Ethics, 19 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 117 (1981) . . .
1083
Coffee, John C., Jr., Hush!: The Criminal Status of Confidential
Information After McNally and Carpenter and the Enduring
Problem of Overcriminalization, 26 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 121 (1988)
. . . 1069
Coffee, John C., Jr., The Metastasis of Mail Fraud: The Continuing
Story of the “Evolution” of a White-Collar Crime, 21 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 1 (1983) . . . 1083
Coffee, John C., Jr., “No Soul to Damn, No Body to Kick”: An
Unscandalized Inquiry into the Problem of Corporate
Punishment, 79 Mich. L. Rev. 386 (1981) . . . 783, 785

--- Page 2259 ---
Cohen, Jacqueline, Incapacitating Criminals: Recent Research
Findings, U.S. Dept. of Justice, Natl. Institute of Justice,
Research in Brief (Dec. 1983) . . . 29
Cohen-Cole, Ethan, Model Uncertainty and the Deterrent Effect of
Capital Punishment, 11 Am. L. & Econ. Rev. 335 (2009) . . . 1164
Coke, Edward, Institutes (1644) . . . 534
Coker, Donna, Crime Logic, Campus Sexual Assault, and
Restorative Justice, 49 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 147 (2016) . . . 382,
383, 453
Coker, Donna K., Heat of Passion and Wife Killing: Men Who
Batter/Men Who Kill, 2 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Women’s Stud. 71
(1992) . . . 489, 491
Cole, James M., Deputy Attorney Gen. of the United States,
Memorandum to the U.S. Attorneys (June 29, 2011) . . . 88
Cole, James M., Deputy Attorney Gen. of the United States,
Memorandum to the U.S. Attorneys (Aug. 29, 2013) . . . 88
Cole, Kevin, Better Sex Through Criminal Law: Proxy Crimes, Covert
Negligence, and Other Difficulties of “Affirmative Consent” in the
ALI’s Draft Sexual Assault Provisions, 53 San Diego L. Rev. 507
(2016) . . . 420, 423
Cole, Kevin, Killings During Crime, 28 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 73 (1990) . .
. 540
Cole, Kevin, Sex and the Single Malt Girl: How Voluntary Intoxication
Affects Consent, 78 Mont. L. Rev. 155 (2017) . . . 427
Coleman, Doriane, Individualizing Justice through Multiculturalism,
96 Colum. L. Rev. 1094 (1996) . . . 375
Collins, Eric, Insane: James Holmes, Clark v. Arizona, and America’s
Insanity Defense, 31 J.L. & Health 33 (2018) . . . 986
Collins, Erin R., The Evidentiary Rules of Engagement in the War
Against Domestic Violence, 90 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 397 (2015) . . . 96,
826
Collins, Erin R., Status Courts, 105 Geo. L.J. 1481 (2017) . . . 24
Collins, Jennifer M., Lieb, Ethan J., & Markel, Dan, Punishing Family
Status, 88 B.U. L. Rev. 1327 (2008) . . . 276, 342
Comment, 133 Harv. L. Rev. 1087 (2020) . . . 211

--- Page 2260 ---
Comment, Towards a Consent Standard in the Law of Rape, 43 U.
Chi. L. Rev. 613 (1976) . . . 407
Cook, Julian A., Federal Guilty Pleas: Inequities, Indigence, and the
Rule 11 Process, 60 B.C. L. Rev. 1073 (2019) . . . 112
Cook, P., The Costs of Processing Murder Cases in North Carolina,
Duke University (May 1993) . . . 1162
Copeland, Katrice Bridges, The Yates Memo: Looking for “Individual
Accountability” in All the Wrong Places, 102 Iowa L. Rev. 1897
(2017) . . . 773
p. 1314
p. 1315
Corda, Alessandro & Hester, Rhys, Leaving the Shining City on a
Hill: A Plea for Rediscovering Comparative Criminal Justice
Policy in the United States, 31 Int’l Crim. Just. Rev. 203 (2021) . .
. 1
Corrado, Michael Louis, Addiction and the Theory of Action, 25
Quinnipiac L. Rev. 117 (2006) . . . 999
Corrado, Michael Louis, The Case for a Purely Volitional Insanity
Defense, 42 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 481 . . . 959
Coughlin, Anne M., Excusing Women, 82 Cal. L. Rev. 1 (1994) . . .
834
Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Perspectives on
Incarceration and the Justice System (Apr. 2016) . . . 1099
Council of Economic Advisers Issue Brief, Fines, Fees, and Bail
(Dec. 2015) . . . 80
Covey, Russell D., Fixed Justice: Reforming Plea Bargaining with
Plea-Based Ceilings, 82 Tul. L. Rev. 1237 (2008) . . . 135
Covey, Russell D., Longitudinal Guilt: Repeat Offenders, Plea
Bargaining, and the Variable Standard of Proof, 63 Fla. L. Rev.
431 (2011) . . . 124
Covey, Russell D., Temporary Insanity: The Strange Life and Times
of the Perfect Defense, 91 B.U. L. Rev. 1597 (2011) . . . 979
Cowan, Sharon, The Trouble with Drink: Intoxication (In)capacity,
and the Evaporation of Consent to Sex, 41 Akron. L. Rev. 899

--- Page 2261 ---
(2008) . . . 426
Crespo, Andrew Manuel, The Hidden Law of Plea Bargaining, 118
Colum. L. Rev. 1303 (2018) . . . 120
Crespo, Andrew Manuel, Systemic Facts: Toward Institutional
Awareness in Criminal Courts, 129 Harv. L. Rev. 2049 (2016) . . .
106
Crown Prosecution Service, Policy for Prosecutors in Respect of
Cases of Encouraging or Assisting Suicide (updated Oct. 2014) .
. . 902
Crump, David, Assaultive Felony Murder: Homicide with Intent to
Cause Serious Injury, 55 Santa Clara L. Rev. 247 (2015) . . . 553
Crump, David, Reconsidering the Felony Murder Rule in Light of
Modern Criticisms, 32 Harv. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 1155 (2009) . . .
543
Crump, David, Should We Have Different Views of Felony Murder,
Depending on the Governing Statute?, 47 Tex. Tech. L. Rev. 113
(2014) . . . 542
Dan-Cohen, Meir, Actus Reus, in Encyclopedia of Criminal Justice
(1983) . . . 1004
Dan-Cohen, Meir, Causation, in Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice
(1983) . . . 581
Dan-Cohen, Meir, Decision Rules and Conduct Rules: On Acoustic
Separation in Criminal Law, 97 Harv. L. Rev. 625 (1984) . . . 315
DAO Worker Protection Unit Charges Plumbing Contractor for
Misappropriating Union Fees (Jan. 25, 2021) . . . 1036
Darrow, Clarence, The Story of My Life (1932) . . . 703
David, Lois M., Evaluating the Effectiveness of Correctional
Education: A Meta-Analysis of Programs That Provide Education
to Incarcerated Adults (2015) . . . 26
Davies, Sharon L., Jurisprudence of Ignorance: An Evolving Theory
of Excusable Ignorance, 48 Duke L.J. 341 (1998) . . . 362
Davis, Angela J., Are Prisons Obsolete? (2003) . . . 54
Davis, Angela J., Reimaging Prosecution: A Growing Progressive
Movement, 3 UCLA Crim. Just. L. Rev. 1 (2019) . . . 86

--- Page 2262 ---
Davis, Kenneth Culp, Administrative Law Treatise (1970 Supp.) . . .
91
Davis, Kenneth Culp, Discretionary Justice (1969) . . . 77
p. 1315
p. 1316
Dayan, Hava & Gross, Emanuel, Between the Hammer and the
Anvil: Battered Women Claiming Self-Defense and a Legislative
Proposal to Amend Section 3.04(2)(b) of the U.S. Model Penal
Code, 52 Harv. J. on Legis. 17 (2015) . . . 847
Dearth, Megan H., Defending the “Indefensible”: Replacing
Ethnocentrism with a Native American Cultural Defense, 35 Am.
Indian L. Rev. 621 (2011) . . . 518
Death Penalty Information Center, Facts About the Death Penalty
(June 11, 2020) . . . 1162
Death Penalty Information Center, Innocence and the Death Penalty
. . . 1167
Death Penalty Information Center, New Generation of Prosecutors
May Signal Shift in Death Penalty Policies . . . 1202
Death Penalty Information Center, The 2% Death Penalty: The
Geographic Arbitrariness of Capital Punishment in the United
States . . . 1163
Decker, John F., The Mental State Requirement for Accomplice
Liability in American Criminal Law, 60 S.C. L. Rev. 237 (2008) . . .
683–684
Deise, Jerome & Paternoster, Raymond, More Than a “Quick
Glimpse of the Life”: The Relationship Between Victim Impact
Evidence and Death Sentencing, 40 Hastings Const. L.Q. 611
(2013) . . . 1180
Delaney, Ruth, Subramanian, Sam, Shames, Alison & Turner,
Nicholas, Reimagining Prison, Vera Inst. of Justice (2018) . . .
1096
Delgado, Richard, “Rotten Social Background”: Should the Criminal
Law Recognize a Defense of Severe Environmental
Deprivation?, 3 Law & Inequality 9 (1985) . . . 1005

--- Page 2263 ---
Delgado, Richard, The Wretched of the Earth, 2 Ala. Civ. Rts. & Civ.
Lib. L. Rev. 1 (2011) . . . 1007
Denno, Deborah W., Lethal Injection Chaos Post-Baze, 102 Geo.
L.J. 1331 (2014) . . . 1183
Denno, Deborah W., Sexuality, Rape, and Mental Retardation, 1997
U. Ill. L. Rev. 315 . . . 392, 426
DePalma, Aahren R., I Couldn’t Help Myself — My Culture Made Me
Do It: The Use of Cultural Evidence in the Heat of Passion
Defense, 28 Chicana/o-Latina/o L. Rev. 1 (2009) . . . 375
Dervan, Lucian E. & Edkins, Vanessa A., The Innocent Defendant’s
Dilemma, 103 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1 (2013) . . . 129
Devlin, Patrick, The Enforcement of Morals (1965) . . . 48
Diamantis, Mihailis E., Functional Corporate Knowledge, 61 Wm. &
Mary L. Rev. 319 (2019) . . . 766, 774
Diamond, John L., Reviving Lenity and Honest Belief at the
Boundaries of Criminal Law, 44 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 1 (2010) . . .
1026
Dieter, Richard, Testimony Before the Judiciary Committee Colorado
House of Representatives, “Costs of the Death Penalty and
Related Issues” (Feb. 7, 2007) . . . 1162
Difonzi, James Herbie, Parental Responsibility for Juvenile Crime, 80
Or. L. Rev. 1 (2001) . . . 343
Dobbie, Will, Goldin, Jacob & Yang, Crystal S., The Effects of Pretrial
Detention on Conviction, Future Crime, and Employment:
Evidence from Randomly Assigned Judges, Am. Econ. Rev.
(2018) . . . 80
Dolovich, Sharon, Cruelty, Prison Conditions, and the Eighth
Amendment, 84 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 881 (2009) . . . 1099
p. 1316
p. 1317
Dolovich, Sharon, Foreword: Incarceration American-Style, 3 Harv.
L. & Pol’y Rev. 237 (2009) . . . 1120
Dolovich, Sharon, Strategic Segregation in the Modern Prison, 48
Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1 (2011) . . . 1147

--- Page 2264 ---
Dolovich, Sharon, Two Models of the Prison: Accidental Humanity
and Hypermasculinity in the L.A. County Jail, 102 J. Crim. L. &
Criminology 965 (2012) . . . 384
Donnelly, Ellen A., Can Legislatures Redress Racial Discrimination
in Capital Punishment? Evaluating Racial Justice Acts in
Response to McCleskey, 82 J. Crim. L. 388 (2018) . . . 1203
Donohue, John J., III & Levitt, Steven, The Impact of Legalized
Abortion and Crime, 116 Q.J. Econ. 379 (2001) . . . 31
Donohue, John J., III & Seligman, Peter, Allocating Resources
Among Prisons and Social Programs in the Battle Against Crime,
27 J. Legal Stud. 1 (1998) . . . 28
Donovan, James M. & Garth, John Stuart, Delimiting the Culture
Defense, 26 Quinnipiac L. Rev. 109 (2007) . . . 503
Dooley, Laura G., The Dilution Effect: Federalization, Fair Cross-
Sections, and the Concept of Community, 54 DePaul L. Rev. 79
(2004) . . . 165
Doré, Laurie Kratky, Downward Adjustment and the Slippery Slope:
The Use of Duress in Defense of Battered Offenders, 56 Ohio St.
L.J. 665 (1995) . . . 913
Dow, David R., The Autobiography of an Execution (2010) . . . 1168
Dow, Steven B. & Ellis, Nan S., A New Look at Criminal Liability for
Selling Dangerous Vehicles: Lessons from General Motors and
Toyota, 15 Hastings Bus. L.J. 1, 37 (2019) . . . 768–769
Doyle, Charles, Cong. Research Serv., RL32040, Federal Mandatory
Minimums Sentencing Statutes (2013) . . . 707
Doyle, Colin, Chesa Boudin’s New Bail Policy Is Nation’s Most
Progressive. It Also Reveals Persistence of Tough-on-Crime
Norms, The Appeal (Jan. 30, 2020) . . . 80
Dressler, Joshua, ed., Encyclopedia of Crime & Justice (2d ed. 2001)
. . . 347, 348
Dressler, Joshua, Reforming Complicity Law: Trivial Assistance as a
Less Offense?, 5 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 427 (2008) . . . 654
Dressler, Joshua, When “Heterosexual” Men Kill “Homosexual” Men:
Reflections on Provocation Law, Sexual Advances, and the
“Reasonable Man” Standard, 85 J. Crim. Law & Criminology 726
(1995) . . . 492

--- Page 2265 ---
Dripps, Donald A., After Rape Law: Will the Turn to Consent
Normalize the Prosecution of Sexual Assault?, 41 Akron L. Rev.
957 (2008) . . . 451
Dripps, Donald A., The Constitutional Status of the Reasonable
Doubt Rule, 75 Cal. L. Rev. 1665 (1987) . . . 157
Dripps, Donald A., Guilt, Innocence, and Due Process of Plea
Bargaining, 57 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1343 (2016) . . . 135
Druzin, Bryan H. & Li, Jessica, The Criminalization of Lying: Under
What Circumstances, If Any, Should Lies Be Made Criminal?,
101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 529 (2011) . . . 1049
Duff, R.A., “Can I Help You?”: Accessorial Liability and the Intention
to Assist, 10 Legal Stud. 167 (1990) . . . 662
Duff, R.A., The Circumstances of an Attempt, 50 Cambridge L.J. 104
(1991) . . . 611
p. 1317
p. 1318
Duff, R.A., Guiding Commitments and Criminal Liability for Attempts,
6 Crim. L. & Phil. 411 (2012) . . . 607
Duindam, Guus, Judicial Incoherence, Capital Punishment, and the
Legalization of Torture: A Response to Glossip v. Gross and
Bucklew v. Precythe, 108 Geo. L.J. Online 74 (2019) . . . 1183
Duncan, Meredith J., Sex Crimes and Sexual Miscues: The Need for
a Clearer Line Between Forcible Rape and Nonconsensual Sex,
42 Wake Forest L. Rev. 1087 (2007) . . . 417
Durkheim, Emile, The Division of Labor in Society (W.D. Halls trans.,
1984; originally published, 1893) . . . 44
Dutile, Fernand N. & Moore, Harold F., Mistake and Impossibility:
Arranging a Marriage Between Two Difficult Partners, 74 Nw. U.
L. Rev. 166 (1979) . . . 649
Duvall, Kenneth, The Contradictory Stance on Jury Nullification, 88
N.D. L. Rev. 409 (2012) . . . 175
Dworkin, G. & Blumenfeld, G., Punishments for Intentions, 75 Mind
396 (1966) . . . 260

--- Page 2266 ---
Easterbrook, Frank, Criminal Procedure as a Market System, 12 J.
Legal Stud. 289 (1983) . . . 128
Edmondson, Carla, Nothing Is Certain But Death: Why Future
Dangerousness Mandates Abolition of the Death Penalty, 20
Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 857 (2016) . . . 1177
Edwards, Griffin, Rushin, Stephen & Colquitt, Joseph, The Effects of
Voluntary and Presumptive Sentencing Guidelines, 89 Tex. L.
Rev. 1 (2019) . . . 1137
Ehrenreich, Nancy, Attempt, Merger, and Transferred Intent, 82
Brook. L. Rev. 49 (2016) . . . 583
Ehrlich, Isaac, The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment: A
Question of Life and Death, 65 Am. Econ. Rev. 397 (1975) . . .
1164
Eichorn, Lisa, Social Science Findings and the Jury’s Ability to
Disregard Evidence Under the Federal Rules of Evidence, 52
Law & Contemp. Probs. 341 (1989) . . . 145
Eisenberg, Theodore, Death Sentence Rates and County
Demographics: An Empirical Study, 90 Cornell L. Rev. 347 (2005)
. . . 1201
Eldar, Shachar, The Limits of Transferred Malice, 32 Oxford J. Legal.
Studies 633 (2012) . . . 584
Ellison, Louise & Munro, Vanessa E., A Stranger in the Bushes, or
an Elephant in the Room?: Critical Reflections upon Received
Rape Myth Wisdom in the Context of a Mock Jury Study, 13 New
Crim. L. Rev. 781 (2010) . . . 400
Enker, Arnold, Perspectives on Plea Bargaining, in President’s
Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of
Justice, Task Force Report: The Courts (1967) . . . 117
Epps, Daniel & Ortman, William, The Informed Jury (July 26, 2021) .
. . 185
Epstein, Deborah, Procedural Justice: Tempering the State’s
Response to Domestic Violence, 43 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1843
(2002) . . . 828
Equal Justice Initiative, The Death Penalty in Alabama (2011) . . .
1201

--- Page 2267 ---
Equal Justice Initiative, United States Still Has Highest Incarceration
Rate in the World (Apr. 26, 2019) . . . 1
p. 1318
p. 1319
Erickson, Steven K. & Vitacco, Michael J., Predators and
Punishment, 18 Psychol. Pub. Pol’y & L. 1 (2012) . . . 981
Esakov, Gennady, The Russian Criminal Jury: Recent
Developments, Practice, and Current Problems, 60 Am. J. Comp.
L. 665 (2012) . . . 170
Eskridge, William N., Jr., The New Textualism, 37 UCLA L. Rev. 621
(1990) . . . 206
Estrich, Susan, Defending Women (Book Review, Cynthia Gillespie,
Justifiable Homicide: Battered Women, Self-Defense and the Law
(1989)), 88 Mich. L. Rev. 1430 (1990) . . . 832
Estrich, Susan, Palm Beach Stories, 11 Law & Phil. 5 (1992) . . . 455
Estrich, Susan, Rape, 95 Yale L.J. 1087 (1986) . . . 385, 398
Estrich, Susan, Real Rape (1987) . . . 406, 434
Estrich, Susan, Teaching Rape Law, 102 Yale L.J. 509 (1992) . . .
386, 460
Eule, Julian, The Presumption of Sanity: Bursting the Bubble, 25
UCLA L. Rev. 637 (1978) . . . 948
Ewing, A.C., A Study of Punishment II: Punishment as Viewed by the
Philosopher, 21 Canadian B. Rev. 102 (1943) . . . 236
Executive Office of the President, Economic Perspectives on
Incarceration and the Criminal Justice System (2016) . . . 2
Fabian, John, The Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act:
Legal and Psychological Aspects of the New Civil Commitment
Law for Federal Sex Offenders, 60 Clev. St. L. Rev. 307 (2012) . .
. 960
Fagan, Jeffrey, Death and Deterrence Redux: Science, Alchemy and
Causal Reasoning on Capital Punishment, 4 Ohio St. J. Crim. L.
255 (2006) . . . 1164

--- Page 2268 ---
Fahey, Eugene M., “The Angels that Surrounded My Cradle”: The
History, Evolution, and Application of the Insanity Defense, 68
Buff. L. Rev. 805 (2020) . . . 963
Faigman, David L., Note, The Battered Woman Syndrome and Self-
Defense: A Legal and Empirical Dissent, 72 Va. L. Rev. 619
(1986) . . . 833
Faigman, David L. & Wright, Amy J., The Battered Woman in the
Age of Science, 39 Ariz. L. Rev. 67 (1997) . . . 833
Fairfax, Roger A., Jr., The Delegation of the Criminal Prosecution
Function to Private Actors, 43 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 411 (2009) . . .
95
Falk, Patricia J., Not Logic, But Experience: Drawing on Lessons
from the Real World in Thinking About the Riddle of Rape-by-
Fraud, 123 Yale L.J. Online 353 (2013) . . . 435
Falk, Patricia J., Rape by Drugs: A Statutory Overview and
Proposals for Reform, 44 Ariz. L. Rev. 131 (2002) . . . 427
Falk, Patricia J., Rape by Fraud and Rape by Coercion, 64 Brook. L.
Rev. 39 (1998) . . . 428
Fan, Mary D., Legalization Conflicts and Reliance Defenses, 92
Wash. U. L. Rev. 907 (2015) . . . 367
Fan, Mary D., Sex, Privacy, and Public Health in a Casual
Encounters Culture, 45 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 531 (2011) . . . 458
Farrell, Amy S. & Givelber, Daniel James, Liberation Reconsidered:
Why Judges and Juries Disagree About Guilt, 100 J. Crim. L. &
Criminology 1549 (2010) . . . 170
p. 1319
p. 1320
Farrell, Ian P., Gilbert & Sullivan and Scalia: Philosophy,
Proportionality, and the Eighth Amendment, 55 Vill. L. Rev. 321
(2010) . . . 243
Farrell, Ian P. & Marceau, Justin F., Taking Voluntariness Seriously,
54 B.C. L. Rev. 1545 (2013) . . . 1005
Faulkner, Robert P. & Hsiao, Douglas H., And Where You Go I’ll
Follow: The Constitutionality of Antistalking Laws and Proposed

--- Page 2269 ---
Model Legislation, 31 Harv. J. Legis. 1 (1994) . . . 626
FBI, Clearances (2018) . . . 79
FBI, Crime in the United States 2015 (Sept. 26, 2016) . . . 3
FBI, Crime in the United States 2018 . . . 1098
FBI, Crime in the United States 2019 . . . 67
Feinberg, Joel, Equal Punishment for Failed Attempts, 37 Ariz. L.
Rev. 117 (1995) . . . 602
Feinberg, Joel, Overlooking the Merits of the Individual Case: An
Unpromising Approach to the Right to Die, 4 Ratio Juris 131
(1991) . . . 903
Ferguson, Andrew Guthrie, The Big Data Jury, 91 Notre Dame L.
Rev. 935 (2016) . . . 165
Ferguson, Andrew Guthrie, Jury Instructions as Constitutional
Education, 84 U. Colo. L. Rev. 233 (2013) . . . 167
Ferreone, Alyssa, Drinking Away Mens Rea: The Blurred Line
Between Voluntary Intoxication and Alcohol-Induced Brain
Damage, 23 Quinnipiac Health L.J. 165 (2020) . . . 934
Ferzan, Kimberly Kessler, Conspiracy, Complicity, and the Scope of
Contemplated Crime, 53 Ariz. St. L.J. 453 (2021) . . . 714
Ferzan, Kimberly Kessler, Defending Imminence: From Battered
Women to Iraq, 46 Ariz. L. Rev. 213 (2004) . . . 846
Ferzan, Kimberly Kessler, Opaque Recklessness, 91 J. Crim. L. &
Criminology 597 (2001) . . . 255, 303
Ferzan, Kimberly Kessler, Plotting Premeditation’s Demise, 75 Law
& Contemp. Probs. 83 (2012) . . . 476
Ferzan, Kimberly Kessler, Probing the Depths of the Responsible
Corporate Officer’s Duty, 12 Crim. L. & Phil. 455 (2018) . . . 800
Ferzan, Kimberly Kessler, Provocateurs, 7 Crim. L. & Phil. 597
(2013) . . . 859–860
FindLaw, The Insanity Defense Among the States (Jan. 23, 2019) . .
. 948, 962
Findley, Keith A., Reducing Error in the Criminal Justice System, 48
Seton Hall L. Rev. 1265 (2018) . . . 148
Fingarette, Herbert, Heavy Drinking (1988) . . . 999
Fingarette, Herbert, The Meaning of Criminal Insanity (1972) . . . 975

--- Page 2270 ---
Finkel, Norman J., Commonsense Justice: Jurors’ Notions of the
Law (1995) . . . 170
Finkel, Norman J., The Insanity Defense: A Comparison of Verdict
Schemas, 15 Law & Hum. Behav. 533 (1991) . . . 963
Finkel, Norman J., The Insanity, Defense Reform Act of 1984: Much
Ado About Nothing, 7 Behav. Sci. & L. 399 (1989) . . . 963
Finkelstein, Claire O., Duress: A Philosophical Account of the
Defense in Law, 37 Ariz. L. Rev. 251 (1995) . . . 914
First, Harry, Branch Office of the Prosecutor: The New Role of the
Corporation in Business Crime Prosecutions, 89 N.C. L. Rev. 23
(2010) . . . 771
p. 1320
p. 1321
Fischel, Daniel R. & Sykes, Alan O., Corporate Crime, 25 J. Legal
Stud. 319 (1996) . . . 768
Fisher, Bonnie S., Cullen, Francis T. & Turner, Michael G., The
Sexual Victimization of College Women (Natl. Institute of Justice
2000) . . . 383
Fisher, Talia, Conviction Without Conviction, 96 Minn. L. Rev. 833
(2012) . . . 148
Flanders, Chad, Time, Death, and Retribution, 19 U. Pa. J. Const. L.
431 (2016) . . . 39
Fletcher, George P., Blackmail: The Paradigmatic Crime, 141 U. Pa.
L. Rev. 1617 (1993) . . . 1058
Fletcher, George P., Constructing a Theory of Impossible Attempts, 5
Crim. J. Ethics 53 (1986) . . . 650
Fletcher, George P., A Crime of Self-Defense: Bernhard Goetz and
the Law on Trial (1988) . . . 809
Fletcher, George P., The Place of Victims in the Theory of
Retribution, 3 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 51 (1999) . . . 39
Fletcher, George P., Reflections on Felony-Murder, 12 Sw. U. L. Rev.
413 (1981) . . . 538
Fletcher, George P., Rethinking Criminal Law (1978) . . . 616, 662,
934

--- Page 2271 ---
Fletcher, W., Encyclopedia of the Law of Private Corporations (1975)
. . . 788
Flurry, Alan, Study Estimates U.S. Population with Felony
Convictions, UGA Today (Oct. 1, 2017) . . . 2
Follman, Mark & Williams, Lauren, Actually, Stand Your Ground
Played a Major Role in the Trayvon Martin Case, Mother Jones
(July 19, 2013) . . . 854
Fontaine, Reid Griffith, Adequate (Non)Provocation and Heat of
Passion as Excuse Not Justification, 43 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 27
(2009) . . . 495
Foot, Philippa, Utilitarianism and the Virtues, 94 Mind 196 (1985) . . .
892
Forell, Caroline, Domestic Homicides: The Continuing Search for
Justice, 25 Am. U. J. Gender Soc. Pol’y & L. 1 (2017) . . . 504
Forell, Caroline, Homicide and the Unreasonable Man, 72 Geo.
Wash. L. Rev. 597 (2004) . . . 499
Forell, Caroline, What’s Reasonable?: Self-Defense and Mistake in
Criminal and Tort Law, 14 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 1401 (2010) . . .
866
Forman, James, Jr., Comments offered at Criminal Justice
Roundtable, Columbia Univ. (May 2021) . . . 57
Frampton, Thomas Ward, The Jim Crow Jury, 71 Vand. L. Rev. 1593
(2018) . . . 166
Frankel, Marvin, Criminal Sentencing: Law Without Order (1973) . . .
1120
Franks, Mary Anne, Real Men Advance, Real Women Retreat: Stand
Your Ground, Battered Women’s Syndrome, and Violence as
Male Privilege, 68 U. Miami L. Rev. 1099 (2014) . . . 856
Frase, Richard S., Excessive Prison Sentences, Punishment Goals,
and the Eighth Amendment: “Proportionality” Relative to What?,
89 Minn. L. Rev. 571 (2005) . . . 246
Frase, Richard S., Limiting Excessive Prison Sentences Under
Federal and State Constitutions, 11 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 39 (2008)
. . . 247
Frase, Richard S. & Weigend, Thomas, German Criminal Justice as
a Guide to American Law Reform, 18 B.C. Int’l & Comp. L. Rev.

--- Page 2272 ---
317 (1995) . . . 100
p. 1321
p. 1322
Freeman, John P. & Crystal, Nathan M., Scienter in Professional
Liability Cases, 42 S.C. L. Rev. 783 (1991) . . . 307
French, Peter A., The Virtues of Vengeance (2001) . . . 39
Fuller, Lon, The Case of the Speluncean Explorers, 62 Harv. L. Rev.
616 (1949) . . . 891
Gabrielson, Ryan, Deadly Force, in Black and White, ProPublica
(Oct. 10, 2014) . . . 869
Galvin, Harriett R., Shielding Rape Victims in the State and Federal
Courts: A Proposal for the Second Decade, 70 Minn. L. Rev. 763
(1986) . . . 456
Gardner, John, The Gist of Excuses, 2 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 1 (1997) . .
. 913
Gardner, John & Macklem, Timothy, Compassion Without Respect?
Nine Fallacies in R. v. Smith, [2001] Crim. L. Rev. 623 . . . 506
Garland, David, Introduction: The Meaning of Mass Imprisonment, 3
Punishment & Soc’y 5 (2001) . . . 3
Garland, David, Peculiar Institution: America’s Death Penalty in an
Age of Abolition (2010) . . . 1166, 1168, 1205
Garland, David, Punishment and Modern Society (1990) . . . 240
Garrett, Brandon L., Convicting the Innocent: Where Criminal
Prosecutions Go Wrong (2011) . . . 1167
Garrett, Brandon L., Declining Corporate Prosecutions, 57 Am. Crim.
L. Rev. 109 (2020) . . . 773
Garrett, Brandon L., Too Big to Jail: How Prosecutors Compromise
with Corporations (2014) . . . 6, 774
Garvey, Stephen P., Reading Rosemond, 12 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 233
(2014) . . . 677
General Principles of Criminal Law (2d ed. 1960) . . . 910
Gersen, Jacob & Jeannie Suk, The Sex Bureaucracy, 104 Calif. L.
Rev. 881 (2016) . . . 452

--- Page 2273 ---
Gershman, Bennett L., Prosecutorial Decisionmaking and Discretion
in the Charging Function, 62 Hastings L.J. 1259 (2011) . . . 87
Gershowitz, Adam M., Consolidating Local Criminal Justice: Should
the Prosecutors Control the Jails?, 51 Wake Forest L. Rev. 677
(2016) . . . 126
Gershowitz, Adam M., Imposing a Cap on Capital Punishment, 72
Mo. L. Rev. 73 (2007) . . . 1191
Gershowitz, Adam M. & Killinger, Laura R., The State (Never) Rests:
How Excessive Prosecutorial Caseloads Harm Criminal
Defendants, 105 Nw. U. L. Rev. 261 (2011) . . . 126
Gerstein, Charlie & Prescott, J.J., Process Costs and Police
Discretion, 128 Harv. L. Rev. F. 268 (2015) . . . 228
Gertner, Nancy S., 12 Angry Men (and Women) in Federal Court, 82
Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 613 (2007) . . . 165
Gertner, Nancy, Women and Sentencing, 57 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1401
(2020) . . . 1145
Ghandnoosh, Nazgol, Can We Wait 75 Years to Cut the Prison
Population in Half?, Sentencing Project (Mar. 8, 2018) . . . 69
Gilchrist, Gregory M., Individual Accountability for Corporate Crime,
34 Ga. St. U. L. Rev. 335 (2018) . . . 766
Gilchrist, Gregory M., Regulation by Prosecutor, 56 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 315 (2019) . . . 786
p. 1322
p. 1323
Gilchrist, Gregory M., Trial Bargaining, 101 Iowa L. Rev. 609 (2016) .
. . 122
Gilchrist, Gregory M., Willful Blindness as Mere Evidence, 54 Loy.
L.A. L. Rev. 405 (2021) . . . 308
Gilchrist, Heidi R., The Vast Gulf Between Attempted Mass
Shootings and Attempted Material Support, 81 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 63
(2019) . . . 623
Gilligan, James, Violence (1996) . . . 1110, 1113
Ginsburg, Douglas H. & Shechtman, Paul, Blackmail: An Economic
Analysis of the Law, 141 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1849 (1993) . . . 1058

--- Page 2274 ---
Ginther, Matthew R., Decoding Guilty Minds: How Jurors Attribute
Knowledge and Guilt, 71 Vand. L. Rev. 241 (2018) . . . 304
Givelber, Daniel, Lost Innocence: Speculation and Data About the
Acquitted, 42 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1167 (2005) . . . 82
Gold, Russell M., “Clientless” Prosecutors, 51 Ga. L. Rev. 693
(2017) . . . 134
Gold, Russell M., Paying for Pretrial Detention 98 N.C. L. Rev. 1257
(2020) . . . 81–82
Gold, Russell M., Hessick, Carissa Byrne & Hessick, F. Andrew,
Civilizing Criminal Settlements, 97 B.U. L. Rev. 1607 (2017) . . .
139
Goldscheid, Julie, Gender Neutrality and the “Violence Against
Women” Frame, 5 U. Miami Race & Soc. Just. L. Rev. 307 (2015)
. . . 383
Goldstein, Abraham, Conspiracy to Defraud the United States, 68
Yale L.J. 405 (1959) . . . 261
Goldstein, Abraham, The Insanity Defense (1967) . . . 958
Goldstick, Evan, Note, Accidental Vitiation: The Natural and
Probable Consequence of Rosemond v. United States on the
Natural and Probable Consequence Doctrine, 85 Fordham L.
Rev. 1281 (2016) . . . 684
Goluboff, Risa, Vagrant Nation (2016) . . . 226
Gómez-Aller, Jacobo, Criminal Omissions: A European Perspective,
11 New Crim. L. Rev. 419 (2008) . . . 271
Gonnerman, Jennifer, The Knock at the Door, N.Y. Mag. (Sept. 11,
2011) . . . 691
González, Thalia, The State of Restorative Justice in American
Criminal Law, 2020 Wis. L. Rev. 1147 . . . 64
Goodhart, Arthur, Possession of Drugs and Absolute Liability, 84
L.Q. Rev. 382 (1968) . . . 347
Goodman, Christine Chambers, Protecting the Party Girl: A New
Approach for Evaluating Intoxicated Consent, 2009 BYU L. Rev.
57 . . . 427
Goodman, Lisa A. & Epstein, Deborah, Listening to Battered
Women: A Survivor-Centered Approach to Advocacy, Mental
Health, and Justice (2008) . . . 827, 828

--- Page 2275 ---
Goodmark, Leigh, Reframing Domestic Violence Law and Policy: An
Anti-Essentialist Proposal, 31 Wash. U. J.L. & Pol’y 39 (2009) . . .
827, 828, 833
Goodmark, Leigh, Should Domestic Violence Be Decriminalized?, 40
Harv. J.L. & Gender 53 (2017) . . . 96
Goodmark, Leigh, A Troubled Marriage: Domestic Violence and the
Legal System (2012) . . . 96
Goodno, Naomi Harlin, Cyberstalking, a New Crime, 72 Mo. L. Rev.
125 (2007) . . . 625
Goodwin, Michele, Law’s Limits: Regulating Statutory Rape Law,
2013 Wis. L. Rev. 481 . . . 426
p. 1323
p. 1324
Gordon, Sanford C. & Huber, Gregory, The Effect of Electoral
Competitiveness on Incumbent Behavior, 2 Q.J. Pol. Sci. 107
(2007) . . . 74
Gordon, Wendy J., Truth and Consequences: The Force of
Blackmail’s Case, Central, 141 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1741 (1993) . . .
1059
Gorman, Liz, Walking While Female: A Story of Sexual Assault in
Broad Daylight, Jezebel (July 13, 2012) . . . 379
Gouldin, Lauryn P., Redefining Reasonable Seizures, 93 Denv. U.L.
Rev. 53 (2015) . . . 872
Gramlich, John, The Gap Between the Number of Blacks and Whites
in Prison Is Shrinking, Pew Research Center (Apr. 30, 2019) . . .
2
Grann, David, Trial by Fire: Did Texas Execute an Innocent Man?,
New Yorker (Sept. 7, 2009) . . . 1167
Gray, David, Punishment as Suffering, 63 Vand. L. Rev. 1619 (2010)
. . . 1147
Green, Bruce A. & Bazelon, Lara, Restorative Justice from
Prosecutors’ Perspective, 88 Fordham L. Rev. 2287 (2020) . . .
65

--- Page 2276 ---
Green, Bruce A. & Roiphe, Rebecca, Rethinking Prosecutors’
Conflicts of Interest, 58 B.C. L. Rev. 463 (2017) . . . 93
Green, Stuart P., Castles and Carjackers: Proportionality and the
Use of Deadly Force in Defense of Dwellings and Vehicles, 1999
U. Ill. L. Rev. 1 . . . 864
Green, Stuart P., Criminalizing Sex (2020) . . . 425
Green, Stuart P., Looting, Law, and Lawlessness, 81 Tul. L. Rev.
1129 (2007) . . . 886
Green, Stuart P., Lying, Cheating, and Stealing: A Moral Theory of
White Collar Crime (2006) . . . 1037, 1049
Green, Stuart P., Thirteen Ways to Steal a Bicycle (2012) . . . 1059,
1061, 1076
Greenawalt, Alexander K.A., The Pluralism of International Criminal
Law, 86 Ind. L.J. 1063 (2011) . . . 923
Greenawalt, Kent, Punishment, in Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice
(1st ed. 1983). . . . 9
Greenawalt, Kent, Speech, Crime, and the Uses of Language (1989)
. . . 637
Griffin, Lisa Kern, Compelled Cooperation and the New Corporate
Criminal Procedure, 82 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 311 (2007) . . . 771
Gross, Hyman, A Theory of Criminal Justice (1979) . . . 235
Gross, Samuel R., Race and Death: The Judicial Evaluation of
Evidence of Discrimination in Capital Sentencing, 18 U.C. Davis
L. Rev. 1275 (1985) . . . 1199
Gross, Samuel R., The Risks of Death: Why Erroneous Convictions
Are Common in Capital Cases, 44 Buff. L. Rev. 469 (1996) . . .
1168
Gruber, Aya, A Distributive Theory of Criminal Law, 52 Wm. & Mary
L. Rev. 1 (2010) . . . 603
Gruber, Aya, The Feminist War on Crime (2020) . . . 453
Gruber, Aya, Leniency as a Miscarriage of Race and Gender Justice,
76 Alb. L. Rev. 1571 (2013) . . . 6
Gruber, Aya, Murder, Minority Victims, and Mercy, 85 U. Colo. L.
Rev. 129 (2014) . . . 489
Gruber, Aya, Not Affirmative Consent, 47 U. Pac. L. Rev. 683 (2016)
. . . 422

--- Page 2277 ---
Gruber, Aya, A Provocative Defense, 103 Cal. L. Rev. 273 (2015) . . .
489
p. 1324
p. 1325
Gruber, Aya, Race to Incarcerate: Punitive Impulse and the Bid to
Repeal Stand Your Ground, 68 U. Miami L. Rev. 961 (2014) . . .
812
Gruber, Aya, Rape, Feminism, and the War on Crime, 84 Wash. L.
Rev. 581 (2009) . . . 451
Gruner, Richard, To Let the Punishment Fit the Organization:
Sanctioning Corporate Offenders Through Corporate Probation,
16 Am. J. Crim. L. 1 (1988) . . . 785
Guiora, Amos N. & Dyer, Jessie E., Bystander Legislation: He Ain’t
Heavy, He’s My Brother, 29 Kan. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 291 (2020) . . .
267
Guthrie, Robert Gay, NAAUSA Letter to Senate Judiciary Committee
regarding Mandatory Minimum Sentencing, 26 Fed. Sent’g Rep.
233 (2014) . . . 124
Gwin, James S., Juror Sentiment on Just Punishment: Do the
Federal Sentencing Guidelines Reflect Community Values?, 4
Harv. L. & Pol’y Rev. 173 (2010) . . . 184
Hafemeister, Thomas L. & Stockey, Nicole A., Last Stand? The
Criminal Responsibility of War Veterans Returning from Iraq and
Afghanistan with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder, 85 Ind. L.J. 87
(2010) . . . 835, 979
Hale, Matthew, The History of the Pleas of the Crown (S. Emlyn ed.,
1778) . . . 447
Hale, Matthew, Pleas of the Crown (1736) . . . 12, 579
Hall, Jerome, General Principles of Criminal Law (1947) . . . 642
Hall, Jerome, General Principles of Criminal Law (2d ed. 1960) . . .
510
Hall, Jerome, Negligent Behavior Should Be Excluded from Penal
Liability, 63 Colo. L. Rev. 632 (1963) . . . 293
Hall, Jerome, Theft, Law and Society (2d ed. 1952) . . . 1037, 1038

--- Page 2278 ---
Hamilton, Melissa, Adjudicating Sex Crimes as Mental Disease, 33
Pace L. Rev. 536 (2013) . . . 979
Hampton, Jean, Correcting Harms versus Righting Wrongs: The
Goal of Retribution, 39 UCLA L. Rev. 1659 (1992) . . . 36, 45
Hanna, Cheryl, No Right to Choose: Mandated Victim Participation in
Domestic Violence Prosecutions, 109 Harv. L. Rev. 1849 (1996) .
. . 97, 827
Hans, Valerie P., What Difference Does a Jury Make?, 3 Yonsei L.J.
36 (2012) . . . 170
Hans, Valerie P. & Slater, Dan, John W. Hinckley, Jr. and the Insanity
Defense: The Public’s Verdict, 47 Pub. Opinion Q. 202 (1983) . . .
961
Hansen, TaLise, Note, Between a Rock and a Hard Place: The
Wyoming Supreme Court’s Approach to Arrestees Taking
Controlled Substances into Jails, 20 Wyo. L. Rev. 149 (2020) . . .
250
Hanson, Neil, The Custom of the Sea (2000) . . . 14, 890
Harcourt, Bernard E., The Collapse of the Harm Principle, 90 J.
Crim. L. & Criminology 109 (1999) . . . 49
Harcourt, Bernard E., Imagery and Adjudication in the Criminal Law:
The Relationship Between Images of Criminal Defendants and
Ideologies of Criminal Law in Southern Antebellum and Modern
Appellate Decisions, 61 Brook. L. Rev. 1165 (1995) . . . 618
Harcourt, Bernard E., On the New Abolitionism (Mar. 31, 2021) . . .
61
p. 1325
p. 1326
Harcourt, Bernard E., Reflecting on the Subject: A Critique of the
Social Influence Conception of Deterrence, the Broken Windows
Theory, and Order-Maintenance Policing New York Style, 97
Mich. L. Rev. 291 (1998) . . . 217, 230
Harper, Cecelia M., Note, How Do I Divorce My Gang?: Modifying
the Defense of Withdrawal for a Gang-Related Conspiracy, 50
Val. U. L. Rev. 765 (2016) . . . 741

--- Page 2279 ---
Harrell, Marylyn, Note, Serving Time for Falling in Love: How the
War on Drugs Operates to the Detriment of Women of
Circumstance in Poor Urban Communities of Color, 11 Geo. J.L.
& Mod. Critical Race Persp. 139 (2019) . . . 717
Harris, Angela P., Race and Essentialism in Feminist Legal Theory,
42 Stan. L. Rev. 581 (1990) . . . 385
Harris, George C., The Communitarian Function of the Criminal Jury
Trial and the Rights of the Accused, 74 Neb. L. Rev. 804 (1995) .
. . 169
Harris, Jasmine E., Sexual Consent and Disability, 93 N.Y.U. L. Rev.
480 (2018) . . . 426
Harris, Leslie Joan, An Empirical Study of Parental Responsibility
Laws, 2006 Utah L. Rev. 5 . . . 342
Harrison, Jessica, Idaho’s Abolition of the Insanity Defense — An
Ineffective, Costly, and Unconstitutional Eradication, 51 Idaho L.
Rev. 575 (2015) . . . 972
Harrison, Lindsay C., Appellate Discretion and Sentencing After
Booker, 62 U. Miami L. Rev. 1115 (2008) . . . 1136
Hart, Henry M., The Aims of the Criminal Law, 23 Law & Contemp.
Probs. 401 (1958) . . . 333, 347
Hart, H.L.A., Book Review, 74 Yale L.J. 1325 (1965) . . . 906
Hart, H.L.A., Law, Liberty and Morality (1963) . . . 236
Hart, H.L.A., The Morality of the Criminal Law (1965) . . . 602
Hart, H.L.A., Punishment and Responsibility (1968) . . . 43, 46, 284,
521, 1008
Hart, H.L.A. & Honoré, Anthony, Causation in the Law (2d ed. 1985)
. . . 236, 590, 600
Hasday, Jill Elaine, Contest and Consent: A Legal History of Marital
Rape, 88 Cal. L. Rev. 1373 (2000) . . . 449
Hasday, Jill Elaine, Protecting Them from Themselves: The
Persistence of Mutual Benefits Arguments for Sex and Race
Inequality, 84 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1464 (2009) . . . 449
Hasnas, John, Once More unto the Breach: The Inherent Liberalism
of the Criminal Law and Liability for Attempting the Impossible, 54
Hastings L.J. 1 (2002) . . . 650

--- Page 2280 ---
Hasnas, John, The Real Danger of the Responsibility Surplus, 17
Geo. J.L. & Pub. Pol’y 935 (2019) . . . 800
Hatcher, Gena Rachel, The Gendered Nature of the Battered
Woman Syndrome: Why Gender Neutrality Does Not Mean
Equality, 59 N.Y.U. Ann. Surv. Am. L. 21 (2003) . . . 826
Hawkins, W., Pleas of the Crown (6th ed. 1788) . . . 1037
Hayes, Kelly & Kaba, Mariame, The Sentencing of Larry Nassar Was
Not “Transformative Justice.” Here’s Why, The Appeal (Feb. 5,
2018) . . . 61, 64
Hazard, Geoffrey C., Jr., Criminal Justice System: Overview, in
Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice (S.H. Kadish ed., 1983) . . .
67
Held, Eliot M. & Fontaine, Reid Griffith, On the Boundaries of Culture
as an Affirmative Defense, 51 Ariz. L. Rev. 237 (2009) . . . 375
p. 1326
p. 1327
Hellman, Deborah, Prosecuting Doctors for Trusting Patients, 16
Geo. Mason L. Rev. 3 (2009) . . . 310
Hellman, Deborah, A Theory of Bribery, 38 Cardozo L. Rev. 1947
(2017) . . . 1082
Helm, Rebecca K., Reyna, Valerie F., Franz, Allison A., Limitations
on the Ability to Negotiate Justice: Attorney Perspectives on
Guilt, Innocence, and Legal Advice in the Current Plea System,
Psychol., Crime & L. 24, no. 9, 915 (2018) . . . 129
Hendin, Herbert & Foley, Kathleen, Physician-Assisted Suicide in
Oregon: A Medical Perspective, 106 Mich. L. Rev. 1613 (2008) . .
. 901
Herman, S. Gregory, One or More Wireless Networks Are Available:
Can ISPs Recover for Unauthorized Wi-Fi Use Under Cable
Television Piracy Laws?, 55 Cath. U. L. Rev. 1095 (2006) . . .
1066
Herrmann, Joachim, Bargaining Justice — A Bargain for German
Criminal Justice, 53 U. Pitt. L. Rev. 755 (1992) . . . 100

--- Page 2281 ---
Hessick, Carissa Byrne, Betterman v. Montana and the
Underenforcement of Constitutional Rights at Sentencing, 14
Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 323 (2016) . . . 1119
Hessick, Carissa Byrne, The Myth of Common Law Crimes, 105 Va.
L. Rev. 965 (2019) . . . 193, 194
Hessick, Carissa Byrne, Why Are Only Bad Acts Good Sentencing
Factors?, 88 B.U. L. Rev. 1109 (2008) . . . 1146
Hessick, Carissa Byrne & Hessick, F. Andrew, Appellate Review of
Sentencing Decisions, 60 Ala. L. Rev. 1 (2008) . . . 1136
Hessick, Carissa Byrne & Morse, Michael, Picking Prosecutors, 105
Iowa L. Rev. 1537 (2020) . . . 98
Hewitt, Jillian, Fifty Shades of Gray: Sentencing Trends in Major
White-Collar Cases, 125 Yale L.J. 1018 (2016) . . . 707
Heyman, Steven J., Foundations of the Duty to Rescue, 47 Vand. L.
Rev. 673 (1994) . . . 267
Hills, Blake R., Sell v. United States: Has the Split Between the
Lower Courts Created a Substantial Likelihood of Injustice?, 38
Quinnipiac L. Rev. 83 (2019) . . . 942
Hirshman, Linda, Reckoning (2019) . . . 379
Hoag, Alexis, Black on Black Representation, 96 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 5
(2021) . . . 73
Hoag, Alexis, Valuing Black Lives: A Case for Ending the Death
Penalty, 51 Colum. Hum. Rts. L. Rev. 983 (2020) . . . 1200
Hoeffel, Janet C., Death Beyond a Reasonable Doubt, 70 Ark. L.
Rev. 267 (2017) . . . 169
Hoernle, Tatjana, Social Expectations in the Criminal Law: The
“Reasonable Person” in a Comparative Perspective, 11 New
Crim. L. Rev. 1 (2008) . . . 521
Hofer, Paul J., Federal Sentencing After Booker, 48 Crime & Just.
137, 145 (2019) . . . 1149
Hofer, Paul J., Has Booker Restored Balance? A Look at Data on
Plea Bargaining and Sentencing, 23 Fed. Sent’g Rep. 326 (2011)
. . . 1149
Holder, Eric, Jr., Attorney Gen. of the United States, Memorandum
on Department Policy on Charging and Sentencing (May 19,
2010) . . . 1010, 1123

--- Page 2282 ---
Hollander-Blumoff, Rebecca, Crime, Punishment, and the
Psychology of Self-Control, 61 Emory L.J. 501 (2012) . . . 495,
959
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, Jr., The Common Law (1881) . . . 351, 540,
607, 1086
Home Office U.K., Report of the Committee on Homosexual
Offences and Prostitution (Wolfenden Report) (1957) . . . 49
p. 1327
p. 1328
Hopwood, Shon, How Atrocious Prison Conditions Make Us All Less
Safe, Brennan Center (Aug. 9, 2021) . . . 1101
Hopwood, Shon, Restoring the Historical Rule of Lenity as a Canon,
95 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 918 (2020) . . . 204
Horowitz, Irwin A., Chaos in the Courtroom Reconsidered: Emotional
Bias and Juror Nullification, 30 Law & Hum. Behav. 163 (2006). .
. . 174
Horowitz, Irwin A., Jury Nullification: An Empirical Perspective, 28 N.
Ill. U. L. Rev. 425 (2008) . . . 174
Howell, K. Babe, Prosecutorial Discretion and the Duty to Seek
Justice in an Overburdened Criminal Justice System, 27 Geo. J.
Legal Ethics 285 (2014) . . . 86
Hughes, Graham, Criminal Omissions, 67 Yale L.J. 590 (1958) . . .
274
Hughes, Graham, Criminal Responsibility, 16 Stan. L. Rev. 470
(1964) . . . 314
Huigens, Kyron, The Continuity of Justification Defenses, 2009 U. Ill.
L. Rev. 62 . . . 911
Huigens, Kyron, Homicide in Aretaic Terms, 6 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 97
(2002) . . . 527
Human Rights Watch, Why Sex Work Should Be Decriminalized
(Aug. 2019) . . . 50
Huq, Aziz Z., Racial Equity in Algorithmic Criminal Justice, 68 Duke
L.J. 1043 (2019) . . . 1133

--- Page 2283 ---
Hurd, Heidi M., Expressing Doubts About Expressivism, 2005 U. Chi
Legal F. 405 . . . 45
Hurd, Heidi M. & Moore, Michael S., Untying the Gordian Knot of
Mens Rea Requirements for Accomplices, 32 Soc. Phil. & Pol’y
161 (2016) . . . 662
Husak, Douglas, Is Drunk Driving a Serious Offense?, 23 Phil. &
Pub. Aff. 52 (1994) . . . 530
Husak, Douglas, The Price of Criminal Law Skepticism: Ten
Functions of the Criminal Law, 23 New Crim. L. Rev. 27 (2020) . .
. 45
Husak, Douglas, Rethinking the Act Requirement, 28 Cardozo L.
Rev. 2437 (2007) . . . 254
Husak, Douglas, Strict Liability, Justice, and Proportionality, in
Appraising Strict Liability (A.P. Simester ed., 2005) . . . 349
Husak, Douglas, Transferred Intent, 10 Notre Dame J.L. Ethics &
Pub. Pol’y 65 (1996) . . . 584
Husak, Douglas & Callender, Craig, Willful Ignorance, Knowledge,
and the “Equal Culpability” Thesis, 1994 Wis. L. Rev. 29 . . . 312
Husak, Douglas & McLaughlin, Brian P., Time Frames, Voluntary
Acts, and Strict Liability, 12 Law & Phil. 95 (1993) . . . 343
Husak, Douglas N. & Thomas, George C., III, Date Rape, Social
Convention and Reasonable Mistakes, 11 Law & Phil. 95 (1992) .
. . 424, 447
Hyman, David A., Rescue Without Law: An Empirical Perspective on
the Duty to Rescue, 84 Tex. L. Rev. 653 (2006) . . . 271, 272
Ijoma, Samone, False Promises of Protection: Black Women, Trans
People & the Struggle for Visibility as Victims of Intimate Partner
and Gendered Violence, 18 U. Md. L.J. Race, Religion, Gender &
Class 255 (2018) . . . 830
Innocence Project, Safeguarding Against Unreliable Jailhouse
Informant Testimony . . . 124
p. 1328
p. 1329

--- Page 2284 ---
Iontcheva, Jenia, Jury Sentencing as Democratic Practice, 89 Va. L.
Rev. 311 (2003) . . . 184
Isola, Ryan P., Note, Homelessness: The Status of the Status
Doctrine, 54 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1725 (2021) . . . 1000
Jackson, Brandi, No Ground on Which to Stand: Revise Stand Your
Ground Laws So Survivors of Domestic Violence Are No Longer
Incarcerated for Defending Their Lives, 30 Berkeley J. Gender L.
& Just. 154 (2015) . . . 856
Jackson, Robert H., Jackson, The Federal Prosecutor, 31 J. Crim. L.
Criminology & Police Sci. 3 (1940) . . . 101
Jacobs, James B., Drunk Driving: An American Dilemma (1989) . . .
530
Jacobs, Michelle S., Requiring Battered Women [to] Die: Murder
Liability for Mothers Under Failure to Protect Statutes, 88 J. Crim.
& Criminology 579 (1998) . . . 277
Jain, Eisha, Proportionality and Other Misdemeanor Myths, 98 B.U.
L. Rev. 953 (2018) . . . 113
Jeffries, John Calvin, Jr., Legality, Vagueness, and the Construction
of Penal Statutes, 71 Va. L. Rev. 189 (1985) . . . 230
Jeffries, John Calvin, Jr. & Stephan, Paul B., Defenses,
Presumptions and Burdens of Proof in the Criminal Law, 88 Yale
L.J. 1325 (1979) . . . 156, 322
Jimenez, Gustavo A., Note, Corporate Criminal Liability: Toward a
Compliance-Oriented Approach, 26 Ind. J. Global Legal Stud.
353 (2019) . . . 773
Johnson, Eric A., Cause-in-Fact After Burrage v. United States, 68
Fla. L. Rev. 1727 (2016) . . . 574
Johnson, Eric A., Does Criminal Law Matter? Thoughts on Dean v.
United States and Flores-Figueroa v. United States, 8 Ohio St.
L.J. 123 (2010) . . . 338
Johnson, Eric A., Knowledge, Risk, and Wrongdoing: The Model
Penal Code’s Forgotten Answer to the Riddle of Objective
Probability, 59 Buff. L. Rev. 507 (2011) . . . 527
Johnson, Eric A., Wrongful-Aspect Overdetermination: The Scope-
of-the-Risk Requirement in Drunk-Driving Homicide, 46 Conn. L.

--- Page 2285 ---
Rev. 601 (2013) . . . 578
Johnson, Margaret E., Changing Course in the Anti-Domestic
Violence Legal Movement: From Safety to Security, 60 Vill. L.
Rev. 145 (2015) . . . 827
Johnson, Phillip, Strict Liability: The Prevalent View, in Encyclopedia
of Crime and Justice (1983) . . . 348
Johnson, Phillip, The Unnecessary Crime of Conspiracy, 61 Cal. L.
Rev. 1137 (1973) . . . 759
Johnson, Robert, Death Work (1990) . . . 943
Johnson, Thea, Measuring the Creative Plea Bargain, 92 Ind. L.J.
901 (2017) . . . 113
Jordan, W. Chris, Conditioned to Kill: Volition, Combat Related
PTSD, and the Insanity Defense: Providing a Uniform Test for
Uniformed Trauma, 16 Rutgers J. L. & Pub. Pol’y 1 (2019) . . .
960
Jurrens, Robert Damion, Fool Me Once: U.S. v. Aleynikov and the
Theft of Trade Secrets Clarification Act of 2012, 28 Berkeley
Tech. L.J. 833 (2013) . . . 1073
Justice Department Guidance on Prosecutions of Corporations, 66
Crim. L. Rep. 189 (Dec. 8, 1999) . . . 771
p. 1329
p. 1330
Kaba, Mariame, Take No Prisoners, Vice (Oct. 5, 2015) . . . 1096
Kaba, Mariame, We Do This ‘Til We Free Us (2021) . . . 5, 55, 63
Kadish, M.R. & Kadish, S.H., On Justified Rule Departures by
Officials, 59 Calif. L. Rev. 905 (1971) . . . 172, 173
Kadish, Sanford H., Blame and Punishment: Essays in the Criminal
Law (1987) . . . 589, 700, 701, 849, 892
Kadish, Sanford H., Codifiers of the Criminal Law, 78 Colum. L. Rev.
1098 (1978) . . . 269
Kadish, Sanford H., The Criminal Law and the Luck of the Draw, 84
J. Crim. L. & Criminology 679 (1994) . . . 604
Kadish, Sanford H., Excusing Crime, 75 Cal. L. Rev. 257 (1987) . . .
905

--- Page 2286 ---
Kadish, Sanford H., Fifty Years of Criminal Law: An Opinionated
Review, 87 Cal. L. Rev. 943 (1999) . . . 1207, 1208
Kadish, Sanford H., Legal Norm and Discretion in the Police and
Sentencing Process, 75 Harv. L. Rev. 904 (1962) . . . 77
Kadish, Sanford H., Letting Patients Die: Legal and Moral
Reflections, 80 Cal. L. Rev. 857 (1992) . . . 903
Kadish, Sanford H., The Model Penal Code’s Historical Antecedents,
19 Rutgers L. Rev. 521 (1988) . . . 1207
Kadish, Sanford H., A Theory of Complicity, in Issues in
Contemporary Legal Philosophy: The Influence of H.L.A. Hart
(Ruth Gavison ed., 1987) . . . 651, 700
Kahan, Dan M., Culture, Cognition, and Consent: Who Perceives
What, and Why, in Acquaintance-Rape Cases, 158 U. Pa. L. Rev.
729 (2010) . . . 446
Kahan, Dan M., Ignorance of the Law Is an Excuse — But Only for
the Virtuous, 96 Mich. L. Rev. 127 (1997) . . . 353
Kahan, Dan M., Lenity and Federal Common Law Crimes, 1994 Sup.
Ct. Rev. 345 . . . 206
Kahan, Dan M., The Secret Ambition of Deterrence, 113 Harv. L.
Rev. 413 (1999) . . . 1165
Kahan, Dan M., What Do Alternative Sanctions Mean?, 63 U. Chi. L.
Rev. 591 (1996) . . . 1110
Kahan, Dan M., Hoffman, David, & Braman, Donald, Whose Eyes
Are You Going to Believe? Scott v. Harris and the Perils of
Cognitive Illiberalism, 122 Harv. L. Rev. 837 (2009) . . . 871
Kahan, Dan M. & Meares, Tracey L., The Coming Crisis of Criminal
Procedure, 86 Geo. L.J. 1153 (1998) . . . 232
Kalven, Harry & Zeisel, Hans, The American Jury (1966) . . . 162,
167, 170, 188
Kaplan, Margo, Rethinking HIV-Exposure Crimes, 87 Ind. L.J. 1517
(2012) . . . 606
Kaplan, Margo, Taking Pedophilia Seriously, 72 Wash. & Lee L. Rev.
75 (2015) . . . 979
Karakatsanis, Alec, The Punishment Bureaucracy: How to Think
About “Criminal Justice Reform,” 128 Yale L.J. F. 848, 851 (2019)
. . . 60

--- Page 2287 ---
Kassin, Saul M. & Wrightsman, Lawrence S., Coerced Confessions,
Judicial Instruction and Mock Juror Verdicts, 11 J. Applied Soc.
Psych. 489 (1981) . . . 145
Katyal, Neal Kumar, Conspiracy Theory, 112 Yale L.J. 1307 (2003) . .
. 713, 760
Katyal, Neal Kumar, Deterrence’s Difficulty, 95 Mich. L. Rev. 2385
(1997) . . . 20
Katzmann, Robert A., Judging Statutes (2014) . . . 205
p. 1330
p. 1331
Kaufman, Zachary D., Protectors of Predators or Prey: Bystanders
and Upstanders Amid Sexual Crimes, 92 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1317
(2019) . . . 273, 687
Kaye, Anders, Excuses in Exile, 48 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 437 (2015)
. . . 911
Keedy, Edwin R., Criminal Attempts at Common Law, 102 U. Pa. L.
Rev. 464 (1954) . . . 643, 645
Kelman, Mark, Interpretive Construction in the Substantive Criminal
Law, 33 Stan. L. Rev. 591 (1991) . . . 258
Kelman, Mark, Strict Liability: An Unorthodox View, in Encyclopedia
of Crime and Justice (1983) . . . 347
Kennedy, Deseriee A., Using the NFL as a Model? Considering Zero
Tolerance in the Workplace for Batterers, 45 U. Balt. L. Rev. 293
(2016) . . . 828
Kennedy, Joseph L.D., Long-Term Effectiveness of a Brief
Restorative Justice Intervention, 63 Int’l J. Offender Therapy &
Compar. Criminology 3 (2019) . . . 66
Kennedy, Randall L., McCleskey v. Kemp: Race, Capital
Punishment, and the Supreme Court, 101 Harv. L. Rev. 1388
(1988) . . . 1199
Kennedy, Randall L., Race, Crime, and the Law (1997) . . . 182,
1168
Kennedy, Randall, Say It Loud! (2021) . . . 58
Kenny, C.S., Outlines of Criminal Law (1902) . . . 286

--- Page 2288 ---
Kerr, Lisa, How the Prison Is a Black Box in Punishment Theory, 69
U. Toronto L.J. 85 (2019) . . . 1102
Kessler, Kimberly D., The Role of Luck in the Criminal Law, 142 U.
Pa. L. Rev. 2183 (1994) . . . 604
Kieschnick, Hannah, Note, A Cruel and Unusual Way to Regulate
the Homeless: Extending the Status Crimes Doctrine to Anti-
Homeless Ordinances, 70 Stan. L. Rev. 1569 (2018) . . . 1000
Kiesel, Diane, Who Saw This Happen?, 69 A.B.A. J. 1208 (1983) . . .
265
Kilmer, Beau & Midgette, Greg, Criminal Deterrence: Evidence from
an Individual-Level Analysis of 24/7 Sobriety, 39 J. Pol’y Analysis
& Mgmt. 801 (2020) . . . 930
Kim, Joy H., Note, The Case Against Criminalizing Homelessness:
Functional Barriers to Shelters and Homeless Individuals’ Lack of
Choice, 95 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1150 (2020) . . . 1000
Kimpel, Amy F., Using Laws Designed to Protect as a Weapon:
Prosecuting Minors Under Child Pornography Laws, 34 N.Y.U.
Rev. L. & Soc. Change 299 (2010) . . . 698
King, Nancy J., Duncan v. Louisiana: How Bigotry in the Bayou Led
to Federal Regulation of State Juries, in Criminal Procedure
Stories (C. Steiker ed., 2006) . . . 163
King, Nancy J., How Different Is Death? Jury Sentencing in Capital
and Non-Capital Cases Compared, 2 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 195
(2004) . . . 185
King, Nancy J., Silencing Nullification Advocacy Inside and Outside
the Courtroom, 65 U. Chi. L. Rev. 433 (1998) . . . 179, 180
King, Nancy J. & Noble, Roosevelt L., Felony Jury Sentencing in
Practice: A Three-State Study, 57 Vand. L. Rev. 885 (2004) . . .
184
King, Nancy J. & Noble, Rosevelt L., Jury Sentencing in Non-Capital
Cases: Comparing Severity and Variance with Judicial Sentences
in Two States, 2 J. Empirical L. Stud. 331 (2005) . . . 184
p. 1331
p. 1332

--- Page 2289 ---
King, Nancy J. & Wright, Ronald F., The Invisible Revolution in Plea
Bargaining: Managerial Judging and Judicial Participation in
Negotiations, 95 Tex. L. Rev. 325 (2016) . . . 116
King-Ries, Andrew, Arbitrary and Godlike Determinations: Insanity,
Neuroscience, and Social Control in Montana, 76 Mont. L. Rev.
281 (2015) . . . 960
Kinports, Kit, The Myth of Battered Woman Syndrome, 24 Temp. Pol.
& Civ. Rts. L. Rev. 313 (2015) . . . 826
Kinports, Kit, Rosemond, Mens Rea, and the Elements of Complicity,
52 San Diego L. Rev. 133 (2015) . . . 677
Kirschner, Stuart M., The Defense of Extreme Emotional
Disturbance: A Qualitative Analysis of Cases in New York County,
10 Psychol. Pub. Pol’y & L. 102 (2004) . . . 500
Kitchens, Caroline, It’s Time to End “Rape Culture” Hysteria, Time
(Mar. 20, 2014) . . . 380
Klein, Dora W., Curioser and Curioser: Involuntary Medications and
Incompetent Criminal Defendants After Sell v. United States, 13
Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 897 (2005) . . . 942
Klein, Dora W., Is Felony Murder the New Depraved Heart Murder?
Considering the Appropriate Punishment for Drunken Drivers
Who Kill, 67 S.C. L. Rev. 1 (2015–2016) . . . 529
Klein, Dora W., Rehabilitating Mental Disorder Evidence After Clark
v. Arizona: Of Burdens, Presumptions, and the Right to Raise
Reasonable Doubt, 60 Case W. Res. L. Rev. 645 (2010) . . . 988
Klein, Lawrence R., The Deterrent Effect of Capital Punishment, in
Deterrence and Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects of Criminal
Sanctions on Crime Rates (Alfred Blumstein ed., 1978) . . . 1164
Klein, Richard, An Analysis of Thirty-Five Years of Rape Reform, 41
Akron L. Rev. 981 (2008) . . . 450
Kleinfeld, Joshua, Reconstructivism: The Place of Criminal Law in
Ethical Life, 129 Harv. L. Rev. 1486 (2016) . . . 45
Kleinig, John, Good Samaritanism, 5 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 382 (1976) . . .
268
Kolber, Adam J., The Subjective Experience of Punishment, 109
Colum. L. Rev. 182 (2009) . . . 1147

--- Page 2290 ---
Kotch, Seth & Mosteller, Robert P., The Racial Justice Act and the
Long Struggle with Race and the Death Penalty in North
Carolina, 88 N.C. L. Rev. 2031 (2010). . . . 1203
Kramer, Karen M., Rule by Myth: The Social and Legal Dynamics
Governing Alcohol-Related Acquaintance Rapes, 47 Stan. L.
Rev. 115 (1994) . . . 426
Krause, Joan H., Distorted Reflections of Battered Women Who Kill:
A Response to Professor Dressler, 4 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 555
(2007) . . . 846
Krause, Lindsey E., One Size Does Not Fit All: The Need for a
Complete Abolition of Mandatory Minimum Sentences for
Juveniles in Response to Roper, Graham, and Miller, 33 Law &
Ineq. 481 (2015) . . . 1161
Krebs, Christopher, Campus Climate Survey Validation Study: Final
Technical Report (U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice
Statistics, 2016) . . . 383, 384
Kutz, Christopher, Complicity: Ethics and Law for a Collective Age
(2002) . . . 679
p. 1332
p. 1333
La Fond, John Q., The Case for Liberalizing the Use of Deadly Force
in Self-Defense, 6 U. Puget Sound L. Rev. 237 (1983) . . . 847
Lacey, Nicola, Socializing the Subject of Criminal Law? Criminal
Responsibility and the Purposes of Criminalization, 99 Marq. L.
Rev. 541 (2016) . . . 1008
LaFave, Wayne R., Criminal Law (3d ed. 2000) . . . 915
LaFave, Wayne R., Criminal Law (4th ed. 2003) . . . 531, 622
LaFave, Wayne R., Criminal Law (5th ed. 2010) . . . 160
LaFave, Wayne R., The Prosecutor’s Discretion in the United States,
18 Am. J. Comp. L. 532 (1970) . . . 85–86
LaFave, Wayne R., Substantive Criminal Law (2d ed. 2015) . . . 541
LaFave, Wayne R. & Scott, Austin W., Criminal Law (2d ed. 1986) . .
. 326

--- Page 2291 ---
LaFave, Wayne R. & Scott, Austin W., Handbook on Criminal Law
(1972) . . . 444, 681
LaFond, John Q. & Durham, Mary L., Back to the Asylum (1992) . . .
962
Lam, Bourree, Why Is Utah the First State to Have a White Collar
Crime Registry?, The Atlantic (Mar. 29, 2016) . . . 1113
Lambie, Ian & Randell, Isabel, The Impact of Incarceration on
Juvenile Offenders, 33 Clinical Psych. Rev. 448 (2013) . . . 1120
Lane, Charles, The Death Penalty and Racism, The American
Interest (Nov.-Dec. 2010) . . . 1200
Langer, Máximo, Rethinking Plea Bargaining: The Practice and
Reform of Prosecutorial Adjudication in American Criminal
Procedure, 33 Am. J. Crim. L. 223 (2006) . . . 135
Lanni, Adriaan, Taking Restorative Justice Seriously, 69 Buff. L. Rev.
635 (2021) . . . 64, 65, 66, 98, 1114
Laquer, Hannah S., Incapacitation: Penal Policy and the Lessons of
Recent Experience, 24 Berkeley J. Crim. L. 48 (2019) . . . 31
Larkin, Paul, The Folly of Requiring Complete Knowledge of the
Criminal Law, 12 Liberty U. L. Rev. 335 (2018) . . . 363
Larson, Jeff, Mattu, Surya, Kirchner, Lauren & Angwin, Julia, How
We Analyzed the COMPAS Recidivism Algorithm, ProPublica
(May 23, 2016) . . . 30
Lave, Tamara Rice, A Critical Look at How Top Colleges and
Universities Are Adjudicating Rape, 71 U. Miami L. Rev. 377
(2017) . . . 452
Lave, Tamara Rice, Ready, Fire, Aim: How Universities Are Failing
the Constitution in Sexual Assault Cases, 48 Ariz. St. L.J. 637
(2016) . . . 452
Lave, Tamara Rice & Zimring, Franklin E., Assessing the Real Risk
of Sexually Violent Predators: Doctor Padilla’s Dangerous Data,
55 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 705 (2018) . . . 1103
Law Commission (U.K.), Consultation Paper No. 122 (1992) . . . 912
Law Commission (U.K.), Report No. 290, Partial Defences to Murder
(2004) . . . 490
Le, Loan K. & Moua, Maitria, Civilian Oversight and Developments in
Less Lethal Technologies: Weighing Risks and Prioritizing

--- Page 2292 ---
Accountability in Domestic Law Enforcement, 14 Seattle J. Soc.
Just. 101 (2015) . . . 874
Leavens, Arthur, A Causation Approach to Criminal Omissions, 78
Cal. L. Rev. 547 (1988) . . . 274
p. 1333
p. 1334
Lederman, Eli, Models for Imposing Corporate Criminal Liability:
From Adaptation and Imitation Toward Aggregation and the
Search for Self-Identity, 4 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 641 (2000) . . . 781
Lee, Cynthia, The Gay Panic Defense, 42 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 471
(2008) . . . 493
Lee, Cynthia, Race and Self-Defense: Toward a Normative
Conception of Reasonableness, 81 Minn. L. Rev. 367 (1996) . . .
814
Lee, Cynthia, The Trans Panic Defense Revisited, 57 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 1411 (2020) . . . 493
Lee, Cynthia & Kwan, Peter, The Trans Panic Defense: Masculinity,
Heteronormativity, and the Murder of Transgender Women, 66
Hastings L.J. 77 (2014) . . . 492
Lee, Evan Tsen, Cancelling Crime, 30 Conn. L. Rev. 117 (1997) . . .
739
Lee, Jennifer J. & Smith, Annie, Regulating Wage Theft, 94 Wash. L.
Rev. 759 (2019) . . . 1036
Lee, Youngjae, Desert and the Eighth Amendment, 11 U. Pa. J.
Const. L. 101 (2008) . . . 243
Lee, Youngjae, International Consensus as Persuasive Authority in
the Eighth Amendment, 156 U. Pa. L. Rev. 63 (2007) . . . 1190
Lee, Youngjae, Recidivism as Omission: A Relational Account, 87
Tex. L. Rev. 571 (2009) . . . 245, 1156
Leib, Ethan J., A Comparison of Criminal Jury Trial Rules in
Democratic Countries, 5 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 629 (2008) . . . 170
Leipold, Andrew D., The Dangers of Race-Based Jury Nullification,
44 UCLA L. Rev. 109 (1996) . . . 183

--- Page 2293 ---
Leipold, Andrew D., Race-Based Jury Nullification: Rebuttal (Part A),
30 J. Marshall L. Rev. 923 (1997) . . . 181
Leipold, Andrew D., Rethinking Jury Nullification, 82 Va. L. Rev. 253
(1996) . . . 177, 187
Lemann, Nicholas, A Call for Help: What the Kitty Genovese Story
Really Means, New Yorker (Mar. 10, 2014) . . . 266
Letessa, Edward J., What Works in Correctional Intervention, 23 S.
Ill. U. L.J. 415 (1999) . . . 26
Levenson, Laurie L., Good Faith Defenses: Reshaping Strict Liability
Crimes, 78 Cornell L. Rev. 401 (1993) . . . 346
Levin, Benjamin, Mens Rea Reform and Its Discontents, 109 J. Crim.
L. & Criminology 491 (2019) . . . 365
Levin, Benjamin, Wage Theft Criminalization, 54 U.C. Davis L. Rev.
1429 (2021) . . . 1037
Levine, Kate, Who Shouldn’t Prosecute the Police, 101 Iowa L. Rev.
1447 (2016) . . . 93
Levinson, Daryl J., Collective Sanctions, 56 Stan. L. Rev. 345 (2003)
. . . 713
Levinson, Justin D., Devaluing Death: An Empirical Study of Implicit
Racial Bias on Jury-Eligible Citizens in Six Death Penalty States,
89 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 513 (2014) . . . 1201
Levinson, Justin D., Smith, Robert J. & Hioki, Koichi, Race and
Retribution: An Empirical Study of Implicit Bias and Punishment
in America, 53 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 839 (2019) . . . 38
Levy, Ariel, Trial by Twitter, The New Yorker (Aug. 5, 2013) . . . 267
Levy, Ken, Does Situationism Excuse? The Implications of
Situationism for Moral Responsibility and Criminal Responsibility,
68 Ark. L. Rev. 731 (2015) . . . 960
p. 1334
p. 1335
Levy, Ken, It’s Not Too Difficult: A Plea to Resurrect the Impossibility
Defense, 45 N.M. L. Rev. 225 (2014) . . . 649
Levy, Ken, Killing, Letting Die, and the Case for Mildly Punishing Bad
Samaritanism, 44 Ga. L. Rev. 607 (2010) . . . 271

--- Page 2294 ---
Lieberman, Joel D. & Sales, Bruce D., What Social Science Teaches
Us About the Jury Instruction Process, 3 Psychol. Pub. Pol’y & L.
589 (1997) . . . 145
Lilith, Ryiah, Reconsidering the Abuse That Dare Not Speak Its
Name: A Criticism of Recent Legal Scholarship Regarding Same-
Gender Domestic Violence, 7 Mich. J. Gender & L. 181 (2001) . .
. 829
Lindgren, James, Unraveling the Paradox of Blackmail, 84 Colum. L.
Rev. 670 (1984) . . . 1058
Litman, Harry, Pretextual Prosecution, 92 Geo. L.J. 1135 (2004) . . .
108
Littleton, Heather, Sexual Assault Victims’ Acknowledgment Status
and Revictimization Risk, 33 Psychol. Women Q. 34 (2009) . . .
383
Litton, Paul, The Mistaken Quest for a Control Test: For a Rationality
Standard of Sanity, in the Insanity Defense: Multidisciplinary
Views on Its History, Trends, and Controversies (Mark D. White
ed., 2017) . . . 960
Livermore, Joseph M., Lawyer Extortion, 20 Ariz. L. Rev. 403 (1978)
. . . 1052
Livingston, Debra, Police Discretion and the Quality of Life in Public
Spaces, 97 Colum. L. Rev. 551 (1997) . . . 230
Logan, Wayne A., Challenging the Punitiveness of “New Generation”
SORN Laws, 21 New Crim. L. Rev. 426 (2018) . . . 1104
Long, Lance N. & Hamilton, Ted, The Climate Necessity Defense:
Proof and Judicial Error in Climate Protest Cases, 38 Stan. Envtl.
L.J. 57 (2018) . . . 889
Love, Margaret Colgate, Reinvigorating the Federal Pardon Process:
What the President Can Learn from the States, 9 U. St. Thomas
L.J. 730 (2012) . . . 1150
Lovell, Jeremy, Ferry Safety Still an Issue 10 Years After Herald, J.
Com. (Mar. 13, 1997) . . . 890
Luban, David, Contrived Ignorance, 87 Geo. L.J. 957 (1999) . . . 311
Luna, Erik, Criminal Justice and the Public Imagination, 7 Ohio St. J.
Crim. L. 71 (2009) . . . 244

--- Page 2295 ---
Luna, Erik, Gridland: An Allegorical Critique of Federal Sentencing,
96 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 25 (2005) . . . 1133
Luna, Erik, Spoiled Rotten Social Background, 2 Ala. Civ. Rts. & Civ.
Lib. L. Rev. 23 (2011) . . . 1007
Luna, Erik & Wade, Marianne, Prosecutors as Judges, 67 Wash. &
Lee L. Rev. 1413 (2010) . . . 100
Lustberg, Lawrence S. & Jacobi, John V., The Battered Woman as a
Reasonable Person: A Critique of the Appellate Division Decision
in State v. McClain, 22 Seton Hall L. Rev. 365 (1992) . . . 504
Luzon, Golan, The Practice of Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide
Meets the Concept of Legalization, 13 Crim. L. & Phil. 329 (2019)
. . . 901
Lvovsky, Anna, The Judicial Presumption of Police Expertise, 130
Harv. L. Rev. 1995 (2017) . . . 228
Lynch, David, The Impropriety of Plea Agreements: A Tale of Two
Counties, 19 Law & Soc. Inquiry 115 (1994) . . . 132
Lynch, Gerard E., Our Administrative System of Criminal Justice, 66
Fordham L. Rev. 2117 (1998) . . . 135
p. 1335
p. 1336
Lynch, James P., A Comparison of Prison Use in England, Canada,
and West Germany, 79 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 180 (1999) . . .
3
Lynch, Mona, Booker Circumvention: Adjudication Strategies in the
Advisory Sentencing Guidelines Era, 43 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc.
Change 59 (2019) . . . 1136
Lyons, Edward C., Slaughter of the Innocents: Justification, Excuse
and the Principle of Double Effect, 18 Berkeley J. Crim. L. 231
(2013) . . . 893
Mabatah, Jacqueline, Note, Blaming the Victim: The Intersections of
Race, Domestic Violence, and Child Neglect Laws, 8 Geo. J.L. &
Mod. Critical Race Persp. 355 (2016) . . . 691
Macaulay, T.B., Notes on the Indian Penal Code (1867) . . . 269

--- Page 2296 ---
Macaulay, T.B., A Penal Code Prepared by the Indian Law
Commissioners (1838) . . . 537
MacDonald, John, Fagan, Jeffrey & Geller, Amanda, The Effects of
Local Police Surges on Crime and Arrests in New York City
(2015) . . . 232
MacDougall, Mark J. & Brodie, Katherine Deming, Strange Justice in
Indian Country, Nat’l L.J. (Sept. 28, 2009) . . . 1146
Mackay, Irene, The Sleepwalker Is Not Insane, 55 Mod. L. Rev. 714
(1992) . . . 982
Mackie, John L., Retribution: A Test Case for Ethical Objectivity, in
Philosophy of Law (Joel Feinberg & Hyman Gross eds., 1991) . .
. 36
MacKinnon, Catharine A., Feminism, Marxism, Method, and the
State: Toward a Feminist Jurisprudence, 8 Signs 635 (1983) . . .
447
MacKinnon, Catharine A., Rape Redefined, 10 Harv. L. & Pol’y Rev.
431 (2016) . . . 385, 429
Madison, J., The Federalist No. 44 (C. Rossiter ed., 1961) . . . 215,
224
Maguigan, Holly, Battered Women and Self-Defense: Myths and
Misconceptions in Current Reform Proposals, 140 U. Pa. L. Rev.
379 (1991) . . . 842
Maguigan, Holly, Cultural Evidence and Male Violence: Are Feminist
and Multicultural Reformers on a Collision Course in Criminal
Courts?, 70 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 36 (1995) . . . 375
Mair, George, What Works — Nothing or Everything?, Home Office
[Great Britain], Research Bulletin #30 (1991) . . . 25
Malcolm, John G., Morally Innocent, Legally Guilty: The Case for
Mens Rea Reform, 18 Fed. Soc’y Rev. 40 (2017) . . . 365
Mannheimer, Michael J. Zydney, Not the Crime But the Cover-Up: A
Deterrence-Based Rationale for the Premeditation-Deliberation
Formula, 86 Ind. L.J. 879 (2011) . . . 478
Marcus, Paul, The Crime of Conspiracy Thrives in Decisions of the
United States Supreme Court, 64 U. Kan. L. Rev. 373 (2016) . . .
703

--- Page 2297 ---
Marcus, Paul, Criminal Conspiracy Law: Time to Turn Back from an
Ever Expanding, Ever More Troubling Area, 1 Wm. & Mary Bill
Rts. J. 1 (1992) . . . 704
Marder, Nancy S., The Myth of the Nullifying Jury, 93 Nw. U. L. Rev.
877 (1999) . . . 179, 181, 183
Margeson, William A., Bringing the Gavel Down on Stops and Frisks:
The Equitable Regulation of Police Power, 51 Am. Crim. L. Rev.
739 (2014) . . . 231
Markel, Dan, Are Shaming Punishments Beautifully Retributive?
Retributivism and the Implications for the Alternative Sanctions
Debate, 54 Vand. L. Rev. 2157 (2001) . . . 1108
p. 1336
p. 1337
Markel, Dan, State, Be Not Proud: A Retributivist Defense of the
Commutation of Death Row and the Abolition of the Death
Penalty, 40 Harv. C.R.-C.L. L. Rev. 407 (2005) . . . 34
Markel, Dan, What Might Retributive Justice Be?, in Retributivism:
Essays on Theory and Policy (Mark D. White ed., 2011) . . . 45
Markel, Dan, Collins, Jennifer M., & Lieb, Ethan J., Privilege or
Punish (2009) . . . 275
Markel, Dan & Flanders, Chad, Bentham on Stilts: The Bare
Relevance of Subjectivity to Retributive Justice, 98 Cal. L. Rev.
907 (2010) . . . 1147
Markoff, Gabriel, Arthur Andersen and the Myth of the Corporate
Death Penalty: Corporate Criminal Convictions in the Twenty-
First Century, 15 U. Pa. J. Bus. L. 797 (2013) . . . 787
Markovitz, Jonathan, “A Spectacle of Slavery Unwilling to Die”:
Curbing Reliance on Racial Stereotyping in Self-Defense Cases,
5 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 873 (2015) . . . 814
Maroney, Terry A., Emotional Competence, “Rational
Understanding,” and the Criminal Defendant, 43 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 1375 (2006) . . . 941
Marouf, Fatma, Assumed Sane, 101 Cornell L. Rev. Online 25
(2016) . . . 946

--- Page 2298 ---
Marsh, Jeanne C., Geist, Alison, & Caplan, Nathan, Rape and the
Limits of Law Reform (1982) . . . 450
Martinson, Robert, New Findings, New Views: A Note of Caution
Regarding Sentencing Reform, 7 Hofstra L. Rev. 243 (1979) . . .
25
Martinson, Robert, What Works? — Questions and Answers About
Prison Reform, 36 Pub. Int. 22 (1974) . . . 24
Marzán, César F. Rosado, Wage Theft as Crime: An Institutional
View, 20 J.L. in Soc’y 300 (2020) . . . 1036
Massaro, Toni M., Shame, Culture, and American Criminal Law, 89
Mich. L. Rev. 1880 (1991) . . . 1110, 1113
Mayson, Sandra G., Dangerous Defendants, 127 Yale L.J. 490
(2018) . . . 959
Mayson, Sandra G. & Stevenson, Megan T., Misdemeanors by the
Numbers, 61 B.C. L. Rev. 971 (2020) . . . 67
McAnaney, Kathleen G., Note, From Imprudence to Crime: Anti-
Stalking Laws, 68 Notre Dame L. Rev. 819 (1993) . . . 623
McCaleb, Robert B., Note, Rejustifying Retributive Punishment on
Utilitarian Grounds in Light of Neuroscientific Discoveries More
Than Philosophical Calisthenics!, 63 Clev. St. L. Rev. 515 (2015)
. . . 1007
McCord, David, Judging the Effectiveness of the Supreme Court’s
Death Penalty Jurisprudence According to the Court’s Own
Goals: Mild Success or Major Disaster?, 24 Fla. St. U. L. Rev.
545 (1997) . . . 1205
McCord, David & Lyons, Sandra K., Moral Reasoning and the
Criminal Law: The Example of Self-Defense, 30 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 97 (1992) . . . 841
McGinley, Hugh & Pasewark, Richard, National Survey of the
Frequency and Success of the Insanity Plea and Alternate Pleas,
13 J. Psychiatry & L. 1 (Spring 1989) . . . 963
McGreevy, Steadman & Callahan, The Negligible Effects of
California’s 1982 Reform of the Insanity Defense Test, 148 Am. J.
Psychiatry 744 (1991) . . . 963
McIntyre, Alison, Doing Away with Double Effect, 111 Ethics 219
(2001) . . . 894

--- Page 2299 ---
p. 1337
p. 1338
McKenna, Brendan J., Automatism: A Complete Yet Imperfect
Defense, 227 Mil. L. Rev. 46 (2019) . . . 257
McKinley, Elizabeth, The Importance of Drug Quantity in Federal
Sentencing: How Circuit Courts Should Determine the Mandatory
Minimum Sentence for Conspiracy to Distribute Controlled
Substances in Light of United States v. Stoddard, 87 U. Cin. L.
Rev. 1145 (2019) . . . 717
McLeod, Allegra M., Decarceration Courts: Possibilities and Perils of
a Shifting Criminal Law, 100 Geo. L.J. 1587 (2012) . . . 24
McLeod, Allegra M., Envisioning Abolition Democracy, 132 Harv. L.
Rev. 1613 (2019) . . . 57, 61, 64, 1011
Meares, Tracey L. & Kahan, Dan M., The Wages of Antiquated
Procedural Thinking: A Critique of Chicago v. Morales, 1998 U.
Chi. Legal F. 197 . . . 232
Mears, Daniel P., Cochran, Joshua C., Bales, William D. & Bhati,
Avinash S., Recidivism and Time Served in Prison, 106 J. Crim.
L. & Criminology 83 (2016). . . . 1120
Megale, Elizabeth, A Call for Change: A Contextual-Configurative
Analysis of Florida’s “Stand Your Ground” Laws, 68 U. Miami L.
Rev. 1051 (2014) . . . 865
Meinero, Seth Adam, A Capital of Conspiracies: Prosecuting Violent-
Crime Conspiracies in District of Columbia Superior Court, 61
U.S. Att’ys Bull. 26 (2013) . . . 713
Meltsner, Michael, Cruel and Unusual: The Supreme Court and
Capital Punishment (1973) . . . 1170
Menlow, Michael & McCall, Alexander, eds., The Duty to Rescue
(1993) . . . 267
Menninger, Karl, The Crime of Punishment 79 (1968) . . . 54
Messinger, Adam, LGBTQ Intimate Partner Violence: Lessons for
Policy, Practice, and Research (2017) . . . 829
Meszaros, Jozsef, Achieving Peace of Mind: The Benefits of
Neurobiological Evidence for Battered Women Defendants, 23
Yale J.L. & Feminism 117 (2011) . . . 834

--- Page 2300 ---
Michael, Jerome & Wechsler, Herbert, A Rationale of the Law of
Homicide, 37 Colum. L. Rev. 1261 (1937) . . . 487
Michaels, Alan C., Acceptance: The Missing Mental State, 71 S. Cal.
L. Rev. 953 (1998) . . . 309
Michaels, Alan C., Defining Unintended Murder, 85 Colum. L. Rev.
786 (1985) . . . 527
Michaels, Alan C., Fastow and Arthur Andersen: Some Reflections
on Corporate Criminality, Victim Status, and Retribution, 1 Ohio
St. J. Crim. L. 551 (2004) . . . 771
Michaels, Andrew, A Decent Proposal: Exempting Eighteen- to
Twenty-Year-Olds from the Death Penalty, 40 N.Y.U. Rev. L. &
Soc. Change 139 (2016) . . . 1191
Miles, Thomas J., Dupes and Losers in Mail Fraud, 77 U. Chi. L.
Rev. 1111 (2010) . . . 1077
Milhizer, Eugene R., Group Status and Criminal Defenses, 71 Mo. L.
Rev. 547 (2006) . . . 819
Milhizer, Eugene R., Justification and Excuse: What They Were,
What They Are, and What They Ought to Be, 78 St. John’s L.
Rev. 725 (2004) . . . 904
Mill, John Stuart, On Liberty, in Utilitarianism, Liberty and
Representative Government (Everyman’s Library Edition, 1950) .
. . 49
p. 1338
p. 1339
Miller, Emily L. (Comment) (Wo)manslaughter: Voluntary
Manslaughter, Gender, and the Model Penal Code, 50 Emory L.J.
665 (2000) . . . 489
Miller, H., McDonald, W., & Cramer, J., Plea Bargaining in the United
States (1978) . . . 115
Miller Midura, Janna M. & Bleakley, Elizabeth, Restorative Justice:
An Overview, Hum. Rts. (Ill. State Bar Assn., Springfield, Ill. Dec.
2019) . . . 64
Mills, Linda G., Killing Her Softly: Intimate Abuse and the Violence of
State Intervention, 113 Harv. L. Rev. 550 (1999) . . . 97

--- Page 2301 ---
Minnesota Sentencing Guidelines Commission, 2021 Report to the
Legislature (2021) . . . 1136
Mison, Robert B., Comment, Homophobia in Manslaughter: The
Homosexual Advance as Insufficient Provocation, 80 Cal. L. Rev.
133 (1992) . . . 492
Mitchell, Kelly Lyn, State Sentencing Guidelines: A Garden Full of
Variety, Fed. Probation (Sept. 2017) . . . 1128
Moley, Raymond, The Vanishing Jury, 2 S. Cal. L. Rev. 97 (1928) . . .
169
Montana, Patricia Grande, Watch or Report? Livestream or Help?
Good Samaritan Laws Revisited: The Need to Create a Duty to
Report, 66 Clev. St. L. Rev. 533 (2018) . . . 268
Moohr, Geraldine Scott, An Enron Lesson: The Modest Role of
Criminal Law in Preventing Corporate Crime, 55 Fla. L. Rev. 937
(2003) . . . 801
Moohr, Geraldine Scott, Federal Criminal Fraud and the
Development of Intangible Property Rights in Information, 2000
U. Ill. L. Rev. 683 . . . 1072
Moohr, Geraldine Scott, Of Bad Apples and Bad Trees: Considering
Fault-Based Liability for the Complicit Corporation, 44 Am. Crim.
L. Rev. 1343 (2007) . . . 782
Moore, Michael S., Act and Crime (1993) . . . 254, 258, 580
Moore, Michael S., Causation and Responsibility, 16 Soc. Phil. &
Pol’y 1 (1999) . . . 581
Moore, Michael S., Causation and Responsibility (2009) . . . 581
Moore, Michael S., Foreseeing Harm Opaquely, in Action and Value
in Criminal Law (S. Shute eds., 1993) . . . 578
Moore, Michael S., The Independent Moral Significance of
Wrongdoing, 1 J. Contemp. Legal Issues 1 (1994) . . . 604
Moore, Michael S., Law and Psychiatry (1984) . . . 23, 47
Moore, Michael S., The Moral Worth of Retribution, in Responsibility,
Character and Emotions (F. Schoeman ed., 1987) . . . 33
Moran, Richard, Knowing Right from Wrong (1981) . . . 949
Morgan, Jamelia N., Rethinking Disorderly Conduct, 109 Calif. L.
Rev. 5 (2021) . . . 623

--- Page 2302 ---
Moriarty, Daniel G., Extending the Defense of Renunciation, 62
Temp. L. Rev. 1 (1989) . . . 616
Morris, Grant H. & Haroun, Ansar, “God Told Me to Kill”: Religion or
Delusion?, 38 San Diego L. Rev. 973 (2001) . . . 976
Morris, Herbert, On Guilt and Innocence (1976) . . . 35
Morris, Norval, Psychiatry and the Dangerous Criminal, 41 S. Cal. L.
Rev. 514 (1968) . . . 970
Morris, Norval, Somnambulistic Homicide: Ghosts, Spiders, and
North Koreans, 5 Res Judicatae 29 (1951) . . . 255
p. 1339
p. 1340
Morrison, Steven R., Defending Vicarious Felony Murder, 47 Tex.
Tech L. Rev. 129 (2014) . . . 559
Morrison, Steven R., Relational Criminal Liability, 44 Fla. St. U. L.
Rev. 636 (2017) . . . 713
Morrison, Trevor W., Fair Warning and Retroactive Judicial
Expansion of Federal Criminal Statutes, 74 S. Cal. L. Rev. 455
(2001) . . . 370
Morse, Stephen J., Excusing and the New Excuse Defenses: A
Legal and Conceptual Review, 23 Crime & Just. 329 (1998) . . .
980
Morse, Stephen J., Fear of Danger, Flight from Culpability, 4
Psychol. Pub. Pol’y & L. 250 (1998) . . . 932
Morse, Stephen J., Internal and External Challenges to Culpability,
53 Ariz. St. L.J. 2 (2021) . . . 933, 971, 988
Morse, Stephen J., Mental Disorder and Criminal Law, 101 J. Crim.
L. & Criminology 885 (2011) . . . 941, 959, 988, 1002
Morse, Stephen J., The “New Syndrome Excuse” Syndrome, 14
Crim. Just. Ethics 3 (Winter/Spring 1995) . . . 831
Morse, Stephen J., Preventive Detention: Mental Disorder and
Criminal Law, 101 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 885 (2011) . . . 947,
975
Morse, Stephen J., Rationality and Responsibility, 74 S. Cal. L. Rev.
251 (2000) . . . 960

--- Page 2303 ---
Morse, Stephen J., Severe Environmental Deprivation (aka RSB): A
Tragedy, Not a Defense, 2 Ala. Civ. Rts. & Civ. Lib. L. Rev. 147
(2011) . . . 1008
Morse, Stephen J., The Twilight of Welfare Criminology: A Reply to
Judge Bazelon, 49 S. Cal. L. Rev. 1247 (1976) . . . 1006
Morse, Stephen J., Undiminished Confusion in Diminished Capacity,
75 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1 (1984) . . . 489, 986
Morse, Stephen J. & Bonnie, Richard J., Abolition of the Insanity
Defense Violates Due Process, 41 J. Am. Acad. Psych. & L. 488
(2013) . . . 970, 971
Mosteller, Robert P., Syndromes and Politics in Criminal Trials and
Evidence Law, 46 Duke L.J. 461 (1996) . . . 835
Motro, Shari, Scholarship Against Desire, 27 Yale J.L. & Hum. 115
(2015) . . . 421
Mounts, Suzanne, Premeditation and Deliberation in California:
Returning to a Distinction Without a Difference, 36 U.S.F. L. Rev.
261 (2002) . . . 478
Mourer, Sarah Anne, Believe It or Not: Mitigating the Negative
Effects Personal Belief and Bias Have on the Criminal Justice
System, 43 Hofstra L. Rev. 1087 (2015) . . . 127
Mueller, Gerhard O.W., Mens Rea and the Corporation: A Study of
the Model Penal Code Position on Corporate Criminal Liability, 19
U. Pitt. L. Rev. 21 (1957) . . . 781
Muller, Eric L., The Hobgoblin of Little Minds? Our Foolish Law of
Inconsistent Verdicts, 111 Harv. L. Rev. 771 (1998) . . . 187
Mulroy, Steven J., The Duress Defense’s Uncharted Terrain, 43 San
Diego L. Rev. 159 (2006) . . . 921
Mungan, Murat C., Abandoned Criminal Attempts: An Economic
Analysis, 67 Ala. L. Rev. 1 (2015) . . . 616
Murphy, Diana E., The Federal Sentencing Guidelines for
Organizations: A Decade of Promoting Compliance and Ethics,
87 Iowa L. Rev. 697 (2002) . . . 786
p. 1340
p. 1341

--- Page 2304 ---
Murphy, Jeffrie G., Getting Even: The Role of the Victim, 7 Soc. Phil.
& Pol’y 209 (1990) . . . 39
Murphy, Jeffrie G., Involuntary Acts and Criminal Liability, 51 Ethics
332 (1971) . . . 254
Murphy, Jeffrie G., The Killing of the Innocent, 57 Monist 527 (1973) .
. . 892
Murphy, Jeffrie G., Marxism and Retribution, 2 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 217
(1973) . . . 35
Murphy, Keegan, Buying into Criminal Liability: Resolving the Circuit
Split over the Buyer-Seller Rule in Federal Drug Conspiracy
Jurisprudence, 97 Or. L. Rev. 183 (2018) . . . 755
Murray, Brian M., Beyond the Right to Counsel: Increasing Notice of
Collateral Consequences, 49 U. Rich. L. Rev. 1139 (2015) . . .
113
NAACP Legal Defense Fund, Criminal Justice Project, Death Row
U.S.A (2016) . . . 1162
Nagel, Thomas, The View from Nowhere (1986) . . . 894
Natapoff, Alexandra, Negotiating Accuracy: DNA in the Age of Plea
Bargaining, in Wrongful Convictions and the DNA Revolution:
Twenty-Five Years of Freeing the Innocent (Daniel Medwed ed.,
2017) . . . 124
Natapoff, Alexandra, Punishment Without Crime (2018) . . . 228
Natapoff, Alexandra, Underenforcement, 75 Fordham L. Rev. 1715
(2006) . . . 7
Nathanson, Stephen, Does It Matter If the Death Penalty Is
Arbitrarily Administered, in Punishment and the Death Penalty
(Baird & Rosenbaum eds., 1995) . . . 1169
National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, Criminal
Conspiracy: Position Paper and Proposals for Reform (Apr. 19,
2015) . . . 714
National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers & Foundation for
Criminal Justice, The Trial Penalty: The Sixth Amendment Right
to Trial on the Verge of Extinction and How to Save It (2018) . . .
128, 129

--- Page 2305 ---
National Center for State Courts, Court Statistics Project, Examining
the Work of State Courts: An Analysis of 2010 State Court
Caseloads (2012) . . . 74
National Commission on Safety and Abuse in America’s Prisons
(2006) . . . 1098
National Commission on the Insanity Defense, Myths and Realities
(1983) . . . 963
National Conference of State Legislatures, Barriers to Work: People
with Criminal Records (July 17, 2018) . . . 75
National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence, Alcohol,
Drugs, and Crimes . . . 930
National Research Council, The Growth of Incarceration in the
United States (2014) . . . 1, 2, 3, 4, 69
Neily, Clark, There Are Way Too Many Prosecutors in the Federal
Judiciary, Cato Inst. (Oct. 14, 2019) . . . 74
Nelson, J.S., Disclosure-Driven Crime, 52 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1487
(2019) . . . 310
Nemerson, Steven, Criminal Liability Without Fault: A Philosophical
Perspective, 75 Colum. L. Rev. 1517 (1975) . . . 347
Nevins-Saunders, Elizabeth, Not Guilty as Charged: The Myth of
Mens Rea for Defendants with Mental Retardation, 45 U.C. Davis
L. Rev. 1419 (2012) . . . 989
New York City Police Dept., Citywide Seven Major Felony Offenses
2000-2020 . . . 232
New York City Police Dept., Stop, Question and Frisk Data . . . 231
p. 1341
p. 1342
New York State Task Force on Life and the Law, When Death Is
Sought — Assisted Suicide in the Medical Context (1994) . . . 902
Newton, Danielle R., Comment, What’s Right with a Claim of Right?,
33 U.S.F. L. Rev. 673 (1999) . . . 1093
North Carolina Sentencing and Policy Advisory Commission,
Structured Sentencing Statistical Report for Felonies and
Misdemeanors for FY 2019 (2020) . . . 1136

--- Page 2306 ---
Note, Common Law Crimes in the United States, 47 Colum. L. Rev.
1332 (1947) . . . 193
Note, Conspiracy: State Statutory Reform Since the Model Penal
Code, 75 Colum. L. Rev. 1122 (1975) . . . 702, 705, 712, 735
Note, Desuetude, 119 Harv. L. Rev. 2209 (2006) . . . 366
Note, Developments in the Law — Corporate Crime: Regulating
Corporate Behavior Through Criminal Sanctions, 92 Harv. L. Rev.
1227 (1979) . . . 769
Note, Due Process and Legislative Standards in Sentencing, 101 U.
Pa. L. Rev. 257 (1952) . . . 1117
Note, Justification: The Impact of the Model Penal Code on State
Law Reform, 75 Colum. L. Rev. 914 (1975) . . . 820
Note, A Rationale of the Law of Aggravated Theft, 54 Colum. L. Rev.
84 (1954) . . . 1022
Nourse, Victoria F., After the Reasonable Man: Getting over the
Subjectivity/Objectivity Question, 11 New Crim. L. Rev. 33 (2008)
. . . 817
Nourse, Victoria F., Passion’s Progress: Modern Law Reform and the
Provocation Defense, 106 Yale L.J. 1331 (1997) . . . 485, 500
Nourse, Victoria F., Self-Defense and Subjectivity, 68 U. Chi. L. Rev.
1235 (2001) . . . 843
Nugent-Borakove, M. Elaine & Cruz, Franklin, The Power of Choice:
The Implications of a System Where Indigent Defendants Choose
Their Own Counsel (Mar. 2017) . . . 73
Ocen, Priscilla A., Birthing Injustice: Pregnancy as a Status Offense,
85 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 1163 (2017) . . . 211
O’Donnell, Kaitlin R., The Problematic Use of the Kill Zone Theory,
11 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 583 (2020) . . . 584
Offit, Anna, Prosecuting in the Shadow of the Jury, 113 Nw. U. L.
Rev. 1071 (2019) . . . 160
Ogden, David W., Deputy Attorney Gen. of the United States,
Memorandum to Selected U.S. Attorneys (Oct. 19, 2009) . . . 88
O’Hara, Erin Ann, Victim Participation in the Criminal Process, 3 J.L.
& Pol’y 229 (2005) . . . 96

--- Page 2307 ---
O’Hear, Michael, Plea Bargaining and Procedural Justice, 42 Ga. L.
Rev. 407 (2008) . . . 138
O’Hear, Michael, Yes to Nondiscrimination, No to New Forms of
Criminal Liability, 88 B.U. L. Rev. 1437 (2008) . . . 276
O’Hear, Michael & Wheelock, Darren, Violent Crime and
Punitiveness: An Empirical Study of Public Opinion, 103 Marq. L.
Rev. 1035 (2020) . . . 45
Ohlin, Jens David, Group Think: The Law of Conspiracy and
Collective Reason, 98 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 147 (2007) . . .
714
p. 1342
p. 1343
O’Regan, R.S., Indirect Provocation and Misdirected Retaliation,
1968 Crim. L. Rev. 319 . . . 495
Oregon Dept. of Human Servs., Oregon Death with Dignity Act: 2015
Data Summary (2016) . . . 901
Ostroff, Sue & Maguigan, Holly, Explaining Without Pathologizing:
Testimony on Battering and Its Effects, in Current Controversies
on Family Violence (D.R. Loseke ed., 2005) . . . 836
O’Sullivan, Julie, How Prosecutors Apply the “Federal Prosecutions
of Corporations” Charging Policy in the Era of Deferred
Prosecutions, and What That Means for the Purposes of the
Federal Criminal Sanction, 51 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 29 (2014) . . .
774
Ouziel, Lauren M., Beyond Law and Fact: Jury Evaluation of Law
Enforcement, 92 Notre Dame L. Rev. 691 (2016) . . . 166
Packer, Herbert, The Limits of the Criminal Sanction (1968) . . . 347
Park, Ryan Y., The Globalizing Jury Trial: Lessons and Insights from
Korea, 58 Am. J. Comp. L. 525 (2010) . . . 170
Parry, John T., Culpability, Mistake, and Official Interpretations of
Law, 25 Am. J. Crim. L. 1 (1997) . . . 367
Paseward, Richard A., Insanity Plea: Statutory Language and Trial
Procedure, 12 J. Psychiatry & L. 399 (1984) . . . 963

--- Page 2308 ---
Patch, Kelly A., Harmelin v. Michigan: Is Proportionate Sentencing
Merely Legislative Grace?, 1992 Wis. L. Rev. 1697 . . . 245
Pauley, Matthew A., Murder by Premeditation, 36 Am. Crim. L. Rev.
145 (1999) . . . 476
Payne, Alison Ann & Welch, Kelly, Restorative Justice in Schools:
The Influence of Race on Restorative Discipline, 47 Youth & Soc.
539 (2015) . . . 66
Penney, Steven, Impulse Control and Criminal Responsibility:
Lessons from Neuroscience, 35 Int’l J.L. & Psychiatry 99 (2012) .
. . 960
Pennsylvania Commission on Sentencing, 2019 Annual Report 16
(2020) . . . 1136
Perkins & Boyce, Criminal Law (3d ed. 1982) . . . 432
Perkins, Rollin M., Criminal Attempt and Related Problems, 2 UCLA
L. Rev. 319 (1955) . . . 645
Perlin, Michael L., “On Desolation Row”: The Blurring of the Borders
Between Civil and Criminal Mental Disability Law, and What It
Means to All of Us, 24 Tex. J. C.L. & C.R. 59 (2018) . . . 1103–
1104
Perlin, Michael L. & Lynch, Alison J., In the Wasteland of Your Mind:
Criminology, Scientific Discoveries and the Criminal Process, 4
Va. J. Crim. L. 304 (2016) . . . 988–989
Perlmutter, Steve, Physician-Assisted Suicide — A Medicolegal
Inquiry, 15 Mich. St. J. Med. & L. 203 (2011) . . . 901
Perry, Samuel, A DSM-III Casebook of Differential Therapeutics
(1985) . . . 981
Pertnoy, Leonard D., Same Violence, Same Sex, Different Standard:
An Examination of Same-Sex Domestic Violence and the Use of
Expert Testimony on Battered Woman’s Syndrome in Same-Sex
Domestic Violence Cases, 24 St. Thomas L. Rev. 544 (2012) . . .
829
p. 1343
p. 1344

--- Page 2309 ---
Peter-Hagene, Liana C. & Ratliff, Chasity L., When Jurors’ Moral
Judgments Result in Jury Nullification: Moral Outrage at the Law
as a Mediator of Euthanasia Attitudes on Verdicts, Psychiatry,
Psych. & L. (May 7, 2020) . . . 174
Petersilia, Joan, Community Corrections: Probation, Parole, and
Prisoner Reentry, in Crime and Public Policy (James Q. Wilson &
Joan Petersilia eds., 2011) . . . 75
Pew Center on the States, State of Recidivism: The Revolving Door
of America’s Prisons (2011) . . . 19
Pew Research Center, Only 2% of Federal Criminal Defendants Go
to Trial, and Most Who Do Are Found Guilty (June 11, 2019) . . .
82, 115
Pfaff, John F., The Empirics of Prison Growth: A Critical Review and
Path Forward, 98 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 547 (2008) . . . 3
Pfaff, John F., Locked In: The True Causes of Mass Incarceration
and How to Achieve Real Reform (2017) . . . 78
Pfaff, John F., Prosecutorial Guidelines, in Reforming Crim. J. (Erik
Luna ed., 2017) . . . 87
Phelps, Michelle S., Rehabilitation in the Punitive Era: The Gap
Between Rhetoric and Reality in U.S. Prison Programs, 45 Law &
Soc’y Rev. 33 (2011) . . . 1119
Phillips, Scott & Marceau, Justin, Whom the State Kills, 55 Harv.
C.R.-C.L. L. Rev. 585 (2020) . . . 1200
Philpot, Richard, Would I Be Helped? Cross-National CCTV Footage
Shows That Intervention Is the Norm in Public Conflicts, 75 Am.
Psychol. 66 (2020) . . . 266
Picardi, Ralph G., Comment, Theft of Employee Services Under the
United States Penal Code, 23 San Diego L. Rev. 897 (1986) . . .
1064
Pierson, Emma, A Large-Scale Analysis of Racial Disparities in
Police Stops Across the United States, 4 Nature Human
Behaviour 736 (2020) . . . 876
Pillsbury, Samuel H., Crimes of Indifference, 49 Rutgers L. Rev. 105
(1996) . . . 520
Pillsbury, Samuel H., Judging Evil: Rethinking the Law of Murder and
Manslaughter (1998) . . . 479, 491–492, 518

--- Page 2310 ---
Pillsbury, Samuel H., The Meaning of Deserved Punishment, 67 Ind.
L.J. 719 (1992) . . . 1008
Pillsbury, Samuel H., Misunderstanding Provocation, 43 U. Mich. J.L.
Reform 143 (2009) . . . 487
Pinard, Michael, Freedom in Decline: Reflections and Perspectives
on Reentry and Collateral Consequences, 100 J. Crim. L. &
Criminology 1213 (2010) . . . 1095
Pittman, Elizabeth Wagner, Mail and Wire Fraud, 47 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 797 (2010) . . . 1045
Podgor, Ellen S., Criminal Fraud, 48 Am. U. L. Rev. 729 (1999) . . .
1049
Pohl, Jason & Gabrielson, Ryan, There Has Been an Explosion of
Homicides in California’s County Jails. Here’s Why, ProPublica
(June 13, 2019) . . . 1100
Pohlman, Sarah A., Shooting from the Hip: Missouri’s New Approach
to Defense of Habitation, 56 St. Louis U. L.J. 857 (2012) . . . 864
Pojman, Louis P., Why the Death Penalty Is Morally Permissible, in
Debating the Death Penalty (Hugo Bedau & Paul Cassell eds.,
2004) . . . 1165
Porter, Wes R., The Pendulum in Federal Sentencing Can Also
Swing Toward Predictability: A Renewed Role for Binding Plea
Agreements Post-Booker, 37 Wm. Mitchell L. Rev. 469 (2011) . . .
116
Posner, Richard, Economic Analysis of Law 242 (7th ed. 2007) . . .
20
p. 1344
p. 1345
Pound, Introduction to Sayre, Cases on Criminal Law (1927) . . .
353, 956
President’s Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration
of Justice, The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society (1967) . . .
69, 71, 82
Pretrial Justice Institute, Implementing the Recommendations of the
National Symposium on Pretrial Justice: The 2013 Progress

--- Page 2311 ---
Report . . . 89
Price, Zachary S., Reliance on Nonenforcement, 58 Wm. & Mary L.
Rev. 937 (2017) . . . 366
Prison Policy Initiative, How Race Impacts Who Is Detained Pretrial
(Oct. 9, 2019) . . . 81
Prosecutors in the Boardroom: Using Criminal Law to Regulate
Corporate Conduct (Anthony Barkow & Rachel Barkow eds.,
2011) . . . 786
Quinn, Mae C., From Turkey Trot to Twitter: Policing Puberty, Purity,
and Sex-Positivity, 38 N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 51 (2014) . .
. 699
Radelet, Michael L. & Cohen, G. Ben, The Decline of the Judicial
Override, 15 Ann. Rev. L. & Soc. Sci. 539 (2019) . . . 1201
RAINN Memorandum to White House Task Force to Protect
Students from Sexual Assault (Feb. 28, 2014) . . . 381
Rakoff, Jed S., The Federal Mail Fraud Statute (Part I), 18 Duq. L.
Rev. 771 (1980) . . . 1045
Rakoff, Jed S., The Financial Crisis: Why Have No High-Level
Executives Been Prosecuted?, N.Y. Rev. Books (Jan. 9, 2014) . .
. 6, 307, 801
Ramsey, Carolyn B., Homicide on Holiday: Prosecutorial Discretion,
Popular Culture, and the Boundaries of the Criminal Law, 54
Hastings L.J. 1641 (2003) . . . 514
Ramsey, Carolyn B., Provoking Change: Comparative Insights on
Feminist Homicide Law Reform, 100 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 33
(2010) . . . 490
Rapaport, Elizabeth, Staying Alive: Executive Clemency, Equal
Protection, and the Politics of Gender in Women’s Capital Cases,
4 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 967 (2001) . . . 1170
Raphael, Jody, Rape Is Rape: How Denial, Distortion, and Victim
Blaming Are Fueling a Hidden Acquaintance Rape Crisis (2013) .
. . 417
Rappaport, Aaron, Institutional Design of Punishment, 60 Ariz. L.
Rev. 913 (2018) . . . 184

--- Page 2312 ---
Rappaport, John, Criminal Justice, Inc., 118 Colum. L. Rev. 2251
(2018) . . . 1057
Rappaport, John, Some Doubts About “Democratizing” Criminal
Justice, 87 U. Chi. L. Rev. 711 (2020) . . . 166, 167, 233
Rappeport, Jonas R., The Insanity Plea Scapegoating the Mentally
Ill — Much Ado about Nothing?, 24 So. Tex. L.J. 687 (1983) . . .
957
Raymond, Margaret, Looking for Trouble: Framing and the Dignitary
Interest in the Law of Self-Defense, 71 Ohio St. L.J. 287 (2010) . .
. 859
Reed, Alan & Wake, Nicola, Potentiate Liability and Preventing Fault
Attribution: The Intoxicated “Offender,” 47 J. Marshall L. Rev. 57
(2013) . . . 979
Reeves, Brian A., Bureau of Justice Statistics, U.S. Dept. of Justice,
Felony Defendants in Large Urban Counties, 2009 — Statistical
Tables (2013) . . . 115
p. 1345
p. 1346
Reifman, Alan, Grusick, Spencer & Ellsworth, Phoebe C., Real
Jurors’ Understanding of the Law in Real Cases, 16 Law & Hum.
Behav. 539 (1992) . . . 145
Reilly, Peter R., Justice Deferred Is Justice Denied: We Must End
Our Failed Experiment in Deferring Corporate Criminal
Prosecutions, 2015 BYU L. Rev. 307 . . . 90
Reilly, Peter R., Sweetheart Deals, Deferred Prosecution, and
Making a Mockery of the Criminal Justice System: U.S.
Corporate DPAs Rejected on Many Fronts, 50 Ariz. St. L.J. 1113
(2018) . . . 774
Reimer, Norman L. & Wayne, Lisa M., From the Practitioners’ Perch:
How Mandatory Minimum Sentences and the Prosecution’s
Unfettered Control over Sentence Reductions for Cooperation
Subvert Justice and Exacerbate Racial Disparity, 160 U. Pa. L.
Rev. PENNumbra 159 (2011) . . . 696
Reiss, Albert J., Jr. & Roth, Jeffrey A., eds., Understanding and
Preventing Violence: Report of the National Research Panel on

--- Page 2313 ---
the Understanding and Control of Violence (1993) . . . 20
Renteln, Alison Dundes, The Cultural Defense (2004) . . . 375
Report of the Royal Commission On Capital Punishment, 1945–1953
(1953) . . . 462
Revesz, Joshua, Comment, Ideological Imbalance and the
Peremptory Challenge, 125 Yale L.J. 2535 (2016) . . . 165
Reznik, Rafi, Retributive Abolitionism, 24 Berkeley J. Crim. L. 123
(2019) . . . 63
Ribeiro, Gustavo, The Case for Varying Standards of Proof, 56 San
Diego L. Rev. 161 (2019) . . . 148
Richardson, L. Song & Goff, Phillip Atiba, Self-Defense and the
Suspicion Heuristic, 98 Iowa L. Rev. 293 (2012) . . . 812, 813
Richie, Beth E., Arrested Justice: Black Women, Violence, and
America’s Prison Nation (2012) . . . 97
Richman, Daniel C., Federal Criminal Law, Congressional
Delegation, and Enforcement Discretion, 46 UCLA L. Rev. 757
(1999) . . . 88
Richman, Daniel C., Prosecutors and Their Agents, Agents and
Their Prosecutors, 103 Colum. L. Rev. 749 (2003) . . . 136
Richman, Daniel C. & Stuntz, William J., Al Capone’s Revenge: An
Essay on the Political Economy of Pretextual Prosecution, 105
Colum. L. Rev. 583 (2005) . . . 108
Ristroph, Alice, Desert, Democracy, and Sentencing Reform, 96 J.
Crim. L. & Criminology 1293 (2006) . . . 38
Ristroph, Alice, Hope, Imprisonment, and the Constitution, 23 Fed.
Sent’g Rep. 75 (2010) . . . 1161
Robbins, Ira P., Attempting the Impossible: The Emerging
Consensus, 23 Harv. J. Legis. 377 (1986) . . . 648, 650
Robbins, Ira P., Double Inchoate Crimes, 26 Harv. J. on Legis. 1
(1989) . . . 758
Roberts, Andrea L., Exposure to American Football and
Neuropsychiatric Health in Former National Football League
Players, 20 Am. J. Sports Med. (No. 10) 1 (2019) . . . 834
Roberts, Dorothy E., Constructing a Criminal Justice System Free of
Racial Bias: An Abolitionist Framework, 39 Colum. Hum. Rts. L.
Rev. 261 (2007) . . . 54

--- Page 2314 ---
Roberts, Dorothy E., Foreword: Race, Vagueness, and the Social
Meaning of Order-Maintenance Policing, 89 J. Crim. L. &
Criminology 775 (1999) . . . 233
p. 1346
p. 1347
Roberts, Dorothy E., Motherhood and Crime, 79 Iowa L. Rev. 95
(1993) . . . 277, 691
Roberts, Jenny, Effective Plea Bargaining Counsel, 122 Yale L.J.
2650 (2013) . . . 115
Robertson, John, Respect for Life in Bioethical Dilemmas — The
Case of Physician-Assisted Suicide, 45 Clev. St. L. Rev. 329
(1997) . . . 283
Robinson, Paul H., Competing Theories of Blackmail: An Empirical
Research Critique of Criminal Law Theory, 89 Tex. L. Rev. 291
(2010) . . . 1059
Robinson, Paul H., Criminal Law Defenses (2010) . . . 255
Robinson, Paul H., Distributive Principles of Criminal Law: Who
Should Be Punished How Much? (2008) . . . 38
Robinson, Paul H., Forward: The Criminal-Civil Distinction and
Dangerous Blameless Offenders, 83 J. Crim. L. & Criminology
693 (1993) . . . 947
Robinson, Paul H., Murder Mitigation in the Fifty-Two American
Jurisdictions: A Case Study in Doctrinal Interrelation Analysis, 47
Tex. Tech L. Rev. 19 (2014) . . . 986
Robinson, Paul H., The Ongoing Revolution in Punishment Theory:
Doing Justice as Controlling Crime, 42 Ariz. St. L.J. 1089 (2010) .
. . 38
Robinson, Paul H., Would You Convict? Seventeen Cases That
Challenged the Law (1999) . . . 515
Robinson, Paul H. & Darley, John M., The Role of Deterrence in the
Formulation of Criminal Code Rules, 91 Geo. L.J. 949 (2003) . . .
19
Robinson, Paul H. & Darley, John M., The Utility of Desert, 91 Nw. U.
L. Rev. 453 (1997) . . . 21, 1166

--- Page 2315 ---
Robinson, Russell K., Masculinity as Prison: Sexual Identity, Race,
and Incarceration, 99 Cal. L. Rev. 1309 (2011) . . . 384
Rodriguez, Nancy, Restorative Justice, Communities, and
Delinquency: Whom Do We Reintegrate, 4 Criminology & Pub.
Pol’y 103 (2005) . . . 66
Rogers, Audrey, Protecting Children on the Internet: Mission
Impossible?, 61 Baylor L. Rev. 323 (2009) . . . 642
Roiphe, Rebecca, The Duty to Charge in Police Use of Excessive
Force Cases, 65 Clev. St. L. Rev. 503 (2017) . . . 85
Rolnick, Addie C., Defending White Space, 40 Cardozo L. Rev. 1639
(2019) . . . 854
Root, Veronica, Coordinating Compliance Incentives, 102 Cornell L.
Rev. 1003 (2017) . . . 786
Rose, V. Gordon & Ogloff, James R.P., Evaluating the
Comprehensibility of Jury Instructions: A Method and Example,
25 Law & Hum. Behav. 409 (2001) . . . 145
Rosen, Richard A., On Self-Defense, Imminence, and Women Who
Kill Their Batterers, 71 N.C. L. Rev. 371 (1993) . . . 840
Rosenberg, Roni, A New Rationale for the Doctrine of Provocation:
Applications to Cases of Killing an Unfaithful Spouse, 37 Colum.
J. Gender & L. 220 (2019) . . . 491
Rosenberg, Roni, Human Dignity and the Doctrine of Provocation: A
New Approach, 34 Notre Dame J.L. Ethics & Pub. Pol’y 281
(2020) . . . 486
Ross, Jacqueline E., Damned Under Many Headings: The Problem
of Multiple Punishment, 29 Am. J. Crim. L. 245 (2002) . . . 706
Roth, Nelson E. & Sundby, Scott E., The Felony-Murder Rule: A
Doctrine at Constitutional Crossroads, 70 Cornell L. Rev. 446
(1985) . . . 544
p. 1347
p. 1348
Roxin, C., Täterschaft und Tatherrschaft (1984) . . . 655
Rozelle, Susan D., Controlling Passion: Adultery and the
Provocation Defense, 37 Rutgers L.J. 197 (2005) . . . 491

--- Page 2316 ---
Rubin, Lilian, Quiet Rage: Bernie Goetz in a Time of Madness (1988)
. . . 809
Rushin, Stephen & Michalski, Roger, Police Funding, 72 Fla. L. Rev.
277 (2020) . . . 20
Russell, Diana E.H., Rape in Marriage (2d ed. 1990) . . . 448
Russell, Sarah F., Rethinking Recidivist Enhancements: The Role of
Prior Drug Convictions in Federal Sentencing, 43 U.C. Davis L.
Rev. 1135 (2010) . . . 1156
Russell, Wm. Oldnall, A Treatise on Crimes and Misdemeanors
(Turner ed., 11th ed. 1958) . . . 1025
Rutkowski, David, Note, A Coercion Defense for the Street Gang
Criminal: Plugging the Moral Gap in Existing Law, 10 Notre Dame
J.L. Ethics & Pub. Pol’y 137 (1999) . . . 921
Rutledge, Njeri Mathis, Employers Know Best? The Application of
Workplace Restraining Orders to Domestic Violence Cases, 48
Loy. L.A. L. Rev. 175 (2014) . . . 828
Ryan, Meghan, The Missing Jury: The Neglected Role of Juries in
Eighth Amendment Punishments Clause Determinations, 64 Fla.
L. Rev. 549 (2012) . . . 244
Ryznar, Margaret, The Honest-Services Doctrine in White-Collar
Criminal Law, 34 Hamline L. Rev. 83 (2010) . . . 1076
Sacharoff, Laurent, Trespass and Deception, 2015 BYU L. Rev. 359
. . . 434
Sachs, Stephen E., Comment, Saving Toby: Extortion, Blackmail,
and the Right to Destroy, 24 Yale L. & Pol’y Rev. 251 (2006) . . .
1054
Sack, Emily J., Is Domestic Violence a Crime? Intimate Partner
Rape as Allegory, 24 St. John’s J. Legal Comment. 535 (2010) . .
. 449, 825
St. John, David, Environmental Crimes, 57 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 657
(2020) . . . 799
Samons, Christina, Same-Sex Domestic Violence: The Need for
Affirmative Legal Protections at All Levels of Government, 22 S.
Cal. Rev. L. & Soc. Just. 417 (2013) . . . 829

--- Page 2317 ---
Sanchez, Angel E., In Spite of Prison, 132 Harv. L. Rev. 1650 (2019)
. . . 1098
Sarch, Alexander, Ignorance Lost: A Reply to Yaffe on the Culpability
of Willful Ignorance, 12 Crim. L. & Phil. 107 (2018) . . . 308
Sarch, Alexander, Is Parity of Culpability a Constraint on Accomplice
Liability?, 15 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 336 (2018) . . . 654
Sawyer, Logan E., III, Reform Prosecutors and Separation of
Powers, 72 Okla. L. Rev. 603 (2020) . . . 99
Sawyer, Wendy & Wagner, Peter, Prison Policy Initiative, Mass
Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2020 (Mar. 24, 2020) . . . 67
Sayre, Francis Bowes, Criminal Attempts, 41 Harv. L. Rev. 821
(1928) . . . 645
Sayre, Francis Bowes, Public Welfare Offenses, 33 Col. L. Rev. 55
(1933) . . . 332
Scalia, Antonin, A Matter of Interpretation (1997) . . . 205
Scheflin, Alan & Van Dyke, Jon, Jury Nullification: The Contours of a
Controversy, 43 Law & Contemp. Probs. 51 (1980) . . . 173
Schehr, Robert, The Emperor’s New Clothes: Intellectual Dishonesty
and the Unconstitutionality of Plea-Bargaining, 2 Tex. A & M L.
Rev. 385 (2015) . . . 126
p. 1348
p. 1349
Schmall, Lorraine, Women on Death Row, 38 Ohio N.U. L. Rev. 441
(2012) . . . 1169
Schmitt, Glenn R., Why Judges Matter at Sentencing: A Reply to
Starr and Rehavi, 123 Yale L.J. Online 251 (2013) . . . 1137
Schneider, Elizabeth, Describing and Changing: Women’s Self-
Defense Work and the Problem of Expert Testimony on Battering,
9 Women’s Rts. L. Rep. 195 (1986) . . . 825, 832
Schopp, Robert F., Sturgis, Barbara J., & Sullivan, Megan, Battered
Woman Syndrome, Expert Testimony, and the Distinction
Between Justification and Excuse, 1994 U. Ill. L. Rev. 45 . . . 833
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Assessing the Federal Sentencing Process:
The Problem Is Uniformity, Not Disparity, 29 Am. Crim. L. Rev.

--- Page 2318 ---
833 (1992) . . . 1134
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Attempt, Encyclopedia of Crime and Justice
(1983) . . . 603
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Client Choice for Indigent Criminal
Defendants: Theory and Implementation, 12 Ohio St. J. Crim. L.
505 (2015) . . . 72
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Consent: What It Means and Why It’s Time
to Require It, 47 U. Pac. L. Rev. 665 (2016) . . . 422
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Criminal Justice Discretion as a Regulatory
System, 17 J. Legal Stud. 43 (1988) . . . 121, 128
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Criminal Justice, Local Democracy, and
Constitutional Rights, 111 Mich. L. Rev. 1045 (2013) . . . 169, 233
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Due Process of Sentencing, 128 U. Pa. L.
Rev. 733 (1980) . . . 128, 1134
Schulhofer, Stephen J., The Feminist Challenge in Criminal Law, 143
U. Pa. L. Rev. 2151 (1995) . . . 96, 411, 424, 827
Schulhofer, Stephen J., The Gender Question in Criminal Law, 7
Soc. Phil. & Pol’y 105 (1990) . . . 444, 843
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Harm and Punishment: A Critique of
Emphasis on the Results of Conduct in the Criminal Law, 122 U.
Pa. L. Rev. 1497 (1974) . . . 348, 604
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Is Plea Bargaining Inevitable?, 97 Harv. L.
Rev. 1037 (1984) . . . 115, 122
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Plea Bargaining as Disaster, 101 Yale L.J.
1979 (1992) . . . 127
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Rape-Law Reform circa June 2002, 989
Annals N.Y. Acad. Sci. 276 (2003) . . . 428
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Rethinking Mandatory Minimums, 28 Wake
Forest L. Rev. 199 (1993) . . . 707, 1122, 1124
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Solving the Drug Enforcement Dilemma:
Lessons from Economics, 1994 U. Chi. Legal F. 207 . . . 20
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Taking Sexual Autonomy Seriously: Rape
Law and Beyond, 11 Law & Phil. 35 (1992) . . . 385, 424
Schulhofer, Stephen J., The Trouble with Trials; The Trouble with Us,
105 Yale L.J. 825 (1995) . . . 96

--- Page 2319 ---
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Two Systems of Social Protection:
Comments on the Civil-Criminal Distinction, 7 J. Contemp. Legal
Issues 69 (1996) . . . 947
Schulhofer, Stephen J., Unwanted Sex (1998) . . . 385, 411, 428,
435, 450
Schulhofer, Stephen J. & Friedman, David, Rethinking Indigent
Defense: Promoting Effective Representation Through Consumer
Sovereignty and Freedom of Choice for All Criminal Defendants,
31 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 73 (1993) . . . 72
p. 1349
p. 1350
Schulhofer, Stephen J. & Nagel, Ilene H., Plea Negotiations Under
the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, 91 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1284
(1997) . . . 89, 133
Schwartz, Victoria, The Victims’ Rights Amendment, 42 Harv. J. on
Legis. 525 (2005) . . . 41
Schwartzer, William E., Communicating with Juries: Problems and
Remedies, 69 Cal. L. Rev. 731 (1981) . . . 146
Scott, Robert E. & Stuntz, William J., Plea Bargaining as Contract,
101 Yale L.J. 1909 (1992) . . . 125
SCRAM Systems, Continuous Alcohol Monitoring . . . 930
Segal, Uzi & Stein, Alex, Ambiguity Aversion and the Criminal
Process, 81 Notre Dame L. Rev. 1495 (2006) . . . 168
Seigel, Michael L., Bringing Coherence to Mens Rea Analysis for
Securities-Related Offenses, 2006 Wis. L. Rev. 1563 . . . 296
Sellin, Thorsten, Homicides in Retentionist and Abolitionist States, in
Capital Punishment (Thorsten Sellin ed., 1967) . . . 1164
Semuels, Alana, Low-Wage Workers Aren’t Getting Justice for
Sexual Harassment, The Atlantic (Dec. 27, 2017) . . . 379
The Sentencing Project, Fact Sheet: Trends in U.S. Corrections 2
(2019) . . . 1
The Sentencing Project, Report to the United Nations on Racial
Disparities in the U.S. Criminal Justice System (Apr. 19, 2018) . .
. 2

--- Page 2320 ---
Sepinwall, Amy J., Faultless Guilt: Toward a Relationship-Based
Account of Criminal Liability, 54 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 521 (2017) . . .
342
Sepinwall, Amy J., Responsible Shares and Shared Responsibility:
In Defense of Responsible Corporate Officer Liability, 2014
Colum. Bus. L. Rev. 371 . . . 800
Seralathan, A. Meena, Note, Making the Time Fit the Crime: Clearly
Defining Online Harassment Crimes and Providing Incentives for
Investigating Online Threats in the Digital Age, 42 Brook. J. Int’l
L. 425 (2016) . . . 626
Sered, Danielle, Until We Reckon: Violence, Mass Incarceration, and
a Road to Repair (2019) . . . 37, 65
Serra, Natalie E., Queering International Human Rights: LGBT
Access to Domestic Violence Remedies, 21 Am. U. J. Gender
Soc. Pol’y & L. 583 (2013) . . . 829
Sessions, Jefferson B., III, Attorney Gen. of the United States,
Memorandum on Department Charging and Sentencing Policy
(May 10, 2017) . . . 1123
Sessions, Jefferson B., III, Attorney Gen. of the United States,
Memorandum to All U.S. Attorneys (Jan. 4, 2018) . . . 88
Severance, Lawrence J., Greene, Edith, & Loftus, Elizabeth F.,
Toward Criminal Jury Instructions That Jurors Can Understand,
75 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 198 (1984) . . . 146
Sewrattan, Christopher, Apples, Oranges, and Steel: The Effect of
Mandatory Minimum Sentences for Drug Offences on the
Equality Rights of Aboriginal Peoples, 46 U.B.C. L. Rev. 121
(2013) . . . 1147
Shaffer, Catherine S., A Conceptual Framework for Thinking About
Physician-Assisted Death for Persons with a Mental Disorder, 22
Psychol. Pub. Pol’y & L. 141 (2016) . . . 901
Shannon, Brian D. & Scarano, Victor R., Incompetency to Be
Executed: Continuing Ethical Challenges and Time for a Change
in Texas, 45 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 419 (2013) . . . 944
p. 1350
p. 1351

--- Page 2321 ---
Shatz, Steven F., The American Death Penalty: Past, Present, and
Future, 53 Tulsa L. Rev. 349 (2018) . . . 1172
Shaw, Lori E., Title IX, Sexual Assault, and the Issue of Effective
Consent: Blurred Lines–When Should “Yes” Mean “No”?, 91 Ind.
L.J. 1363 (2016) . . . 427
Sheketoff, Julia Fong, Note, State Innovations in Noncapital
Proportionality Doctrine, 85 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 2209 (2010) . . . 248
Sheley, Erin L., Tort Answers to the Problems of Corporate Criminal
Mens Rea, 97 N.C. L. Rev. 773 (2019) . . . 781
Sheley, Erin L., Victim Impact Statements and Expressive
Punishment in the Age of Social Media, 52 Wake Forest L. Rev.
157 (2017) . . . 42
Sherman, Lawrence W., Policing Domestic Violence: Experiments
and Dilemmas (1992) . . . 827
Sidhu, Dawinder S., Criminal Law x Addiction, 99 N.C. L. Rev. 1083
(2021) . . . 979
Siegel, Reva B., Blind Justice: Why the Court Refused to Accept
Statistical Evidence of Discriminatory Purpose in McCleskey v.
Kemp — and Some Pathways for Change, 112 Nw. U. L. Rev.
1269 (2018) . . . 1200
Siegel, Reva B., “The Rule of Love”: Wife Beating as Prerogative
and Privacy, 105 Yale L.J. 2117 (1996) . . . 826
Siegler, Alison & Admussen, William, Discovering Racial
Discrimination by the Police, 115 Nw. U. L. Rev. 987 (2021) . . .
107
Silla, Nick, Federal Court Strikes Down Virginia’s “Habitual Drunkard”
Law that Criminalized Owning Alcohol, Forbes (Aug. 2, 2019) . . .
1001
Simester, A.P., ed., Appraising Strict Liability (2005) . . . 347
Simon, Jonathan, Governing Through Crime (2007) . . . 5
Simon, Michelle S., Whose Crime Is It Anyway?: Liability for the
Lethal Acts of Nonparticipants in the Felony, 71 U. Det. Mercy L.
Rev. 223 (1994) . . . 562
Simon, Rita James, The Effects of Newspapers on the Verdicts of
Potential Jurors, in The Sociology of Law (R. Simon ed., 1968) . .
. 145

--- Page 2322 ---
Simon, Rita James, The Jury and the Defense of Insanity (1967) . . .
963
Simons, Kenneth W., The Conceptual Structure of Consent in
Criminal Law, 9 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 577 (2006) . . . 419
Simons, Kenneth W., Ignorance and Mistake of Criminal Law,
Noncriminal Law, and Fact, 9 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 487 (2012) . . .
363
Simons, Kenneth W., Mistake of Fact or Mistake of Criminal Law?
Explaining and Defending the Distinction, 3 Crim. L. & Phil. 213
(2009) . . . 649
Simons, Kenneth W., Rethinking Mental States, 72 B.U. L. Rev. 463
(1992) . . . 304
Simons, Kenneth W., Should the Model Penal Code’s Mens Rea
Provisions Be Amended?, 1 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 179 (2003) . . .
288, 302, 303
Simons, Kenneth W., When Is Strict Criminal Liability Just?, 87 J.
Crim. L. & Criminology 1075 (1997) . . . 347, 537
Simons, Kenneth W., The Willful Blindness Doctrine: Justifiable in
Principle, Problematic in Practice, 51 Ariz. St. L.J. 505 (2021) . . .
309, 312
Simpson, A.W.B., Cannibalism and the Common Law (1984) . . . 14
Sing, James J., Culture as Sameness: Toward a Synthetic View of
Provocation and Culture in the Criminal Law, 108 Yale L.J. 1845
(1999) . . . 375
Slobogin, Christopher, The Civilization of the Criminal Law, 58 Vand.
L. Rev. 121 (2005) . . . 30
p. 1351
p. 1352
Slobogin, Christopher, An End to Insanity: Recasting the Role of
Mental Illness in Criminal Cases, 86 Va. L. Rev. 1199 (2000) . . .
972
Slobogin, Christopher, Plea Bargaining and the Substantive and
Procedural Goals of Criminal Justice: From Retribution and

--- Page 2323 ---
Adversarialism to Preventative Justice and Hybrid-
Inquisitorialism, 57 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1505 (2016) . . . 139
Slobogin, Christopher, What Atkins Could Mean for People with
Mental Illness, 33 N.M. L. Rev. 293 (2003) . . . 1191
Slovenko, Ralph, The Insanity Defense in the Wake of the Hinckley
Trial, 14 Rutgers L.J. 373 (1983) . . . 962
Slovenko, Ralph, A Panoramic View, in Sexual Behavior and the
Law (R. Slovenko ed., 1965) . . . 420
Smallhorn, Amanda E., Excusing Women of Circumstance:
Redefining Conspiracy Law to Hold Culpable Offenders
Accountable, 36 Quinnipiac L. Rev. 409 (2018) . . . 717
Smart, Rosanna, The Science of Gun Policy: A Critical Synthesis of
Research Evidence on the Effects of Gun Policies in the United
States (2d ed. 2020) . . . 855
Smith, Edward, Note, The Criminalization of Belief: When Free
Exercise Isn’t, 42 Hastings L.J. 1491 (1991) . . . 524
Smith, J.C., Aid, Abet, Counsel or Procure, in Reshaping the
Criminal Law (P.R. Glazebrook ed., 1978) . . . 689
Smith, J.C., Liability for Omissions in Criminal Law, 14 Legal Stud.
88 (1984) . . . 278
Smith, Stephen F., Proportional Mens Rea, 46 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 127
(2009) . . . 319
Sommers, Roseanna, Commonsense Consent, 129 Yale L.J. 2232
(2020) . . . 434
Sood, Avani Mehta, Attempted Justice: Misunderstanding and Bias
in Psychological Constructions of Critical Attempt, 71 Stan. L.
Rev. 593 (2019) . . . 630
Southerland, Vincent M., The Intersection of Race and Algorithmic
Tools in the Criminal Legal System, 80 Md. L. Rev. 487 (2021) . .
. 30
Specter, Arlen, Book Review, 76 Yale L.J. 604 (1967) . . . 118
Spohn, Cassia C., The Rape Reform Movement: The Traditional
Common Law and Rape Law Reforms, 39 Jurimetrics 119 (1999)
. . . 450
Spohn, Cassia C. & Horney, Julia, Rape Law Reform: Grassroots
Revolution and Its Impact (1992) . . . 450, 458

--- Page 2324 ---
Spohn, Cassia C. & Tellis, Katharine, Policing and Prosecuting
Sexual Assault (2014) . . . 449
Stahn, Carsten, Olásolo, Héctor, & Gibson, Kate, Participation of
Victims in Pre-Trial Proceedings of the ICC, 4 J. Int’l Crim. Just.
219 (2006) . . . 95
Stand Your Ground Laws, Giffords Law Center (2021) . . . 852
Stanford Office of Substance Use Programs Education & Resources,
What Is a Sober Monitor? . . . 930
Starr, Sonja B., Evidence-Based Sentencing and the Scientific
Rationalization of Discrimination, 66 Stan. L. Rev. 803 (2014) . . .
30
Starr, Sonja B. & Rehavi, M. Marit, Mandatory Sentencing and Racial
Disparity: Assessing the Role of Prosecutors and the Effects of
Booker, 123 Yale L.J. 2 (2013) . . . 1137
Steblay, Nancy, The Impact on Juror Verdicts of Judicial Instructions
to Disregard Inadmissible Evidence: A Meta-Analysis Study, 30
Law & Hum. Behav. 469 (2006) . . . 145
p. 1352
p. 1353
Steiker, Carol S., The Death Penalty and Deontology, in The Oxford
Handbook of Philosophy of Criminal Law (John Deigh & David
Dolinko eds., 2011) . . . 1166
Steiker, Carol S., No, Capital Punishment Is Not Morally Required:
Deterrence, Deontology, and the Death Penalty, 58 Stan. L. Rev.
751 (2005) . . . 1165
Steiker, Carol S. & Steiker, Jordan M., No More Tinkering: The
American Law Institute and the Death Penalty Provisions of the
Model Penal Code, 89 Tex. L. Rev. 353 (2010) . . . 1204
Steiker, Carol S. & Steiker, Jordan M., Opening a Window or Building
a Wall? The Effect of Death Penalty Law and Advocacy on
Criminal Justice More Broadly, 11 U. Pa. J. Const. L. 155 (2008) .
. . 1180
Steiker, Carol S. & Steiker, Jordan M., The Seduction of Innocence:
The Attraction and Limitations of the Focus on Innocence in

--- Page 2325 ---
Capital Punishment Law and Advocacy, 95 J. Crim. L. &
Criminology 587 (2005) . . . 1168
Steiker, Carol S. & Steiker, Jordan M., Sober Second Thoughts:
Reflections on Two Decades of Constitutional Regulation of
Capital Punishment, 109 Harv. L. Rev. 355 (1995) . . . 1204
Steiker, Carol S. & Steiker, Jordan M., A Tale of Two Nations:
Implementation of the Death Penalty in “Executing” versus
“Symbolic” States in the United States, 84 Tex. L. Rev. 1869
(2006) . . . 1163
Steinberg, Robin & Albertson, Skylar, Broken Windows Policing and
Community Courts: An Unholy Alliance, 38 Cardozo L. Rev. 885
(2016) . . . 24
Stephen, James Fitzjames, Digest of the Criminal Law (5th ed. 1894)
. . . 889
Stephen, James Fitzjames, A History of the Criminal Law of England
(1883 ed.) . . . 44, 260, 602, 895, 910, 924, 975
Stern, Craig A., The Heart of Mens Rea and the Insanity of
Psychopaths, 42 Cap. U. L. Rev. 619 (2014) . . . 981
Stewart, Melody J., How Making the Failure to Assist Illegal Fails to
Assist, 25 Am. J. Crim. L. 385 (1998) . . . 267
Stinneford, John, Rethinking Proportionality Under the Cruel and
Unusual Punishments Clause, 97 Va. L. Rev. 899 (2011) . . . 244
Stone, Alan A., Law, Psychiatry, and Morality (1984) . . . 964
Strazzella, James A., The Relationship of Double Jeopardy to
Prosecution Appeals, 73 Notre Dame L. Rev. 1 (1997) . . . 141
Stuntz, William J., The Political Constitution of Criminal Justice, 119
Harv. L. Rev. 780 (2005) . . . 86, 135
Subotnik, Dan, “Hands Off”: Sex, Feminism, Affirmative Consent,
and the Law of Foreplay, 16 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Soc. Justice 249
(2007) . . . 425
Subramanian, Ram & Delaney, Ruth, Playbook for Change? States
Reconsider Mandatory Sentences (2014) . . . 1122
Suk, Jeannie, At Home in the Law (2009) . . . 827
Suk, Jeannie, Criminal Law Comes Home, 116 Yale L.J. 2 (2006). . .
. 449

--- Page 2326 ---
Suk, Jeannie, “The Look in His Eyes”: The Story of State v. Rusk
and Rape Reform, in Criminal Law Stories (Robert Weisberg &
Donna Coker eds., 2011) . . . 377, 398
Suk, Jeannie, The True Woman: Scenes from the Law of Self-
Defense, 31 Harv. J.L. & Gender 237 (2008) . . . 852
Suk Gerson, Jeannie, The Trouble with Teaching Rape Law (Dec.
15, 2014) . . . 377
p. 1353
p. 1354
Sundby, Scott E., The Lockett Paradox: Reconciling Guided
Discretion and Unguided Mitigation in Capital Sentencing, 38
UCLA L. Rev. 1147 (1991) . . . 1181
Sundby, Scott E., The Reasonable Doubt Rule and the Meaning of
Innocence, 40 Hastings L.J. 457 (1989) . . . 157
Sunstein, Cass R. & Vermeule, Adrian, Is Capital Punishment
Morally Required? Acts, Omissions, and Life-Life Tradeoffs, 58
Stan. L. Rev. 703 (2005) . . . 1164, 1165
Swan, Sarah L., Bystander Interventions, 2015 Wis. L. Rev. 975 . . .
272
Symposium on Crime Victim Law, Theory and Practice, 9 Lewis &
Clark L. Rev. 481 (2005) . . . 41
Symposium on Juries and Lay Participation: American Perspectives
and Global Trends, 90 Chi.-Kent L. Rev. 785 (2015) . . . 170
Talbot, The Position of the Christian Science Church, 26 New Eng. J.
Med. 1641 (1983) . . . 523
Tarm, Michael & Kunzelman, Michael, Trump Administration Carries
Out 13th and Final Execution (Jan. 15, 2021) . . . 1202
Tarr, Nina W., Employment and Economic Security for Victims of
Domestic Abuse, 16 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Soc. Just. 371 (2007) . . .
828
Taslitz, Andrew E., Willfully Blinded: On Date Rape and Self-
Deception, 28 Harv. J.L. & Gender 381 (2005) . . . 444, 450
Taub, Amanda, Rape Culture Isn’t a Myth. It’s Real, and It’s
Dangerous, Vox (Dec. 15, 2014) . . . 378

--- Page 2327 ---
Taurek, John M., Should the Numbers Count?, 6 Phil. & Pub. Aff.
293 (1977) . . . 892
Tebo, Margaret Graham, Guilty by Reason of Title, 86 A.B.A. J. 44
(May 2000) . . . 799
Tenzer, Leslie Y. Garfield, #MeToo, Statutory Rape Laws, and the
Persistence of Gender Stereotypes, 2019 Utah L. Rev. 117 . . .
327
Tetlow, Tania, Discriminatory Acquittal, 18 Wm. & Mary Bill Rts. J. 75
(2009) . . . 177
Thi, Bang, The Psychological Double-Edged Sword: How Media
Stigma Influences Aggravating and Mitigating Circumstances in
Capital Sentencing, 25 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Soc. Just. 173 (2016) . .
. 989
Thomas, Clarence, Punishment and Personhood, The City Journal
(Autumn 1994) . . . 1008
Thomas, W. Robert, The Ability and Responsibility of Corporate Law
to Improve Criminal Fines, 78 Ohio St. L.J. 601 (2017) . . . 785
Thompson, Heather Ann, Blood in the Water: The Attica Prison
Uprising of 1971 and Its Legacy (2016) . . . 93
Thompson, Larry D., Deputy Attorney General, Memorandum to
Heads of Department Components on Principles of Federal
Prosecution of Business Organizations (Jan. 20, 2003) . . . 771
Thompson, Richard M., II, Congressional Research Service, Mens
Rea Reform: A Brief Overview (Apr. 14, 2016) . . . 365
Thompson, Sandra Guerra, The White Collar Police Force: “Duty to
Report” Statutes in Criminal Law Theory, 11 Wm. & Mary Bill Rts.
J. 3 (2002) . . . 273
Thomson, Judith Jarvis, The Trolley Problem, 94 Yale L.J. 1395
(1985) . . . 892
Tiffany, Lawrence & Anderson, Carl, Legislating the Necessity
Defense in Criminal Law, 52 Denv. L.J. 839 (1975) . . . 883
p. 1354
p. 1355

--- Page 2328 ---
Tiffany, Lawrence & Tiffany, M., Nosologic Objection to the Criminal
Defense of Pathological Intoxication: What Do the Doubters
Doubt?, 13 Int’l J.L. & Psychiatry 49 (1990) . . . 999
Tillman, Zoe, Feds Won’t Bring Civil Rights Charges in Death of
Trayvon Martin, Legal Times (Feb. 24, 2015) . . . 811
Ting, Timothy James, It’s Time to Define Beyond a Reasonable
Doubt, 106 Ill. B.J. 24 (2018) . . . 151
Tjaden, Patricia & Thoennes, Nancy, Extent, Nature and
Consequences of Rape Victimization: Findings from the National
Violence Against Women Survey (Natl. Institute of Justice 2006) .
. . 382
Tomkovicz, James J., The Endurance of the Felony-Murder Rule, 51
Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 1429 (1994) . . . 539, 542
Tomlinson, Edward A., The French Experience with a Duty to
Rescue, 20 N.Y.L. Sch. J. Int’l & Comp. L. 451 (2000) . . . 271
Tonry, Michael, Prosecutors and Politics in Comparative Perspective,
41 Crime & Just. 1 (2012) . . . 101
Travis, Jeremy, But They All Come Back: Facing the Challenges of
Prisoner Reentry (2005) . . . 2
Trenga, Anna, Forcible Medication of Criminal Defendants: To Stand
Trial and to Be Executed, 25 Temp. Pol. & C.R. L. Rev. 265
(2016) . . . 944
Trieman, David, Recklessness and the Model Penal Code, 9 Am. J.
Crim. L. 283 (1981) . . . 303
Tsesis, Alexander, Social Media Accountability for Terrorist
Propaganda, 86 Fordham L. Rev. 605 (2017) . . . 671
Tuccille, J.D., A Strategy for Jury Nullification Victories in Georgia,
Reason Magazine (July 18, 2018) . . . 175
Tucker, Kathryn L., In the Laboratory of the States: The Progress of
Glucksberg’s Invitation to States to Address End of Life Choice,
106 Mich. L. Rev. 1593 (2008) . . . 901
Tuerkheimer, Deborah, Judging Sex, 97 Cornell L. Rev. 1461 (2012)
. . . 458, 460
Tuerkheimer, Deborah, Rape On and Off Campus, 65 Emory L.J. 1
(2015) . . . 412

--- Page 2329 ---
Tuerkheimer, Deborah, Sex Without Consent, 123 Yale L.J. Online
335 (2013) . . . 435
Tuerkheimer, Deborah, Underenforcement as Unequal Protection, 57
B.C. L. Rev. 4 (2016) . . . 6
Turner, Jenia Iontcheva, Judicial Participation in Plea Negotiations: A
Comparative View, 54 Am. J. Comp. L. 199 (2006) . . . 117
Twentieth Century Fund, Task Force on Criminal Sentencing, Fair
and Certain Punishment (1976) . . . 1121
Twinam, Tate, Danger Zone: Land Use and the Geography of
Neighborhood Crime, 100 J. Urb. Econ. 104 (2017) . . . 930
Tyler, Tom R., Why People Obey the Law (1990) . . . 21
Uhlmann, David M., After the Spill Is Gone: The Gulf of Mexico,
Environmental Crime, and the Criminal Law, 109 Mich. L. Rev.
1413 (2011) . . . 767
Uhlmann, David M., The Pendulum Swings: Reconsidering
Corporate Criminal Prosecution, 49 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 1235
(2016) . . . 766
p. 1355
p. 1356
Ulmer, Jeffrey T. & Bradley, Mindy S., Variation in Trial Penalties
Among Serious Violent Offenses, 44 Criminology 631 (2006) . . .
128
Unah, Isaac, Choosing Those Who Will Die: The Effect of Race,
Gender, and Law in Prosecutorial Decision to Seek the Death
Penalty in Durham County, North Carolina, 15 Mich. J. Race & L.
135 (2009) . . . 1200
U.S. Attorneys’ Manual, Principles of Federal Prosecution . . . 85, 87
U.S. Census, Bureau Quick Facts (July 2019) . . . 1
U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, Race Effects of Stand Your Ground
Laws (2020) . . . 854
U.S. Courts, Federal Court Management Statistics (2020) . . . 74
U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services, Mortality in the United
States, 2018 . . . 1101

--- Page 2330 ---
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Capital
Punishment Statistics . . . 1162
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Census of State
and Federal Correctional Facilities, 2000 . . . 1097
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Characteristics of
State Parole Supervising Agencies, 2006 (Aug. 2008) . . . 75
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Correctional
Populations in the United States (2016) . . . 1
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Crime in the
United States — 2009 (2010) . . . 69
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal Offender
Statistics, Lifetime Likelihood of Going to State or Federal Prison
. . . 2
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal
Victimization, 2004 (Sept. 2005) . . . 3
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal
Victimization, 2018 . . . 825
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal
Victimization, 2019 (2020) . . . 381, 382, 825
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Federal Justice
Statistics, 2011–2012 (2015) . . . 69, 81, 82
U.S. Dept. of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics, Felony Convictions
in State Courts, 2006 (Dec. 2009) . . . 82
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Female Victims of
Sexual Violence, 1994–2010 (2013) . . . 382
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Homicide Trends
in the United States: 1998 Update (Mar. 2000) . . . 30
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Intimate Partner
Violence, 1993–2010 (Nov. 2015) . . . 825, 826, 829
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Intimate Partner
Violence in the United States 1993–2005 (Dec. 2007) . . . 826
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Mortality in Local
Jails and State Prisons, 2000–2016 (Feb. 2020) . . . 1101
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Mortality in State
and Federal Prisons, 2001-2016 (Feb. 2020) . . . 1098

--- Page 2331 ---
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime
Victimization Survey — 2009 (2010) . . . 382
p. 1356
p. 1357
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, PREA Data
Collection Activities, 2015 . . . 1099
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Pretrial Release
and Misconduct in Federal District Courts, 2008–2010 (Nov.
2012) . . . 81
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prison and Jail
Inmates at Midyear 1999 (Apr. 2000) . . . 31
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2018
(Apr. 2020) . . . 1099
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prosecutors in
State Courts, 2007 (Dec 2011) . . . 72
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Rape and Sexual
Assault: Reporting to Police and Medical Attention, 1992-2000
(2002) . . . 381
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Rape and Sexual
Assault Victimization Among College-Age Females, 1995–2013
(2014) . . . 382
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Recidivism of
Prisoners Released in 1994 (2002) . . . 1107
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual
Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2011–
2012 . . . 1099
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual
Victimization Reported by Adult Correctional Authorities, 2012-
2015 . . . 1099
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Violence in
State and Federal Prisons — 2007 (2008) . . . 384
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sourcebook of
Criminal Justice Statistics Online . . . 69

--- Page 2332 ---
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report,
Suicide and Homicide in State Prisons and Local Jails (Aug.
2005) . . . 1098
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, State Court
Organization, 2011 (Nov. 2013) . . . 73
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Civil Rights Division & U.S. Attorney’s Offices
for the Northern, Middle, and Southern Districts of Alabama,
Investigation of Alabama’s State Prisons for Men (2019) . . . 1100
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Exploration and Production Inc. Agrees to
Plead Guilty to Felony Manslaughter, Environmental Crimes and
Obstruction of Congress Surrounding Deepwater Horizon
Incident, Nov. 15, 2012 . . . 767
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Indicators of Mental Health Problems Reported
by Prisoners and Jail Inmates, 2011-2012 (June 2017) . . . 941
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Memorandum from Mark Filip, Deputy Attorney
General, to Heads of Department Components and United States
Attorneys, Principles of Federal Prosecution of Business
Organizations, Aug. 28, 2008 . . . 772
U.S Dept. of Justice, Memorandum from Sally Quillian Yates, Deputy
Attorney General, to Heads of Department Components and
United States Attorneys, Sept. 9, 2015 . . . 772
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Office of Justice Programs Diagnostic Center,
Correctional Officer Wellness and Safety Literature Review
(2013) . . . 1101
U.S. Dept. of Justice, Office of the Inspector General, Review of the
Department’s Clemency Initiative (Aug. 2018) . . . 1150
U.S. Dept. of Justice, U.S. and Five Gulf States Reach Historic
Settlement with BP to Resolve Civil Lawsuit over Deepwater
Horizon Oil Spill, Oct. 5, 2015 . . . 767
p. 1357
p. 1358
U.S. Sentencing Commission, An Analysis of the Implementation of
the 2014 Clemency Initiative (Sept. 2017) . . . 1150
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Demographic Differences in
Sentencing: An Update to the 2012 Booker Report (2017) . . .

--- Page 2333 ---
1137
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Demographic Differences in
Sentencing (Nov. 14, 2017) . . . 2
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Fifteen Years of Guidelines
Sentencing (2004) . . . 1123
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Final Quarterly Data Report (2020) . .
. 1137
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Inter-District Differences in Federal
Sentencing Practices: Sentencing Practices Across Districts from
2005-2017 (Jan. 2020) . . . 1137
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Intra-City Differences in Federal
Sentencing Practices: Federal District Judges in 30 Cities, 2005-
2017 (Jan. 2019) . . . 1137
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Preliminary Quarterly Data Report
Through September 30, 2015 . . . 124
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Quick Facts: Mandatory Minimum
Penalties (2020) . . . 1122
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Report on the Continuing Impact of
United States v. Booker on Federal Sentencing (2012) . . . 1137
U.S. Sentencing Commission, Report to the Congress: Mandatory
Minimum Penalties in the Federal Criminal Justice System (July
2017) . . . 1122
Van Cleve, Nicole Gonzalez & Trivedi, Somil, To Serve and Protect
Each Other: How Police-Prosecutor Codependence Enables
Police Misconduct, 100 B.U. L. Rev. 895 (2020) . . . 93
van den Haag, Ernest, Punishing Criminals (1975) . . . 1168
van den Haag, Ernest, Refuting Reiman and Nathanson, in
Punishment and the Death Penalty: The Current Debate (Robert
M. Baird & Stuart E. Rosenbaum eds., 1995) . . . 1169
van Zyl Smit, Dir & Appleton, Catherine, Life Imprisonment: A Global
Human Rights Analysis (Harvard Univ. Press 2019) . . . 1
Vera Institute for Justice, People in Jail and Prison in 2020 (Jan.
2021) . . . 1
Verga, Rita J., An Advocate’s Toolkit: Using Criminal “Theft of
Service” Laws to Enforce Workers’ Right to Be Paid, 8 N.Y. City

--- Page 2334 ---
L. Rev. 283 (2005) . . . 1036
Vickers, Susan H., ed., Beyond the Criminal Justice System: Our
Nation’s Response to Rape (Victim Rights Law Center 2003) . . .
451
Vidmar, Neil, The Canadian Criminal Jury: Searching for a Middle
Ground, 62 Law & Contemp. Probs. 141 (1999) . . . 169
Vidmar, Neil, ed., World Jury Systems (2000) . . . 170
Villa, John K., A Critical View of Bank Secrecy Act Enforcement and
the Money Laundering Statutes, 37 Cath. U. L. Rev. 489 (1988) .
. . 672
Virginia Criminal Sentencing Commission, 2020 Annual Report 12
(2020) . . . 1136
Vitale, Alex S., The End of Policing (2017) . . . 20, 68
Vitiello, Michael, California’s Three Strikes and We’re Out: Was
Judicial Activism California’s Best Hope?, 37 U.C. Davis L. Rev.
1025 (2004) . . . 244
Vitiello, Michael, Defining the Reasonable Person in the Criminal
Law: Fighting the Lernaean Hydra, 14 Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 1435
(2010) . . . 818
p. 1358
p. 1359
Vitiello, Michael, Punishing Sex Offenders: When Good Intentions
Go Bad, 40 Ariz. St. L.J. 651 (2008) . . . 443
Vitiello, Michael, Reconsidering Rehabilitation, 65 Tul. L. Rev. 1011
(1991) . . . 22, 24, 25
Vitiello, Michael, Three Strikes: Can We Return to Rationality?, 87 J.
Crim. L. & Criminology 395 (1997) . . . 1153, 1156
Volokh, Alexander, n Guilty Men, 146 U. Pa. L. Rev. 173 (1997) . . .
148
Volokh, Eugene, The Freedom of Speech and Bad Purposes, 63
UCLA L. Rev. 1366 (2016) . . . 688
von Hirsch, Andrew & Ashworth, Andrew, Proportionate Sentencing:
Exploring the Principles (2005) . . . 236

--- Page 2335 ---
von Hirsch, Andrew & Maher, Lisa, Should Penal Rehabilitationism
Be Revived?, Crim. Just. Ethics 25 (Winter/Spring 1992) . . . 26
Waldman, Ari E., Tormented: Antigay Bullying in Schools, 84 Temp.
L. Rev. 385 (2012) . . . 591
Walen, Alec D., Consensual Sex Without Assuming the Risk of
Carrying an Unwanted Fetus; Another Foundation for the Right to
an Abortion, 63 Brook. L. Rev. 1051 (1997) . . . 893
Walen, Alec D., Criminalizing Statements of Terrorist Intent, 101 J.
Crim. L. & Criminology 803 (2011) . . . 615
Walen, Alec D., Transcending the Means Principle, 33 L. & Phil. 427
(2014) . . . 894
Walker, James, San Francisco’s New DA Will Not Prosecute
Prostitution, Public Urination Cases: “We Must Think Differently,”
Newsweek (Nov. 13, 2019) . . . 86
Walker, Lenore E., The Battered Woman (1979) . . . 822
Walker, Lenore E., A Response to Elizabeth M. Schneider’s
Describing and Changing, 9 Women’s Rts. L. Rep. 223 (1986) . .
. 844
Wallace, M. Harvey & Wedlock, Shanda, Federal Sentencing
Guidelines and Gender Issues: Parental Responsibilities,
Pregnancy and Domestic Violence, 2 San Diego Just. J. 395
(1994) . . . 1170
Walsh, Michael H., The American Jury: A Reassessment, 79 Yale
L.J. 142 (1969) . . . 170
Ward, Cynthia V., “Stand Your Ground” and Self Defense, 42 Am. J.
Crim. L. 89 (2015) . . . 865
Washington Post-Kaiser Family Foundation Survey of College
Students on Sexual Assault . . . 446
Webb, Lindsey, Slave Narratives and the Sentencing Court, 42
N.Y.U. Rev. L. & Soc. Change 125 (2018) . . . 1102
Wechsler, Herbert, Codification of Criminal Law in the United States:
The Model Penal Code, 68 Col. L. Rev. 1425 . . . 498
Wechsler, Herbert, Insanity as a Defense: A Panel Discussion, 37
F.R.D. 365 (1964) . . . 970

--- Page 2336 ---
Weisberg, Robert, The Death Penalty Meets Social Science:
Deterrence and Jury Behavior Under New Scrutiny, 1 Ann. Rev.
L. & Soc. Sci. 151 (2005) . . . 1164
Weisburd, David, Do Stop, Question, and Frisk Practices Deter
Crime?, 15 Criminology & Pub. Pol’y 31 (2016) . . . 232
p. 1359
p. 1360
Weisburd, David, What Works in Crime Prevention and
Rehabilitation: An Assessment of Systematic Reviews, 16
Criminology & Pub. Pol’y 415 (2017) . . . 25
Weissmann, Andrew, Where Law Ends: Inside the Mueller
Investigation (2020) . . . 94
Weissmann, Andrew & Newman, David, Rethinking Criminal
Corporate Liability, 82 Ind. L.J. 411 (2007) . . . 781
Wendzel, Bailey, Not Guilty, Yet Continuously Confined: Reforming
the Insanity Defense, 57 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 391 (2020) . . . 946
Werle, Nick, Note, Prosecuting Corporate Crime When Firms Are
Too Big to Jail: Investigation, Deterrence, and Judicial Review,
128 Yale L.J. 1366 (2019) . . . 768
Wertheimer, Alan, Consent to Sexual Relations (2003) . . . 419
Westen, Peter, Individualizing the Reasonable Person in Criminal
Law, 2 Crim. L. & Phil. 137 (2008) . . . 518
Westen, Peter, The Logic of Consent (2003) . . . 419
Westen, Peter, The Supreme Court’s Bout with Insanity: Clark v.
Arizona, 4 Ohio St. L.J. 143 (2006) . . . 988
Westen, Peter & Mangiafico, James, The Criminal Defense of
Duress: A Justification, Not an Excuse — And Why It Matters, 6
Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 833 (2003) . . . 914
Wharton, F., American Criminal Law (1st ed. 1846) . . . 1043
Wharton, F., Criminal Law (12th ed. 1932) . . . 695, 701, 753
White House, Fact Sheet: Executive Order on Promoting
Competition in the American Economy (July 9, 2021) . . . 1070
White House Council of Economic Advisers, Economic Perspectives
on Incarceration and the Justice System (Apr. 2016) . . . 5, 18,

--- Page 2337 ---
19, 20
White, Welsh S., The Death Penalty in the Eighties (1987) . . . 1199
Whitman, James Q., What Is Wrong with Inflicting Shame
Sanctions?, 107 Yale L.J. 1055 (1998) . . . 1110
Wiley, John S., Not Guilty by Reason of Blameworthiness: Culpability
in Federal Criminal Interpretation, 85 Va. L. Rev. 1021 (1999) . . .
363
Wilkinson, Robert M. “Monty,” Acting Attorney Gen. of the United
States, Memorandum on Interim Guidance on Prosecutorial
Discretion, Charging, and Sentencing (Jan. 19, 2021) . . . 1123
Williams, Glanville, Blackmail, 1954 Crim. L. Rev. 162 . . . 1052
Williams, Glanville, Criminal Law: The General Part (2d ed. 1961) . .
. 261, 305, 520, 620, 647, 661, 701, 925
Williams, Glanville, Finis for Novus Actus?, 48 Cambridge L.J. 391
(1989) . . . 589, 592
Williams, Glanville, The Mental Element in Crime (1965) . . . 301
Williams, Glanville, Police Control of Intending Criminals, [1955]
Crim. L. Rev. 66 . . . 614
Williams, Glanville, The Proof of Guilt (3d ed. 1963) . . . 165
Williams, Glanville, Textbook on Criminal Law (2d ed. 1983) . . . 701,
891
Williams, Glanville, The Unresolved Problem of Recklessness, 8
Legal Stud. 74 (1988) . . . 302
Williams, Glanville, Victims and Other Exempt Parties in Crime, 10
Legal Stud. 245 (1990) . . . 698
Wilson, James Q., Thinking About Crime (rev. ed. 1983) . . . 19
p. 1360
p. 1361
Wilson, Maisie A., Note, The Law of Lenity: Enacting a Codified
Federal Rule of Lenity, 70 Duke L.J. 1663 (2021) . . . 203
Wilson, Molly K. Wilson, Defense Attorney Bias and the Rush to
Plea, 65 Kan. L. Rev. 271 (2016) . . . 127
Winick, Bruce J., The Supreme Court’s Evolving Death Penalty
Jurisprudence: Severe Mental Illness as the Next Frontier, 50

--- Page 2338 ---
B.C. L. Rev. 785 (2009) . . . 1191
Winslade, W. & Ross, J., The Insanity Plea (1983) . . . 958
Withey, Carol, Rape and Sexual Assault Education, 13 New Crim. L.
Rev. 802 (2010) . . . 451
Witmer-Rich, Jonathan, The Heat of Passion and Blameworthy
Reasons to Be Angry, 55 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 409 (2018) . . . 502
Wolff, Nancy & Shi, Jing, Contextualization of Physical and Sexual
Assault in Male Prisons: Incidents and Their Aftermath, 15 J.
Corr. Health Care 58 (2009) . . . 1098
Wooton, Barbara, Crime and the Criminal Law (1963) . . . 906
World Health Organization, Policy Briefing, Alcohol and Violence
(2006) . . . 929
Wright, Nancy, Voice for the Voiceless: The Case for Adopting the
Domestic Abuse Syndrome for Self Defense Purposes for All
Victims of Domestic Violence Who Kill Their Abusers, 4 Crim. L.
Brief 76 (2009) . . . 835
Wright, Richard A., Prisons: Prisoners, Encyclopedia of Crime and
Justice (J. Dressler ed., 2d ed. 2002) . . . 1097
Wright, Ronald F., Statement Before the United States Sentencing
Commission, Regional Hearing (Feb. 11, 2009) . . . 1136
Wright, Ronald F., Trial Distortion and the End of Innocence in
Federal Criminal Justice, 154 U. Pa. L. Rev. 79 (2005) . . . 129
Wright, Ronald F. & Levine, Kay L., The Cure for Young Prosecutors’
Syndrome, 56 Ariz. L. Rev. 1065 (2014) . . . 89
Wright, Ronald F. & Miller, Marc, The Screening/Bargaining Tradeoff,
55 Stan. L. Rev. 29 (2002) . . . 87, 89
Xu, April Xiaoyi, Applying the Model Penal Code Insanity Defense to
Sleepwalking Killers and Psychopaths: Interfacing Neuroscience
and Criminal Law, 23 New Crim. L. Rev. 471 (2020) . . . 982
Yaffe, Gideon, Criminal Attempts, 124 Yale L.J. 92 (2014) . . . 607
Yaffe, Gideon, Intoxication, Recklessness, and Negligence, 9 Ohio
St. J. Crim. L. 547 (2011–2012) . . . 932
Yaffe, Gideon, The Point of Mens Rea: The Case of Willful
Ignorance, 12 Crim. L. & Phil. 19 (2018) . . . 308

--- Page 2339 ---
Yakubovich, Alexa R., Effects of Laws Expanding Civilian Rights to
Use Deadly Force in Self-Defense on Violence and Crime: A
Systematic Review, Am. J. Pub. Health (Apr. 2021) . . . 854
Yamen, Sharon, Carr, Nancy K. & Bartholomew, Aaron, Am I My
Brother’s Keeper? How Technology Necessitates Reform of the
Lack of Duty to Rescue or Duty to Report Laws in the United
States, 28 B.U. Pub. Int. L.J. 117 (2019) . . . 267, 268
Yang, Crystal S., Have Interjudge Sentencing Disparities Increased
in an Advisory Guidelines Regime? Evidence from Booker, 89
N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1268 (2014) . . . 1137
p. 1361
p. 1362
Yang, Crystal S., Toward an Optimal Bail System, 92 N.Y.U. L. Rev.
1399 (2017) . . . 80
Yeager, Daniel B., Decoding the Impossibility Defense, 56 U.
Louisville L. Rev. 359 (2018) . . . 650
Yeager, Daniel B., A Radical Community of Aid: A Rejoinder to
Opponents of Affirmative Duties to Help Strangers, 71 Wash. U.
L.Q. 1 (1993) . . . 266, 267
Yorke, Susan, Jury Nullification Instructions as Structural Error, 95
Wash. L. Rev. 1441 (2020) . . . 178
Yung, Corey Rayburn, How to Lie with Rape Statistics: America’s
Hidden Rape Crisis, 99 Iowa L. Rev. 1197 (2014) . . . 455
Yung, Corey Rayburn, Rape Law Fundamentals, 27 Yale J.L. &
Feminism 1 (2015) . . . 385
Zelcer, Amy M., Battling Domestic Violence: Replacing Mandatory
Arrest Laws with a Trifecta of Preferential Arrest, Officer
Education, and Batterer Treatment Programs, 51 Am. Crim. L.
Rev. 541 (2014) . . . 827
Zimring, Franklin E., A Consumer’s Guide to Sentencing Reform:
Making the Punishment Fit the Crime, 6 Hastings Ctr. Rep. 13
(1976) . . . 1134
Zimring, Franklin E., When Police Kill (2017) . . . 869

--- Page 2340 ---
Zimring, Franklin E. & Hawkins, Gordon, Incapacitation — Penal
Confinement and the Restraint of Crime (1995) . . . 27
Zimring, Franklin E., Hawkins, Gordon, & Kamin, Sam, Punishment
and Democracy: Three Strikes and You’re Out in California
(2001); . . . 1153
Zorza, Joan, The Criminal Law of Misdemeanor Domestic Violence,
83 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 46 (1992) . . . 827
p. 1362

--- Page 2341 ---
p. 1363

--- Page 2342 ---
I
NDEX
A
Abandoned property, misappropriation, 1029
Abandonment
actus reus and, 615–616
of conspiracy, 739
Abolition
alternatives, 60–61
crimes not stemming from structural deprivation, 62
deep structural change, 61
defunding police, 8, 20, 67
democracy and, 57
foundational vs. incremental change, 61–62
of incarceration, 5, 56, 59
of insanity defense, 968–972
assessment of, 969
blame as imperative, 969–972
“hands-off” principle, 969
state efforts, 969
terminology, 968–969
of law enforcement, 5, 59
overview, 53–54
of provocation, 489–490
strategy and tactics, 60
traditional theories of punishment and, 62–63
who is abolitionist, 60
ACCA (Armed Career Criminal Act of 1984), 229–230
Accessories. See Complicity
Accomplices. See Complicity
Acoustic separation approach, 315–316

--- Page 2343 ---
Acquittal, 140
Actus reus, 248–284
abandonment and, 615–616
attempt, 615–616
complicity, 685–701. See also Complicity
conspiracy, 721–728
attempt vs., 723–724
complicity vs., 723–724
overt-act requirement, 726–728
overview, 721
excuse and, 1004–1005
greater culpability of principal actor, 701
lesser culpability of principal actor, 699–701
omissions, 261–284. See also Omissions
rape, 392–435
absence of consent, 412–429
deception, 429–435
force and coercion, 393–412
overview, 392–393
voluntary action requirement, 248–261. See also Voluntary action
requirement
words as acts, 633–637
Addiction as excuse, 990–992, 1002–1005
Administrative law, plea bargaining and, 135–139
Adultery as provocation, 482–485, 491
Affirmative defenses
burden of proof, 152–155
gratuitous defenses, 156
nongratuitous defenses, 157–158
overview, 141
strict liability, 346–347
Age
alcoholic beverage offenses, strict liability, 339–341
duress and, 912–913

--- Page 2344 ---
mistake of fact, 312–314
rape, absence of consent, 426
Agency costs, 120–121
Agents, criminal liability of, 788–802. See also Corporate criminality
Aiding and abetting. See Complicity
p. 1363
p. 1364
Alcoholic beverage offenses, strict liability, 339–341
Alcoholism as excuse, 992–1001
Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, 168
American Law Institute. See Model Penal Code
Anti-Riot Act of 1968, 637
Appointed counsel, 73
“Arbitrary” leniency, 176–177
Armed Career Criminal Act of 1984 (ACCA), 229–230
Arson
causation, 574–576
felony murder and, 532–534
Model Penal Code, 1267–1269
Asportation, 1017–1018
Assault
attempt, 616–618, 622
with intent to rape, 616–618
Model Penal Code, 1250
Assisted suicide, 584–589
Attempt, 601–650. See also specific offense
abandonment, 615–616
actus reus requirement, 615–616
assault, 616–618, 622
attendant circumstances, 609–610
burglary, 621
complicity compared, 677–678, 689–690
confessions and, 619

--- Page 2345 ---
conspiracy vs., 723–724, 758–759
dangerous proximity test, 612–614
drug offenses, 631–632
equivocality test, 619–621
felony murder, 608–609
impossibility, 637–650
intent requirement, 606
manslaughter, 608
mens rea requirement, 604–611
mere preparation as, 622–623
Model Penal Code, 629–630, 632–633
omissions, 633
overview, 601–604
policing measures, 623
preparation vs., 611–633
proximity test, 612–614
punishment grading, 601–604
race and, 618–619
robbery, 612–614, 627–629
solicitation, 633–637
specific intent, 606–610
stalking, 623–626
statutory reform, 629–630
substantial step formula, 627–629
transferred intent and, 609
unprotected sex and, 604–606
Attendant circumstances
attempt, 609–610
complicity, 672–679
conspiracy, 735–737
facts essential to criminality, 736–737
facts increasing gravity of offense, 736
mens rea, 609–610
Model Penal Code, 676–677

--- Page 2346 ---
Automatism, 981–982
defendant’s option, 981
sane vs. insane automatism, 981–982
sleep, 982
Automobile accidents, causation, 595–599
Autonomy, causation and, 589–590
B
Bail Reform Act of 1984, 81
Battered woman’s syndrome (BWS). See Intimate partner violence
Battery. See Assault
Bench trials, 140
Biased nullification, 177
Black Lives Matter, 68, 868
Blackmail, 1049–1059
First Amendment and, 1054–1055
Model Penal Code, 1052
nature of threat, 1051–1052
practice of law and, 1052
rationale of, 1058–1059
victims threatening lawsuits, 1052–1053
Blameworthy acts, 253–254
Burden of persuasion, 155–156
Burden of production, 155–156
Burden of proof
affirmative defenses, 152–155
insanity defense, 948–949
p. 1364
p. 1365
reasonable doubt standard
allocation of, 151–159
discretion, 159
gratuitous defenses, 156

--- Page 2347 ---
nongratuitous defenses, 157–158
problems, 148
sentencing enhancements, 158–159
self-defense, 849
Burglary
attempt, 621
Model Penal Code, 1269–1270
Business crimes. See Corporate criminality
BWS (Battered woman’s syndrome). See Intimate partner violence
Bystanders
benefiting from victim’s peril, 267–268
duty to report, 272–273
duty to rescue, 270–271
in Europe, 271
Good Samaritans, 268–270
indifference, 265–267
intervention programs, 272
misprision of felony, 272–273
C
California
burglary, 300
consolidation, 1061
manslaughter, 464–465
murder, 463–464
protection of property, 864
rape, 387–389
by deception, 433–434
robbery, 1022–1023
Canada
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 345, 919, 1001
Criminal Code, 919
Motor Vehicle Act, 345
Cannabis, medical, 884–885

--- Page 2348 ---
Cannibalism, 8–14
Capacity evidence, 986
Capital punishment. See Death penalty
Case-in-chief, 141
Castle exception to duty to retreat, 855–856
co-occupants, 856
guests, 855
intruders, 855
Causation, 567–601
arson, 574–576
assisted suicide, 584–589
automobile accidents, 595–599
autonomy and, 589–590
coincidence and, 568–584
complicity and, 679, 689
drugs, providing, 600
factual cause, 572–574
foreseeability and, 568–584, 589–590
intentional vs. reckless choices, 594
intervening acts, 584–601
involuntary choices by subsequent actor, 594–595
involuntary manslaughter, 595–599
life support, removing, 591–592
medical malpractice, 579–580
Model Penal Code, 583, 600–601
murder, 568–571, 574–576
neglect or maltreatment of injury, 579–580
omissions, 580
overview, 567–568
proximate cause, 541, 572–574
rationale of requirement, 581–582
reckless or negligent aid, 588–589
religious beliefs and, 592
reluctant actor, encouraging, 590–591

--- Page 2349 ---
resulting harm, 567–601
“Russian roulette,” 599–600
source of trauma, 591
specific causal mechanism, 577
subsequent actions intended to produce result, 584–594
subsequent actions that recklessly risk result, 594–601
subsequent human actions, 584–601
subsequent victim behavior and, 590
suicide, 584–589
third parties, subsequent acts of, 592–594
transferred intent, 582–584
attempt and, 609
homicide and, 584
Model Penal Code, 583
p. 1365
p. 1366
voluntary choices by subsequent actor, 595
vulnerable victim and, 578–579
Cautionary instructions, 144–145
Charging decision. See also Discretion
alternatives to, 90
Europe, “compulsory” prosecution in, 100–101
independent checks, 90, 98–99
intimate partner violence, 96–97
judges, prosecutions initiated by, 94–95
restorative justice and, 97–98
selective prosecution, 101–106
disparate patterns, 106
drug offenses, 102–105
federalism and, 107
firearms offenses, 102–105
race and, 105–106
transparency and, 107

--- Page 2350 ---
victimless crimes, 98
victim participation in, 95–96
victims, prosecutions initiated by, 94–95
Child abuse, 263–265
Child pornography
distributing, strict liability, 337–338
producing, strict liability, 338–339
Children and minors
age, mistake of fact, 312–314
alcoholic beverage offenses, strict liability, 339–341
child rape, death penalty, 1190
juvenile offenders
capital cases, 1189–1190
death penalty, 1189–1190
gun possession, 668–669
life without parole, 1160–1161
restrictions on having, 1111
sexual abuse, mistake of fact, 319–326
starving children, economic necessity, 886
statutory rape
mistake of fact, 327–329
strict liability, 327–328
Choice of lesser evil, 876–896. See also Necessity
Chokeholds, 868, 873
Civil rights, jury trials and, 163–164
Clean hands, necessity and, 882
Cocaine
attempt, 631–632
crack cocaine, reforms, 107–108
Coercion
Model Penal Code, 1251–1252
plea bargaining and, 128–129
rape, 393–412. See also Rape
Coincidence, causation and, 568–584

--- Page 2351 ---
Common law
complicity at, 652–653
legality principle and, 190–191
new common-law crimes, 193–194
old common-law crimes, 193
Competence to stand trial, 941–942
Compliance programs, corporations, 785–786
Complicity, 651–701
actus reus, 685–701
accomplice as victim, 698–699
acquitted principal, 698
attempted complicity, 689–690
causation and, 689
culpability, 699–701
culpable-but-unconvictable principal, 697–698
encouragement, 685–688
entrapment, 695–696
innocent agent doctrine, 696–697
materiality of aid, 688–691
Model Penal Code, 699
nonculpable principal as innocent agent, 696–697
omissions and, 690–691
onlookers, 687
relationship between liability of parties, 692–701
shared intent, 694–695
speech, 687–688
attempt compared, 677–678, 689–690
causation and, 679, 689
at common law, 652–653
conspiracy as form of complicity liability, 707–721
actus reus and, 723–724
overview, 653
p. 1366

--- Page 2352 ---
p. 1367
Pinkerton doctrine, 707–721. See also Pinkerton doctrine
culpability, 653–655
greater culpability of principal actor, 701
lesser culpability of principal actor, 699–701
entrapment and, 695–696
felony murder, limiting liability for, 542–543
First Amendment and, 687–688
innocent agent doctrine, 696–697
mens rea, 655–685
accomplice liability based on same mental state as substantive
offense, 675–676
actions of principal, 655–672
advance knowledge, 667–668
attempt compared, 677–678
causation and, 679
criminal facilitation, 668–672
knowledge vs. purpose, 667
Model Penal Code, 660–661, 676–677
natural and probable consequences theory, 680–685
omissions and, 691
overview, 655
purchase, aiding and abetting, 659–660
results and attendant circumstances, 672–679
sale, aiding and abetting, 660
seriousness of substantive offenses, 662–663
natural and probable consequences theory, 680–685
Model Penal Code, 685
Pinkerton doctrine compared, 684–685
state of law, 683–684
by omission
actus reus, 690–691
mens rea, 691
punishment, 653–655

--- Page 2353 ---
sentencing, 653–655
shared intent, 694–695
statutory provisions, 652–653
theory of, 651–652
Concurrence requirement, 258–259
Confessions, attempt and, 619
Confidential business information, theft of, 1069–1071
Conflicts of interest, plea bargaining and, 120
Consent as defense
causation and, 584–589
rape, 412–429. See also Rape
trespassory takings, 1019–1021
Consolidation, 1060–1061
Conspiracy, 701–760
abandonment of, 739
actus reus, 721–728
attempt vs., 723–724
complicity vs., 723–724
overt-act requirement, 726–728
overview, 721
attempt vs., 723–724, 758–759
completion of objectives, 737–738
complicity liability, as form of, 707–721
actus reus and, 723–724
overview, 653
Pinkerton doctrine, 707–721
concealment of objectives, 737–738
consequences of charge, 703–707
accessory liability, 706–707
criminalizing non-criminal objectives, 705
procedural consequences, 703–704
sentencing, 705–706
spillover effects, 704–705
criticism of, 759–760

--- Page 2354 ---
duration of, 737
impossibility, 738–739
as inchoate offense, 701–703
meanings of, 701
mens rea, 728–737
attendant circumstances, 735–737
corrupt motive, 735
facts essential to criminality, 736–737
facts increasing gravity of offense, 736
felony cases, purpose or knowledge, 733
p. 1367
p. 1368
Model Penal Code, 706
multiple objectives, 749–750
nonreciprocal conspiracy, 749
overt-act requirement, 726–728
justifications for, 727–728
liability without overt act, 726
statutes requiring overt act, 726–727
overview, 701–707
parties to, 752–759
acquitted co-conspirators, 753
attempt, 758–759
Model Penal Code, 754
modern statutes, 758
rationale for traditional approach, 758
traditional conspiracy, 757
“Wharton’s rule,” 753–755
Pinkerton doctrine, 707–721. See also Pinkerton doctrine
reassessment of, 759–760
renunciation of, 739
sentencing and, 705–706
single vs. multiple conspiracies, 741–751

--- Page 2355 ---
drug offenses, 749
insider trading, 749
Model Penal Code, 741, 750–751
multiple objectives, 749–750
nonreciprocal conspiracy, 749
Sixth Amendment and, 703
withdrawal from, 739–740
Constitution. See also specific Clause or Amendment
death penalty, constitutional limitations, 1170–1205. See also
Death penalty
felony murder, constitutional considerations, 544
rape shield laws, constitutional concerns, 458
strict liability, constitutionality of, 345
vagueness, constitutional foundations, 224–225
Constructive force, rape and, 406
Contract system, 73
Contributory fault, duress and, 920–921
Contributory negligence, homicide and, 510
Controlled Substances Act of 1970, 900
Controlled substances offenses. See Drug offenses
Conversion, strict liability, 331–335
Co-occupants, castle exception to duty to retreat, 856
Cooling time, 493–494
Copies, theft of, 1068–1069
Corporate criminality, 760–802
agents, liability of, 788–802
expansion of responsibilities of officers, 801
liability of corporate entity for acts of agents, 775–780
mens rea, 799
Model Penal Code, 788
officers, 799–800
other theories of criminal liability, 801–802
overview, 788
powerless defendants and, 796–797

--- Page 2356 ---
responsible corporate officer doctrine, 796–797, 799
severity of penalties, 797
vicarious liability, 795–796
compliance programs, 785–786
corporate entity, liability, 761–783
acts of agents, 775–780
alternatives, 781–782
arguments against, 767–768
arguments for, 766–767
collateral consequences, 768–769
collective knowledge, 774–775
deferred prosecution agreements (DPAs), 772–774
intent to benefit corporation, 770
Model Penal Code, 768, 780–781
non-prosecution agreements (NPAs), 772–774
prosecutorial discretion, 770–772
respondeat superior, 769
tort liability vs. criminal liability, 763
for which crimes, 763
“death penalty,” 787–788
deferred prosecution agreements (DPAs), 772–774, 786
fines, 784–785
involuntary manslaughter, 576–577
p. 1368
p. 1369
non-prosecution agreements (NPAs), 772–774, 786
officers, liability of, 799–800
expansion of responsibilities, 801
other theories of criminal liability, 801–802
responsible corporate officer doctrine, 796–797, 799
overview, 760–761
punishment, 783–788
compliance programs, 785–786

--- Page 2357 ---
“death penalty,” 787–788
deferred prosecution agreements (DPAs), 786
fines, 784–785
judicial review, 786–787
non-prosecution agreements (NPAs), 786
overview, 783
responsible corporate officer doctrine, 796–797, 799
Corrections. See Incarceration
Corroboration, rape and, 454–455
Corruption as theft, 1081–1082
Corrupt motive, conspiracy and, 735
Crack cocaine, reforms, 107–108
Credibility, rape and, 455
Crime Control Act of 1994, 1203
Crime Victims’ Rights Act of 2004, 95
Criminal case, stages of, 78–83
dismissal, 79
diversion, 79
flow of cases, 82–83
guilty pleas, 82. See also Guilty pleas
investigation, 78–79
pretrial release, 79–82
sentencing, 82. See also Sentencing
trials, 82. See also Trials
Criminal Damage Act (UK), 357
Criminal facilitation, 668–672
juvenile gun possession, 668–669
material support to terrorism, 669–671
money laundering, 671–672
as stand-alone crime, 668
Criminal justice system, 67–75
defense counsel, 72–73
appointed counsel, 73
contract system, 73

--- Page 2358 ---
defender system, 73
effective assistance of counsel, 114–115
indigent defendants, 72–73
non-indigent defendants, 72
plea bargaining, role in, 111–112
discretion in, 68
high volume of cases, 67
incarceration, 74–75
judges, 73–74
jury trials, effect of, 164
law enforcement, 71
legislative reforms, 69
less serious offenses, 67
multiple jurisdictions, 69–71
politicization of, 68
prosecutors, 71–72
shortage of resources and personnel, 67
Criminal mischief, Model Penal Code, 1267–1269
Cross-examination
rape, proof of, 455–456
at trial, 142
Cruel and unusual punishment
death penalty, 1171–1177, 1180–1199
insanity defense and, 942–944
non-capital cases, sentencing in, 1150–1161
prison conditions and, 1100
proportionality and, 237–244, 246–247
Culpability, 248–375
actus reus, 248–284. See also Actus reus
complicity, 653–655
greater culpability of principal actor, 701
lesser culpability of principal actor, 699–701
insanity defense, “volitional prong,” 960–961
involuntary intoxication and, 937

--- Page 2359 ---
knowledge. See Knowledge
mens rea, 284–375. See also Mens rea
mistake of fact, 312–329. See also Mistake of fact
p. 1369
p. 1370
mistake of law, 350–375. See also Mistake of law
Model Penal Code, 189–190
negligence. See Negligence
omissions, 261–284. See also Omissions
proportionality and, 248
purpose. See Purpose
rape, culpability vs. punishment, 443
recklessness. See Recklessness
strict liability, 329–349. See also Strict liability
voluntary action requirement, 248–261. See also Voluntary action
requirement
willful blindness, 304–312. See also Willful blindness
“Cultural defense,” 374–375
Culture
guideline sentencing, cultural context, 1146–1147
mistake of law, “cultural defense,” 374–375
provocation, reasonable person requirement, 502–503
self-defense and, 819
Cyber-stalking, 624–626
D
Dangerous proximity test, 612–614
Date rape, 424, 440, 447
Deadly force
deadly threat requirement, 815, 847–848
defensive force qualifying as, 815
law enforcement’s use of, 867–876
overview, 815

--- Page 2360 ---
self-defense and, 6
video-recording of, 233
Death penalty, 1161–1205
bias, 1168–1170
child rape, 1190
constitutional limitations, 1170–1205
corporate “death penalty,” 787–788
cruel and unusual punishment, 1171–1177, 1180–1199
current context, 1162–1163
DNA testing and, 1167
Eighth Amendment and, 1171–1178, 1180–1199
experts and, 1190
Fourteenth Amendment and, 1200
future applications, 1191
independent judgment of court and, 1191
individualized capital sentencing, 1178–1180
insanity defense and, 942–944
jury trials and
death qualification, 1201
predicting jury’s attitude, 1201–1202
juvenile offenders, 1189–1190
mentally disabled persons, 1183–1188
method of execution, 1182–1183
methodological questions, 1190–1191
overview, 1170
plea bargaining and, 108–112, 125
procedural due process, 1170–1171
proportionality, 1188–1190
provisions nature of decisions, 1177–1178
race and, 1191–1205
constitutional doctrine, 1204–1205
legislative initiatives, 1203
local demographics, 1200–1201
local influences, 1202

--- Page 2361 ---
Model Penal Code, 1203–1204
nature of racial discrimination, 1200–1205
predicting jury’s attitude, 1201–1202
race of defendants vs. race of victims, 1200
risk of wrongful conviction, 1168–1170
risk of wrongful conviction, 1166–1168, 1191–1200
social consensus and, 1190
tension in Court jurisprudence, 1180–1182
theories of punishment, 1163–1166
Deception
rape, 429–435
theft by, felony murder and, 545–546
p. 1370
p. 1371
Decoys, 637–639
Defective consent, 426–429
Defender system, 73
Defense counsel, 72–73
appointed counsel, 73
contract system, 73
defender system, 73
effective assistance of counsel, 114–115
indigent defendants, 72–73
non-indigent defendants, 72
plea bargaining, role in, 111–112
Defense Production Act of 1950, 789–790
Defenses
consent as
causation and, 584–589
rape, 412–429. See also Rape
trespassory takings, 1019–1021
insanity defense, 938–982. See also Insanity defense
mistake of law as, 357–358

--- Page 2362 ---
necessity, 876–896. See also Necessity
Deferred prosecution agreements (DPAs), 772–774, 786
Defunding police, 8, 20, 67
Deific decree exception, 976
Desert, 15–16
Deterrence, 18–22
certainty vs. severity, 20
death penalty, 1163–1165
moral influence, 21–22
rational and well-informed actors, 19–20
variations in punishment, effect of, 18–19
Diminished capacity, 982–990
mens rea, as negating, 985–988
capacity evidence, 986
specific intent, 987–988
state of law, 985–986
total ban, 986
mental health and, 982–985
Model Penal Code, 989–990
Directed verdicts, 140
Direct examination, 142
Discretion, 84–108. See also Charging decision
burden of proof, 159
charging decision, alternatives to, 90
corporate criminality, 770–772
in criminal justice system, 68
determination of guilt and, 77–78
discretionary sentencing, 1114–1121
Due Process Clause and, 1117–1118
Fourteenth Amendment and, 1115, 1119
purposes of punishment and, 1119–1121
recent developments, 1118–1119
Sixth Amendment and, 1119
dismissal, alternatives to, 90

--- Page 2363 ---
Europe, “compulsory” prosecution in, 100–101
existence of, 84–85
federal vs. state prosecution, 88–89
honest services, theft of, 1084–1085
independent checks, 90, 98–99
internal review, 89
intimate partner violence, 96–97
investigation, statutory requirement, 90–92
office design and, 89
plea bargaining, 108–139. See also Plea bargaining
restorative justice and, 97–98
selective prosecution, 101–106
disparate patterns, 106
drug offenses, 102–105
federalism and, 107
firearms offenses, 102–105
race and, 105–106
transparency and, 107
special prosecutors, 92–94
standards, 86–88
victimless crimes, 98
Discrimination. See Race
Dismissal
alternatives to, 90
as stage in criminal case, 79
Disorderly conduct, Model Penal Code, 1279–1281
Disparate impact. See also Race
death penalty and, 1191–1205
incarceration and, 2–3
plea bargaining and, 127
selective prosecution and, 106
p. 1371
p. 1372

--- Page 2364 ---
District of Columbia, destruction of property statute, 300
Diversion, 79
DNA testing, 1167
Domestic violence. See Intimate partner violence
DPAs (Deferred prosecution agreements), 772–774, 786
Drug offenses
attempt, 631–632
causation, providing drugs, 600
crack cocaine, reforms, 107–108
impossibility, 644
mistake of fact, 319
Pinkerton doctrine, 717
proportionality, 237–242, 244–245
selective prosecution, 102–105
single vs. multiple conspiracies, 749
strict liability, 329–331
Drunk driving
manslaughter and, 528–531
murder and, 528–531
Due Process Clause
death penalty, procedural due process, 1170–1171
discretionary sentencing and, 1117–1118
incarceration and, 1145
official reliance and, 367
reasonable doubt standard and, 146–147
voluntary intoxication and, 932–933
Duress, 906–924
contributory fault, 920–921
guilt, question of, 922–923
imminence requirement, 917–920
mens rea and, 920
Model Penal Code, 910–914, 916
murder, as defense to, 921–922
defendant’s role in offense, 921–922

--- Page 2365 ---
felony murder, 921
sentencing, 921
nature of threat, 916
necessity compared, 914–915
objective standard, 911–914
immaturity and, 912–913
intellectual disability and, 912–913
intimate partner violence and, 913–914
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and, 914
partial vs. complete excuse, 911
positive inducements, 924
possible justification, 923–924
rape, force and coercion, 408
sentencing and
appropriate sentence, 924
murder, as defense to, 921
source of threat, 915–916
threats, 906–909
Duty to retreat, 849–858
castle exception, 855–856
current case law, 851–852
intimate partner violence, 856–858
“stand your ground” laws, 852–855
traditional view, 851
E
Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (EEA), 1072–1073
Economic necessity, 885–887
direct needs vs. speculative harms, 886–887
homeless persons, 885–886
starving children, 886
EED (Extreme emotional disturbance) test, 499–501
Effective assistance of counsel, plea bargaining and, 114–115
Eighth Amendment

--- Page 2366 ---
death penalty, 1171–1178, 1180–1199
insanity defense and, 942–944
non-capital cases, sentencing in, 1150–1161
prison conditions and, 1100
proportionality and, 237–244, 246–247
Electric cattle prods, 873
Elkins Act of 1903, 761
Embezzlement
mens rea, 1089
as misappropriation, 1025–1027
Endangering, reckless, Model Penal Code, 1250
p. 1372
p. 1373
Entrapment
complicity and, 695–696
by omission, 373–374
Environmental deprivation, excuse and, 1005–1012
Epilepsy, voluntary action requirement and, 257–258
Equal culpability thesis, 308
Equivocality test, 619–621
Escape, 880–881
legality principle and, 881
potential harms of, 880
Ethics in Government Act of 1978, 93
Europe
bystanders in, 271
“compulsory” prosecution in, 100–101
European Convention on Human Rights, 1161
Euthanasia, 896–904
assessment of, 902–904
in Oregon, 900–901
in other countries, 901–902
overview, 896

--- Page 2367 ---
recent developments, 901
suicide tourism, 902
in UK, 902
Evidence
cautionary instructions, 144–145
diminished capacity, capacity evidence, 986
exclusionary rules, 143–144
material, 142
order of proof, 141–142
overview, 140
prejudice and, 143–144
presentation of, 141–146
privilege and, 143
probative, 142
rape, mens rea, 446–447
relevance, 142–143
Excessive force. See Deadly force; Force
Exclusionary rules, 143–144
Exculpation
diminished capacity, 982–990. See also Diminished capacity
duress, 906–924. See also Duress
excuse, 904–1012. See also Excuse
insanity defense, 938–982. See also Insanity defense
justification, 804–904. See also Justification
necessity, 876–896. See also Necessity
self-defense, 804–861. See also Self-defense
Excuse, 904–1012
actus reus and, 1004–1005
addiction as, 990–992, 1002–1005
alcoholism as, 992–1001
changing patterns of, 990–1012
addiction, 990–992, 1002–1005
alcoholism, 992–1001
environmental deprivation, 1005–1012

--- Page 2368 ---
homeless persons, 999–1001
non-criminal incarceration of dangerous persons, 1001–1002
race and, 1008–1012
structural deprivation, 1005–1012
diminished capacity, 982–990. See also Diminished capacity
duress, 906–924. See also Duress
environmental deprivation and, 1005–1012
homeless persons and, 999–1001
insanity defense, 938–982. See also Insanity defense
intoxication, 924–937. See also Intoxication
manslaughter, provocation as partial excuse, 486–487
mens rea and, 1001
mental disorder, 938–990. See also Mental disorder
non-criminal incarceration of dangerous persons, 1001–1002
overview, 803–804, 904–906
punishment and, 15–16
race and, 1008–1012
rationale for, 904–906
status vs. act, 992
structural deprivation and, 1005–1012
Experts, death penalty and, 1190
Ex Post Facto Clause, 212–215
Expressive function of punishment, 45
p. 1373
p. 1374
Extortion, 1022–1024
Extreme emotional disturbance (EED) test, 499–501
F
Facilitation. See Criminal facilitation
Factual cause, 572–574
Factual impossibility, 641–642
Fair Sentencing Act of 2010, 107, 1123

--- Page 2369 ---
Faith healing, negligent homicide and, 523–524
False pretenses, theft by
as fraud, 1046–1048
mens rea, 1089
as trespassory taking, 1015–1017
False promises, 1044
Family members, omissions and
de facto family members, 274–276
duties of, 273–274
parent as victim, 276–277
Family offenses, Model Penal Code, 1278
Federal Death Penalty Abolition Act of 2021 (proposed), 1202
Federalism
discretion and, 88–89
official reliance and, 367–368
plea bargaining and, 139
selective prosecution and, 107
Federal Sentencing Guidelines
corporate criminality, 785
guideline sentencing, 1128–1132
Felonies, use of force in law enforcement, 872–873
Felony murder, 532–536
arson and, 532–534
attempt, 608–609
basic doctrine, 532–544
causation requirement, 536
firearms offenses and, 547–549
first-degree felony murder, 554–555
“inherently dangerous felony” limitation, 545–551
abstract approach, 546–551
committed approach, 549–551
degree of danger, 549–550
how dangerous, 546
scope of underlying felony, 546–547

--- Page 2370 ---
who decides, 550
judicial reforms, 543–544
constitutional considerations, 544
statutory interpretation, 543–544
merger doctrine, 551–558
enumerated felonies, 554–555
indoors vs. outdoors, 554
non-assaultive and non-independent purposes, 554–555
non-enumerated felonies, 555–556
misdemeanor-manslaughter, 541
Model Penal Code, 539–540
“not in furtherance” of felony, 558–565
after commission of felony, 558
implied malice, 563–564
justifiable homicide, 564
persons resisting felony, 559–561
protecting innocent, 564–565
unrelated to felony, 558–559
who does killing, 561–563
who is killed, 564–565
rationale for, 536–539
robbery and, 534–535, 551–553, 559–561
second-degree felony murder, 555–556
sentencing consequences, 535–536
shootings, 556–557
statutory reforms, 542–543
grading, 542
limiting complicity liability, 542–543
limiting eligible felonies, 542
mens rea requirement, 542
strict liability, 535
theft by deception and, 545–546
Feminist perspectives
intimate partner violence, 834–835

--- Page 2371 ---
stalking statutes, 623–626
Fetal homicide, 207–212
FIJA (Fully Informed Jury Association), 179–180
Fines
corporations, 784–785
proportionality, 245–246
Firearms offenses
felony murder and, 547–549
juvenile gun possession, 668–669
legality principle and, 205
mistake of law, 350–355
selective prosecution, 102–105
strict liability, 335–336
p. 1374
p. 1375
Fires, homicide and, 506–509
First Amendment
blackmail and, 1054–1055
complicity and, 687–688
incarceration and, 1145
solicitation and, 636–637
First Step Act of 2018, 32, 107, 1123
Flow of cases, 82–83
Floyd, George, 868
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act of 1938, 330, 791–795, 797, 801
Food and Drugs Act of 1906, 330
Force. See also Deadly force
law enforcement, use of force in, 867–876. See also Law
enforcement
rape, 393–412. See also Rape
Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, 755
Foreseeability
causation and, 568–584, 589–590

--- Page 2372 ---
punishment and, 43
Forfeitures, proportionality, 245–246
Forgery, Model Penal Code, 1274–1277
Fourteenth Amendment
death penalty and, 1200
discretionary sentencing and, 1115, 1119
Fourth Amendment
law enforcement, use of force in, 872
mistake of law and, 356
Fraud, 1037–1049
false promises, 1044
federal statutes, 1044–1045
intent, 1041
lying as, 1048–1049
mail fraud, 1076–1077
mens rea, 1041
Model Penal Code, 1274–1277
overview, 1037–1039
politics vs. fraud, 1083–1084
possession vs. ownership, 1041
rape, 434–435
securities fraud, 1077–1081
theft by false pretenses, 1046–1048
wire fraud, 1077–1081
Freedom of speech
complicity and, 687–688
solicitation and, 636–637
Fully Informed Jury Association (FIJA), 179–180
G
Gangs
legality principle and, 216–224, 227–228
Model Penal Code, 228
vagueness and, 216–224, 227–228

--- Page 2373 ---
General intent, 289–291
George Floyd Justice in Policing Act of 2021 (proposed), 868
Good Samaritans, 268–270
Gratuitous defenses, 156
Group criminality, 651–802
complicity, 651–701. See also Complicity
conspiracy, 701–760. See also Conspiracy
corporate criminality, 760–802. See also Corporate criminality
Guests, castle exception to duty to retreat, 855
Guilty but mentally ill, 946–947
Guilty pleas. See also Plea bargaining
knowing and intelligent, 113–114
procedure, 112–113
as stage in criminal case, 82
Gun offenses. See Firearms offenses
H
Habit, voluntary action requirement and, 254–255
“Hands-off” principle, 969
Harm. See Resulting harm
Heat of passion, 493, 497–498, 500
Hinckley trial, 961
HIV/AIDS, 604–606
Hobbs Act of 1946, 755
Homeless persons
excuse and, 999–1001
necessity and, 885–886
Homicide, 461–565
awareness of risk, 514
civil vs. criminal liability, 506–514
contributory negligence, 510
p. 1375
p. 1376

--- Page 2374 ---
death penalty. See Death penalty
felony murder, 532–536. See also Felony murder
fetal homicide, 207–212
fires, 506–509
inadvertent murder, 530
intimate partner violence, 830, 836–842
involuntary manslaughter
causation, 595–599
corporate criminality, 576–577
failure to provide, 261–262
statutes, 466
manslaughter. See Manslaughter
misdemeanor-manslaughter, 541
Model Penal Code, 511, 1248–1250
murder. See Murder
negligent homicide, 514–524. See also Negligent homicide
omissions and, 262
overview, 461–462
reckless manslaughter, 511–514
self-defense, 804–861. See also Self-defense
suicide, 584–589
assisted suicide, 584–589
prison conditions, 1101
suicide tourism, 902
third parties, subsequent acts of, 592–594
traditional tests, 509–510
transferred intent, 584
unintentional murder, 526–528
voluntary manslaughter, 466
Homicide Act 1957 (UK), 988
Honest services, theft of, 1076–1085
corruption as theft, 1081–1082
mail fraud, 1076–1077
politics vs. fraud, 1083–1084

--- Page 2375 ---
prosecutorial discretion, 1084–1085
scope of, 1082–1083
securities fraud, 1077–1081
wire fraud, 1077–1081
Hypnosis, voluntary action requirement and, 255
I
Identity theft, 1074–1076
Ignorantia legis doctrine. See Mistake of law
Illinois, consolidation statute, 1061
Immaturity
duress and, 912–913
rape, absence of consent, 426
Imminence requirement
duress, 917–920
necessity, 881
self-defense, imminent danger requirement, 842–847
defense of another, 844
Model Penal Code, 845–846
nonconfrontational self-defense, 842–843
other contexts, 844–845
self-defense without imminence, 846–847
self-defense without necessity, 847
third persons, turning to, 843–844
Impeachment, 459
Implicit biases, 66, 493, 814–815, 876, 1201
Impossibility, 637–650
attempt and, 639–641
conspiracy, 738–739
drug offenses, 644
factual impossibility, 641–642
hypotheticals, 645–650
legal impossibility, 642
Model Penal Code, 648–650

--- Page 2376 ---
receiving stolen property, 637–639
Imprisonment. See Incarceration
Inadvertent murder, 530
Incapacitation, 27–32
built-in bias, 30
cost-effective alternatives, 31–32
crime decline in 1990s and, 30–31
empirical problems of prediction, 29–30
estimating benefits, 28–29
selective incapacitation, 29
Incapacity, absence of consent to rape and, 426–427
Incarceration, 1095–1102
abolition proposed, 5, 56, 59
causes of high rate of, 3–4
consequences of high rate of, 4–5
in criminal justice system, 74–75
Due Process Clause and, 1145
p. 1376
p. 1377
First Amendment and, 1145
insanity defense, commitment vs. incarceration, 968
non-criminal incarceration of dangerous persons, 1001–1002
prison conditions
crowding, 1099–1101
cruel and unusual punishment and, 1100
Eighth Amendment and, 1100
physical location and environment, 1101
sexual violence, 1098–1099
suicide, 1101
violence and abuse, 1097–1098
public safety and, 4–5
purposes of punishment and, 1101–1102
race and, 2–3

--- Page 2377 ---
social concentration, 2–3
social welfare and, 4–5
statistics, 1–2, 67, 1099
substantive law reforms, 5–6
without imprisonment, 1102
Inchoate crimes
attempt, 601–650. See also Attempt
conspiracy, 701–760. See also Conspiracy
Model Penal Code, 1243–1248
solicitation, 633–637
as attempt, 636
First Amendment and, 636–637
as independent crime, 636
murder, 633–634
Income tax, mistake of law, 360–362
Inconsistent verdicts, 186–188
criticism of prevailing acceptance, 187
problem of, 186–187
solutions, 186–187
Incorporation of right to jury trial, 160–164
Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978, 518
Information, theft of, 1066–1076
confidential business information, 1069–1071
copies, 1068–1069
identity theft, 1074–1076
“Official Secrets Act,” 1068
statutory interpretation, 1072–1073
statutory reform, 1073
Informed consent. See Consent as defense
Informers, 637–639
“Inherently dangerous felony” limitation to felony murder, 545–551
abstract approach, 546–551
committed approach, 549–551
degree of danger, 549–550

--- Page 2378 ---
how dangerous, 546
scope of underlying felony, 546–547
who decides, 550
Insanity defense, 938–982
abolition proposed, 968–972
assessment of, 969
blame as imperative, 969–972
“hands-off” principle, 969
state efforts, 969
terminology, 968–969
administering, 944
automatism, 981–982
defendant’s option, 981
sane vs. insane automatism, 981–982
sleep, 982
burden of proof, 948–949
civil commitment, 945–946
commitment vs. incarceration, 968
competence to stand trial, 941–942
competing formulations, 949–972
cruel and unusual punishment and, 942–944
death penalty and, 942–944
deific decree exception, 976
diminished capacity, 982–990. See also Diminished capacity
disposition after acquittal, 945–947
civil commitment, 945–946
duration of confinement, 946
guilty but mentally ill, 946–947
effect of different versions, 963
Eighth Amendment and, 942–944
frequency of use, 962–963
guilty but mentally ill, 946–947
Hinckley trial, 961
insanity defined, 968

--- Page 2379 ---
involuntary intoxication and, 937
jury instructions, 947–948
legislative proposals, 962
p. 1377
p. 1378
meaning of wrong, 972–976
deific decree exception, 976
legal vs. moral wrong, 974–975
“mental disease or defect,” 976–982
legal definition, 978
specific applications, 979–980
“temporary” insanity, 978–979
mental disturbance not amounting to insanity, 982–990. See also
Diminished capacity
M’Naghten rule, 949–950
Model Penal Code, 953–955
overview, 938–940
psychopaths, 980–981
reform prospects, 964
restricting access to, 961–962
federal law, 962
state law, 962
sentencing alternative, 968
statistics, 962–963
success rates, 962–963
“temporary” insanity, 978–979
terminology, 940–941
in UK, 949–951
“volitional prong,” 959–961
moral culpability, 960–961
practical concerns, 959–960
sexually violent predator (SVP) laws and, 959
voluntary intoxication and, 934

--- Page 2380 ---
who may raise, 944–945
Insider trading, single vs. multiple conspiracies, 749
Intangible property, finders of, 1028–1029
Intent. See Mens rea
Internet, cyber-stalking and, 624–626
Intimate partner violence
charging decision, 96–97
discretion, 96–97
feminist perspectives, 623–626
provocation, reasonable person requirement, 503–504
self-defense, 820–836
duty to retreat, 856–858
female victims, 826–828
feminist perspectives, 834–835
homicide, 830, 836–842
law regarding, 833
LGBTQ+ persons, 829
nonpsychological defenses, 836–842
in other settings, 829
other syndromes, 835–836
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 835–836
problem of, 825–826
reasonableness, 830–833
science regarding, 833–834
Intoxication, 924–937
involuntary intoxication, 934–937
culpability and, 937
insanity defense and, 937
overview, 934–935
proof of, 937
Model Penal Code, 530–531
overview, 924–925
rape, absence of consent, 426–427
voluntary action requirement and, 248–249

--- Page 2381 ---
voluntary intoxication, 925–934
Due Process Clause and, 932–933
insanity defense and, 934
mens rea, as negating, 928–930
Model Penal Code, 930–931
recklessness and, 931–932
as separate offense, 933–934
treated differently from other relevant evidence, 929–930
Intruders, castle exception to duty to retreat, 855
Investigation
as stage in criminal case, 78–79
statutory requirement, 90–92
Involuntary intoxication, 934–937
culpability and, 937
insanity defense and, 937
overview, 934–935
proof of, 937
Involuntary manslaughter
causation, 595–599
corporate criminality, 576–577
failure to provide, 261–262
statutes, 466
J
Judges
in criminal justice system, 73–74
p. 1378
p. 1379
plea bargaining, role in, 116–117, 120
prosecutions initiated by, 94–95
provocation, role in determining, 501
Jury instructions
cautionary instructions, 144–145

--- Page 2382 ---
insanity defense, 947–948
overview, 140
Jury trials, 160–188
behavior of jury, 170–171
civil rights and, 163–164
competence of jurors, 165–166
death penalty and
death qualification, 1201
predicting jury’s attitude, 1201–1202
defense interests vs. community interests, 168
effect on criminal justice system, 164
factfinding, 1148
inconsistent verdicts, 186–188
criticism of prevailing acceptance, 187
problem of, 186–187
solutions, 186–187
nullification, 171–183
“arbitrary” leniency, 176–177
biased nullification, 177
constraining, 178–179
current state of law, 175
desirability of, 175–176
effects in practice, 174
legality principle and, 177
race-based nullification, 181–183
in other countries, 169–170
peremptory challenges, 140
plea bargaining, jury as insufficient check on, 120
policy considerations, 167–168
prevalence of, 169
provocation, role in determining, 501
representative jury, 165
scope of right to, 164
sentencing in, 183–186

--- Page 2383 ---
factfinding, 1148
factual questions shifted from jury to judge, 186
guideline sentencing, implications for, 1148–1149
jury sentencing, 184–185
mandatory minimum sentences, implications for, 1149
Sixth Amendment and, 1148
what jury permitted to know, 185–186
states, incorporation of right to, 160–164
venire, 140
voir dire, 140
Justification, 804–904
choice of lesser evil, 876–896. See also Necessity
euthanasia, 896–904. See also Euthanasia
law enforcement, use of force in, 867–876. See also Law
enforcement
manslaughter, provocation as partial justification, 487–488
necessity, 876–896. See also Necessity
overview, 803–804
prison escape, 880–881
legality principle and, 881
potential harms of, 880
protection of life and person, 804–861. See also Self-defense
protection of property, 861–867
other types of property, 866–867
statutory approaches, 864–865
punishment and, 15
self-defense, 804–861. See also Self-defense
Justification, Model Penal Code, 1229–1238
Juvenile offenders
capital cases, 1189–1190
death penalty, 1189–1190
gun possession, 668–669
life without parole, 1160–1161
K

--- Page 2384 ---
Kansas Offender Registration Act, 345
Kentucky Racial Justice Act (KRJA), 1203
Kidnapping, Model Penal Code, 1251–1252
p. 1379
p. 1380
Knowledge
complicity
advance knowledge, 667–668
knowledge vs. purpose, 667
conspiracy, felony cases, purpose or knowledge, 733
corporate criminality, collective knowledge, 774–775
mistake of law and, 362–363
Model Penal Code, 298, 301–304
negligence distinguished, 301–304
plea bargaining, knowing and intelligent, 113–114
recklessness distinguished, 301–304
L
Larceny as trespassory taking, 1015–1017
Law enforcement
abolition proposed, 5, 59
in criminal justice system, 71
defunding, 8, 20, 67
too little, 6–8
use of force in, 867–876
choke holds, 873
electric cattle prods, 873
felonies, 872–873
flight by misdemeanant, 870–871
Fourth Amendment and, 872
intermediate measures, 873
legal framework, 870
misdemeanors, 870–872

--- Page 2385 ---
night sticks, 873
overview, 867–869
pepper spray, 873
qualified immunity, 872
race and, 869, 874–876
“reasonable” fear, 874–875
resistance by misdemeanant, 871–872
statistics, 869
tasers, 873–874
Legal duty, 262
Legal impossibility, 642
Legality principle, 190–233
common law and, 190–191
new common-law crimes, 193–194
old common-law crimes, 193
Ex Post Facto Clause and, 212–215
fetal homicide, 207–212
firearms offenses and, 205
gangs and, 216–224, 227–228
institutional limits of courts, 192
legislation construed, 194–203
legislative intent and, 205–206
lenity, rule of, 203–206
loitering and, 216–224, 227–228
Model Penal Code, 189–190
nulla poena sine lege, 192
nullification and, 177
politics and, 206
prison escape and, 881
retroactive application of laws and, 212–216
vagrancy laws, 226–227
vagueness. See Vagueness
Legislative intent, 205–206
Lenity, rule of, 203–206

--- Page 2386 ---
Lesser-crime principle, 316
LGBTQ+ persons
intimate partner violence, self-defense, 829
rape, frequency of, 383–384
same-sex advances as provocation, 492–493
Life without parole
juvenile offenders, 1160–1161
other non-capital sentences vs., 1161
Loitering, 216–224, 227–228
Lost property, appropriation of, 1027–1030
M
Mail fraud, 1076–1077
Malice
felony murder, implied malice, 563–564
mens rea, 288–289
Malicious Damage Act (UK), 287
Malicious Injuries to Property Act (UK), 287
Malum in se, 363
Malum prohibitum, 363
Mandatory minimum sentences, 1122–1127, 1149
Mann Act of 1910, 737, 752–753
p. 1380
p. 1381
Manslaughter
attempt, 608
drunk driving and, 528–531
involuntary manslaughter
causation, 595–599
corporate criminality, 576–577
failure to provide, 261–262
statutes, 466
murder distinguished, 524–532

--- Page 2387 ---
drunk driving, 528–531
inadvertent murder, 530
intent to inflict great bodily harm, 531–532
Model Penal Code, 530
murder by omission, 528
“Russian roulette,” 524–525
unintentional murder, 526–528
provocation, 480–506. See also Provocation
reckless manslaughter, 511–514
“Russian roulette,” 599–600
voluntary manslaughter, 466
Marijuana, medical, 884–885
Marital rape exemption, 447–449
harm of marital rape, 448
institutional concerns, 449
judicial approaches, 449
legislative developments, 449
prevalence of marital rape, 448
Martin, Trayvon, self-defense by private citizen and, 811–815
Material evidence, 142
Medical care, omissions and, 280–284
Medical malpractice, 579–580
Medical marijuana, 884–885
Medical necessity, 884–885
medical marijuana, 884–885
slippery slope harms, 884
Megan’s Law, 1104
Mens rea, 284–375
attempt, 604–611
attendant circumstances, 609–610
complicity, 655–685. See also Complicity
conspiracy, 728–737
attendant circumstances, 735–737
corrupt motive, 735

--- Page 2388 ---
facts essential to criminality, 736–737
facts increasing gravity of offense, 736
felony cases, purpose or knowledge, 733
diminished capacity as negating, 985–988
capacity evidence, 986
specific intent, 987–988
state of law, 985–986
total ban, 986
distinctions in practice, 304
duress and, 920
excuse and, 1001
felony murder, requiring for, 542
fraud, 1041
general intent, 289–291
knowledge. See Knowledge
malice
felony murder, implied malice, 563–564
mens rea, 288–289
mistake of fact, 312–329. See also Mistake of fact
mistake of law, 350–375. See also Mistake of law
Model Penal Code, 296–304, 1090–1093
necessity and, 883
negligence. See Negligence
objective, 297–298
overview, 284–285
presumptions, 291–292
proof of, 291–292
rape, 435–447. See also Rape
recklessness. See Recklessness
reform, 364
shared intent, 694–695
silence of statutes, 294–296, 299
specific intent, 289–291
attempt, 606–610

--- Page 2389 ---
diminished capacity, 987–988
strict liability, 329–349. See also Strict liability
terminology, 288–292
theft, 1085–1093
chattels vs. cash, 1092
embezzlement, 1089
exceptions, 1085–1086
p. 1381
p. 1382
federal law and, 1090
intent to restore, 1089–1090
Model Penal Code, 1090–1093
theft by false pretenses, 1089
transferred intent, 582–584
attempt and, 609
homicide, 584
Model Penal Code, 583
unprotected sex and, 604–606
voluntary intoxication as negating, 928–930
willful blindness, 304–312. See also Willful blindness
Mens Rea Reform Act of 2021 (proposed), 364–365
Mental disorder, 938–990
competence to stand trial, 941–942
death penalty and, 1183–1188
diminished capacity, 982–990
mens rea, as negating, 985–988
mental health and, 982–985
Model Penal Code, 989–990
duress, intellectual disability and, 912–913
guilty but mentally ill, 946–947
insanity defense, 938–982. See also Insanity defense
mitigation, as ground for, 988–990
provocation, reasonable person requirement, 504–505

--- Page 2390 ---
self-defense and, 818
Merger doctrine, felony murder and, 551–558
enumerated felonies, 554–555
indoors vs. outdoors, 554
non-assaultive and non-independent purposes, 554–555
non-enumerated felonies, 555–556
Minors. See Children and minors
Misappropriation, 1024–1037
abandoned property, 1029
appropriation of lost property, 1027–1030
embezzlement, 1025–1027
intangible property, finders of, 1028–1029
misdelivered property, 1029–1030
Model Penal Code, 1029–1030, 1033–1035
property transferred by mistake, 1027–1030
tangible property, finders of, 1027–1028
wage theft, 1036–1037
Misdelivered property, 1029–1030
Misdemeanor-manslaughter, 541
Misdemeanors
law enforcement, use of force in, 870–872
flight by misdemeanant, 870–871
resistance by misdemeanant, 871–872
misdemeanor-manslaughter, 541
Misprision of felony, 272–273
Mistake of fact, 312–329
acoustic separation approach, 315–316
age, 312–314
current law, 318–319
drug offenses, 319
lesser-crime principle and, 316
mistake of law distinguished, 355
Model Penal Code, 316–317
moral-wrong principle and, 314–315

--- Page 2391 ---
property transferred by mistake, 1027–1030
rape, mens rea, 445
sexual abuse, 319–326
statutory rape, 327–329
Mistake of law, 350–375
“cultural defense,” 374–375
as defense, 357–358
entrapment by omission, 373–374
firearms offenses, 350–355
Fourth Amendment and, 356
income tax, 360–362
“knowingly” construed, 362–363
mistake of fact distinguished, 355
Model Penal Code, 358–359
no-excuse rule, 358–359
official reliance
conflicts within federal courts, 368–370
Due Process Clause and, 367
federalism and, 367–368
p. 1382
p. 1383
Model Penal Code, 366
reasonableness requirement, 367–370
traditional view, 365–366
overview, 350
registration of convicted persons, 370–372
scope of doctrine, 357–360
tax offenses, 360–362
utilitarianism and, 355–356
“willfully” construed, 362–365
Mitigation, mental disorder as ground for, 988–990
Mixed theories of punishment, 46–48
M’Naghten rule, 949–950

--- Page 2392 ---
Model Penal Code
arson, 1267–1269
assault, 1250
attempt, 629–630, 632–633
attendant circumstances, 676–677
blackmail, 1052
burglary, 1269–1270
causation, 583, 600–601
coercion, 1251–1252
complicity
actus reus, 699
attendant circumstances, 676–677
mens rea, 660–661, 676–677
natural and probable consequences theory, 685
consolidation, 1060
conspiracy, 706
parties to, 754
Pinkerton doctrine, 715
single vs. multiple conspiracies, 741, 749–750
corporate criminality
agents, liability of, 788
corporate entity, liability, 768, 780–781
criminal mischief, 1267–1269
culpability, 189–190
death penalty, 1203–1204
diminished capacity, 989–990
disorderly conduct, 1279–1281
duress, 910–914, 916
family offenses, 1278
felony murder, 539–540
forgery, 1274–1277
fraud, 1274–1277
gangs, 228
general provisions, 1214–1220

--- Page 2393 ---
homicide, 511, 1248–1250
impossibility, 648–650
inchoate crimes, 1243–1248
insanity defense, 953–955
intoxication, 530–531
voluntary intoxication, 930–931
justification under, 1229–1238
kidnapping, 1251–1252
knowledge, 298, 301–304
legality principle, 189–190
liability under, 1220–1229
loitering, 228
manslaughter
murder distinguished, 530
provocation, 496–501
mens rea, 296–304, 1090–1093
misappropriation, 1029–1030, 1033–1035
mistake of fact, 316–317
mistake of law, 358–359
official reliance, 366
motive, 301
murder
inadvertent murder, 530
manslaughter distinguished, 530
premeditation, 469–470, 480
natural and probable consequences theory, 685
necessity, 879–880, 882, 891–892
negligence, 299, 301–304
negligent homicide, 522
objective, 297–298
official reliance, 366
origins, 1207–1208
overview, 1207–1208
Pinkerton doctrine, 715

--- Page 2394 ---
premeditation, 469–470, 480
property damage, 1267–1269
proportionality, 189–190
provocation, 496–501
distinctive features of, 499–501
p. 1383
p. 1384
extreme emotional disturbance (EED) test, 499–501
influence of, 499
judges, role of, 501
jury, role of, 501
reasonable person requirement, 502–505
public indecency, 1281–1283
purpose, 298, 301
rape, 387–388, 392
absence of consent, 423–424
force and coercion, 409
reckless endangering, 1250
recklessness, 299, 301–304
responsibility under, 1238–1243
riot, 1279–1281
robbery, 1023, 1270
self-defense, 860–861
imminent danger requirement, 845–846
sexual offenses, 1252–1267
strict liability, 349
text of, 1207–1283
theft, 1064, 1090–1093, 1270–1274
threats, 1250
transferred intent, 583
voluntary intoxication, 930–931
willful blindness, 307–311
Money laundering, 671–672

--- Page 2395 ---
Moral culpability, 32
Moral influence, 21–22
Moral-wrong principle, 314–315
Motive
Model Penal Code, 301
purpose distinguished, 301
willful blindness and, 310–311
Motor Carrier Act of 1980, 791
Motor vehicle accidents, causation, 595–599
Multiple jurisdictions, 69–71
Murder. See also Homicide
causation, 568–571, 574–576
drunk driving and, 528–531
duress as defense to, 921–922
defendant’s role in offense, 921–922
felony murder, 921
sentencing, 921
felony murder, 532–536. See also Felony murder
inadvertent murder, 530
manslaughter distinguished, 524–532
drunk driving, 528–531
inadvertent murder, 530
intent to inflict great bodily harm, 531–532
Model Penal Code, 530
murder by omission, 528
“Russian roulette,” 524–525
unintentional murder, 526–528
by omission, 528
premeditation, 469–480
brutality of murder and, 479
intent vs., 477
Model Penal Code, 469–470, 480
policy rationales, 478
proof of, 478–479

--- Page 2396 ---
statutory interpretation, 476–477
self-defense. See Self-defense
sentencing, duress as defense and, 921
solicitation, 633–634
in UK, 462–463
unintentional murder, 526–528
N
Narcotic Act of 1914, 329
Narcotics offenses. See Drug offenses
National Firearms Act of 1986, 335–336
National Housing Act of 1934, 742
National Motor Vehicle Theft Act of 1919, 195
Native American children, negligent homicide and, 517–518
Natural and probable consequences theory, 680–685
Model Penal Code, 685
Pinkerton doctrine compared, 684–685
state of law, 683–684
Nebraska, rape statute, 421
Necessity, 876–896
applicable harms, 881
clean hands and, 882
duress compared, 914–915
economic necessity, 885–887
direct needs vs. speculative harms, 886–887
p. 1384
p. 1385
homeless persons, 885–886
starving children, 886
imminence requirement, 881
medical necessity, 884–885
medical marijuana, 884–885
slippery slope harms, 884

--- Page 2397 ---
mens rea and, 883
Model Penal Code, 879–880, 882, 891–892
natural events, 881
overloaded boats, 890–891
political justification, 887–889
prison escape, 880–881
legality principle and, 881
potential harms of, 880
protecting rights vs. saving lives, 892–896
self-defense without necessity, 847
statutory preemption, 881–882
taking life to save life, 891–892
Negative retribution, 32, 37
Negligence
knowledge distinguished, 301–304
mens rea, 292–294
Model Penal Code, 299, 301–304
negligent homicide, 514–524. See also Negligent homicide
rape, mens rea
effects of negligence standard, 444–445
recklessness vs., 442–443
recklessness distinguished, 301–304
reckless or negligent aid, 588–589
Negligent homicide, 514–524
criminal-negligence standard, 518
defined, 514
failure to provide, 515–517
faith healing, 523–524
justification, 514
Native American children, 517–518
objective standard, 518–522
absence of subjective awareness, 518–519
case law, 522
criticisms, 519–520

--- Page 2398 ---
individualization of, 520–522
Model Penal Code, 522
New York
blackmail, 1057
burglary, 300
consolidation, 1060–1061
manslaughter, 467
murder, 467–468
rape, 390–391
consent, 421
Night sticks, 873
No-excuse rule, 358–359
Nongratuitous defenses, 157–158
Non-prosecution agreements (NPAs), 772–774, 786
Nonreciprocal conspiracy, 749
North Carolina Racial Justice Act, 1203
“Not in furtherance” of felony, felony murder and, 558–565
after commission of felony, 558
implied malice, 563–564
justifiable homicide, 564
persons resisting felony, 559–561
protecting innocent, 564–565
unrelated to felony, 558–559
who does killing, 561–563
who is killed, 564–565
NPAs (Non-prosecution agreements), 772–774, 786
Nullification, 171–183
“arbitrary” leniency, 176–177
biased nullification, 177
constraining, 178–179
current state of law, 175
desirability of, 175–176
effects in practice, 174
legality principle and, 177

--- Page 2399 ---
race-based nullification, 181–183
O
Objective, Model Penal Code, 297–298
Offences against the Person Act 1861 (UK), 285–286
Officers, criminal liability of, 799–800
expansion of responsibilities, 801
other theories of criminal liability, 801–802
responsible corporate officer doctrine, 796–797, 799
p. 1385
p. 1386
Official reliance
conflicts within federal courts, 368–370
Due Process Clause and, 367
federalism and, 367–368
Model Penal Code, 366
reasonableness requirement, 367–370
traditional view, 365–366
Omissions, 261–284
acts distinguished, 280–284
attempt, 633
bystanders and
benefiting from victim’s peril, 267–268
duty to report, 272–273
duty to rescue, 270–271
in Europe, 271
Good Samaritans, 268–270
indifference, 265–267
intervention programs, 272
misprision of felony, 272–273
causation, 580
child abuse, 263–265
complicity by omission

--- Page 2400 ---
actus reus, 690–691
mens rea, 691
duty of person creating other’s peril, 277–279
entrapment by omission, 373–374
failure to provide, 261–262
family members
de facto family members, 274–276
duties of, 273–274
parent as victim, 276–277
homicide and, 262
legal duty, 262
medical care and, 280–284
murder by omission, 528
possession as, 279–280
vicarious liability and, 342–343
willful blindness and, 309–310
Onlookers, complicity and, 687
Oregon
“Death with Dignity Act” (DWDA), 900–901
euthanasia in, 900–901
Overbreadth, stalking and, 624
Overt-act requirement for conspiracy, 726–728
justifications for, 727–728
liability without overt act, 726
statutes requiring overt act, 726–727
P
Parents
omissions, parent as victim, 276–277
vicarious liability, 341–342
Parties to conspiracy, 752–759
acquitted co-conspirators, 753
attempt, 758–759
Model Penal Code, 754

--- Page 2401 ---
modern statutes, 758
rationale for traditional approach, 758
traditional conspiracy, 757
“Wharton’s rule,” 753–755
Peace officers. See Law enforcement
Pennsylvania
involuntary manslaughter, 466
murder, 465–466
suicide, 466
voluntary manslaughter, 466
Pepper spray, 873
Peremptory challenges, 140
Pinkerton doctrine, 707–721
applications of, 716–720
controversy regarding, 715–716
criticisms of, 714–715
drug offenses, 717
expansive application of, 717–718
merits of, 712–714
minor participants and, 720–721
Model Penal Code, 715
natural and probable consequences theory compared, 684–685
new conspirator, liability for prior acts of co-conspirators, 716
transitional note, 721
Plea bargaining, 108–139
administrative law vs. criminal law, 135–139
agency costs, 120–121
cap on penalties, 135
coercion and, 128–129
p. 1386
p. 1387
conflicts of interest, 120
consistency requirement, 135

--- Page 2402 ---
cooperation, 124
criminal history and, 124–125
death penalty and, 108–112, 125
defense counsel, role of, 111–112
effective assistance of counsel, 114–115
extent of, 115–116
federal vs. state law, 139
freedom of choice and, 125–126
group of defendants, 125
guilty plea procedure, 112–113
honoring bargain, 116
insufficient checks, 120
judges, role of, 116–117, 120
jury, role of, 120
knowing and intelligent, 113–114
line-attorney discretion, 133
necessity of, 121–122
plea outcomes vs. trial outcomes, 117–120
policy debate, 121–129
procedure, 112–113
propriety of sentencing concessions, 122–124
prosecutorial caseloads and, 126
racial bias and, 127
separation of powers and, 133–134
structural problems, 126–128
supervisory role of court, 133–134
vindictiveness and, 129–132
voluntariness, 108–111
Police. See Law enforcement
Positive inducements, 924
Positive retribution, 32, 37
Possession as omission, 279–280
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
duress and, 914

--- Page 2403 ---
self-defense, intimate partner violence, 835–836
Powell doctrine, 735
Practice of law, blackmail and, 1052
PREA (Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003), 1098
Preemption, necessity and, 881–882
Prejudice, evidence and, 143–144
Premeditation, 469–480
brutality of murder and, 479
intent vs., 477
Model Penal Code, 469–470, 480
policy rationales, 478
proof of, 478–479
statutory interpretation, 476–477
Presentence reports, 141
Presumptions
of innocence, 140
mens rea, 291–292
reasonable doubt standard, 159–160
Pretrial release, 79–82
Prison abolition, 5, 53–63
Prison conditions
crowding, 1099–1101
cruel and unusual punishment and, 1100
Eighth Amendment and, 1100
physical location and environment, 1101
sexual violence, 1098–1099
suicide, 1101
violence and abuse, 1097–1098
Prison escape, 880–881
legality principle and, 881
potential harms of, 880
Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA), 1098
Privilege, evidence and, 143
Probative evidence, 142

--- Page 2404 ---
Procedural due process, death penalty and, 1170–1171
Property. See also Misappropriation
damage, Model Penal Code, 1267–1269
protection of, 861–867
receiving stolen property, 637–639
subject to theft, 1062–1085
Proportionality, 234–248
cruel and unusual punishment and, 237–244, 246–247
culpability and, 248
death penalty, 1188–1190
drug offenses, 237–242, 244–245
Eighth Amendment and, 237–244, 246–247
p. 1387
p. 1388
fines and forfeitures, 245–246
Model Penal Code, 189–190
overview, 234–237
punitive damages, 245–246
purposes of punishment and, 242–243
recidivism and, 245
in sentencing, 245–246
state constitutions, 247–248
“three strikes” laws, 244
who should decide, 243–244
Prosecutors
charging decision. See Charging decision
in criminal justice system, 71–72
discretion, 84–108. See also Discretion
selective prosecution, 101–106
disparate patterns, 106
drug offenses, 102–105
federalism and, 107
firearms offenses, 102–105

--- Page 2405 ---
race and, 105–106
transparency and, 107
special prosecutors, 92–94
Prostitution, 49–51
Protection of property, 861–867
other types of property, 866–867
statutory approaches, 864–865
Provocation, 480–506
abolition proposed, 489–490
cooling time, 493–494
defendants eliciting provocation, 495
domestic disputes, 480–482
heat of passion, 493, 497–498, 500
legally adequate provocation, 485–486
Model Penal Code, 496–501
distinctive features of, 499–501
extreme emotional disturbance (EED) test, 499–501
influence of, 499
judges, role of, 501
jury, role of, 501
reasonable person requirement, 502–505
rationale for, 486–489
as partial excuse, 486–487
as partial justification, 487–488
reasonable person requirement, 501–506
culture and, 502–503
intimate partner violence and, 503–504
mental disorder and, 504–505
Model Penal Code, 502–505
partial individualization, 504–505
reforms, 490–491
same-sex advances as, 492–493
sexual infidelity as, 482–485, 491
victims other than provoker, 494–495

--- Page 2406 ---
derivative provocation, 494
intentionally killing, 494–495
misdirected reaction, 494
Proximate cause, 541, 572–574
Proximity test, 612–614
Psychopaths, 980–981
PTSD (Post-traumatic stress disorder)
duress and, 914
self-defense, intimate partner violence, 835–836
Public indecency, Model Penal Code, 1281–1283
Public welfare offenses, strict liability, 343–344
Punishment
abolition proposed, 53–63. See also Abolition
alternatives to
abolition proposed, 53–63. See also Abolition
restorative justice as, 64–66
for cannibalism, 8–14
children, restrictions on having, 1111
civil sanctions, 1102–1104
complicity, 653–655
controversial conditions, 1111–1112
corporate criminality, 783–788
compliance programs, 785–786
“death penalty,” 787–788
deferred prosecution agreements (DPAs), 786
fines, 784–785
judicial review, 786–787
non-prosecution agreements (NPAs), 786
overview, 783
“cousins” of retribution, 39–45
expressive function, 45
p. 1388
p. 1389

--- Page 2407 ---
retaliation, 39–40
social cohesion, 43–44
unexpected harm, 40–41
vengeance, 39–40
victim-impact statements and, 41–42
culpability, 248–375. See also Culpability
death penalty. See Death penalty
defined, 1095
desert, 15–16
deterrence, 18–22
certainty vs. severity, 20
death penalty, 1163–1165
moral influence, 21–22
rational and well-informed actors, 19–20
variations in punishment, effect of, 18–19
excuse and, 15–16
imposition of, 1095–1205
incapacitation, 27–32
built-in bias, 30
cost-effective alternatives, 31–32
crime decline in 1990s and, 30–31
empirical problems of prediction, 29–30
estimating benefits, 28–29
selective incapacitation, 29
incarceration, 1095–1102. See also Incarceration
innocent, punishment of, 17
justification and, 15
legality principle, 190–233. See also Legality principle
mixed theories, 46–48
overview, 8–9
proportionality, 234–248. See also Proportionality
prudential concerns, 14–15
purposes of, 8–48
“cousins” of retribution, 39–45

--- Page 2408 ---
deterrence, 18–22. See also Deterrence
discretionary sentencing and, 1119–1121
guideline sentencing and, 1145
incapacitation, 27–32. See also Incapacitation
incarceration and, 1101–1102
mixed theories, 46–48
proportionality and, 242–243
rehabilitation, 22–27. See also Rehabilitation
retribution, 32–38. See also Retribution
utilitarian view, 16–32. See also Utilitarian view of punishment
rape, culpability vs. punishment, 443
rehabilitation, 22–27
effectiveness of, 24–26
medical model, 23–24
non-capital cases, sentencing in, 1119–1120
residence, restrictions on, 1112–1113
restorative justice as alternative to, 64–66
resulting harm as criterion, 581–582, 601–604
retribution, 32–38
as constraint, 37–38
criticisms of, 34–37
defenses of, 34–37
moral culpability, 32
negative retribution, 32, 37
overview, 32–34
positive retribution, 32, 37
sentencing. See Sentencing
sex offender registration, 1104
sexually violent predator (SVP) laws, 1103
sex work, 50–53
shaming, 1104–1111, 1113–1114
types of, 1104–1114
utilitarian view, 16–32
deterrence, 18–22. See also Deterrence

--- Page 2409 ---
incapacitation, 27–32. See also Incapacitation
overview, 16–18
rehabilitation, 22–27. See also Rehabilitation
what to punish, 48–53
Punitive damages, proportionality, 245–246
Purchase of sex services, 49–51
p. 1389
p. 1390
Purpose
Model Penal Code, 298, 301
motive distinguished, 301
of punishment, 8–48. See also Punishment
wish distinguished, 301
Q
Qualified immunity, use of force in law enforcement, 872
R
Race
attempt and, 618–619
death penalty and, 1191–1205
constitutional doctrine, 1204–1205
legislative initiatives, 1203
local demographics, 1200–1201
local influences, 1202
Model Penal Code, 1203–1204
nature of racial discrimination, 1200–1205
predicting jury’s attitude, 1201–1202
race of defendants vs. race of victims, 1200
risk of wrongful conviction, 1168–1170
excuse and, 1008–1012
incarceration and disparate impact, 2–3
law enforcement, use of force in, 869, 874–876

--- Page 2410 ---
plea bargaining and, 127
race-based nullification, 181–183
rape and, 385–386
selective prosecution and, 105–106
self-defense and, 810–815
racial profiling, 812–813
solutions, 814–815
stereotypes, 812–813
vagueness and, 232–233
Racial profiling, 812–813
Rape, 377–460
absence of consent, 412–429
affirmative conduct requirement, 422–423
alternative conceptions of consent, 419–423
authority and trust and, 428–429
consent defined, 417–425
defective consent, 426–429
grading of offence, 417–418
immaturity and, 426
implicit pressure, 428
incapacity and, 426–427
internal state of mind, 420–421
intoxication and, 426–427
Model Penal Code, 423–424
objective approach, 421
perspectives, 424–425
replacing force with non-consent, 412–417
actus reus, 392–435
absence of consent, 412–429
deception, 429–435
force and coercion, 393–412
overview, 392–393
assault with intent to, 616–618
child rape, death penalty, 1190

--- Page 2411 ---
date rape, 424, 440, 447
deception, 429–435
female victims, 382–383
force and coercion, 393–412
constructive force, 406
direct but insufficient physical force, 405
disclosure of affair, 409–410
duress, 408
financial leverage, 410–412
force defined, 398
justifications for requirement, 399–400
Model Penal Code, 409
modern justifications for requirement, 399–400
nonphysical coercion, 407–409
proof, 400–405
“reasonable” fear, 406–407
resistance requirement, 400
traditional justifications for requirement, 399
workplace, implicit coercion in, 405
fraud, 434–435
p. 1390
p. 1391
frequency of, 381–384
female victims, 382–383
LGBTQ+ victims, 383–384
male victims, 383–384
harm from, 384–385
LGBTQ+ victims, 383–384
low-wage workers and, 379–380
male victims, 383–384
marital exemption, 447–449
harm of marital rape, 448
institutional concerns, 449

--- Page 2412 ---
judicial approaches, 449
legislative developments, 449
prevalence of marital rape, 448
mens rea, 435–447
consent in other crimes, 443–444
culpability vs. punishment, 443
effects of negligence standard, 444–445
evidence, 446–447
factual claim, 442
mistake as to consent, 441–447
pragmatic consequences, 442
reasonable mistake defense, 445
reasonableness standard, 445–446
recklessness vs. negligence, 442–443
strict liability, 441–442
Model Penal Code, 387–388, 392
overview, 377
perspectives on, 378–386
prison conditions, 1098–1099
proof of, 454–460
abusive treatment of complainants, 455–456
corroboration, 454–455
credibility, 455
cross-examination and, 455–456
force and coercion, 400–405
shield laws and, 455–460
race and, 385–386
rape culture, 378, 380–381
reasonable disagreement, 386
reform statutes, 450–453
alternative remedies, 451–453
de facto resistance to, 450–451
impact of, 450
restorative justice, 453

--- Page 2413 ---
transformative justice, 453
sex offender registration, 1104
sexually violent predator (SVP) laws, 1103
shield laws, 455–460
changing need for, 458–459
constitutional concerns, 458
impact of, 458
prior behavior of defendant, 460
statutory framework, 386–392
Rape shield laws, 455–460
changing need for, 458–459
constitutional concerns, 458
impact of, 458
prior behavior of defendant, 460
RCRA (Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976), 798–799
Reasonable doubt standard, 146–160
basis of, 147–148
burden of persuasion, 155–156
burden of production, 155–156
burden of proof
allocation of, 151–159
discretion, 159
gratuitous defenses, 156
nongratuitous defenses, 157–158
problems, 148
sentencing enhancements, 158–159
Due Process Clause and, 146–147
explanation of, 149–151
as matter of law, 148–149
presumptions, 159–160
Reasonableness
intimate partner violence, 830–833
official reliance, 367–370
rape, mens rea, 445–446

--- Page 2414 ---
Reasonable person requirement, provocation and, 501–506
culture and, 502–503
intimate partner violence and, 503–504
mental disorder and, 504–505
Model Penal Code, 502–505
partial individualization, 504–505
Rebuttal, 141
Receiving stolen property, 637–639
p. 1391
p. 1392
Recidivism, 245
Reckless endangering, Model Penal Code, 1250
Reckless manslaughter, 511–514
Recklessness
intent vs., 694
knowledge distinguished, 301–304
Model Penal Code, 299, 301–304
negligence distinguished, 301–304
rape, mens rea, 442–443
reckless endangering, Model Penal Code, 1250
reckless manslaughter, 511–514
subsequent actions that recklessly risk result, 594–601
voluntary intoxication and, 931–932
willful blindness and, 307
Re-direct examination, 142
Registration of sex offenders, 1104
Regulatory offenses, 541
Rehabilitation, 22–27
effectiveness of, 24–26
medical model, 23–24
non-capital cases, sentencing in, 1119–1120
Reintegrative shaming, 1113–1114
Relevance, 142–143

--- Page 2415 ---
Reliance. See Official reliance
Renunciation of conspiracy, 739
Rescue, duty to, 270–271
Resisting arrest, use of force in law enforcement, 871–872
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA), 798–799
Respondeat superior, corporate criminality, 769
Responsible corporate officer doctrine, 796–797, 799
Restorative justice
as alternative to punishment, 64–66
charging decision and, 97–98
discretion and, 97–98
rape, reform statutes, 453
Resulting harm
attempt, 601–650. See also Attempt
causation, 567–601. See also Causation
significance, 581–582, 601–604
Retaliation, 39–40
Retreat, duty to, 849–858
castle exception, 855–856
current case law, 851–852
intimate partner violence, 856–858
“stand your ground” laws, 852–855
traditional view, 851
Retribution, 32–38
as constraint, 37–38
criticisms of, 34–37
death penalty, 1165–1166
defenses of, 34–37
moral culpability, 32
negative retribution, 32, 37
overview, 32–34
positive retribution, 32, 37
Retroactive application of laws, 212–216
Riot, Model Penal Code, 1279–1281

--- Page 2416 ---
Robbery
attempt, 612–614, 627–629
felony murder and, 534–535, 551–553, 559–561
Model Penal Code, 1023, 1270
as trespassory taking, 1015–1017, 1022–1024
“Russian roulette,” 524–525, 599–600
S
Same-sex advances as provocation, 492–493
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 196–198, 801
Securities fraud, 1077–1081
Selective incapacitation, 29
Selective prosecution, 101–106
disparate patterns, 106
drug offenses, 102–105
federalism and, 107
firearms offenses, 102–105
race and, 105–106
transparency and, 107
Self-defense, 804–861
burden of proof, 849
castle exception, 855–856
co-occupants, 856
guests, 855
intruders, 855
culture and, 819
p. 1392
p. 1393
deadly force, 815
deadly threat requirement, 815, 847–848
defensive force qualifying as, 815
deadly threat requirement, 815, 847–848
defense of another, 844

--- Page 2417 ---
duty to retreat, 849–858
castle exception, 855–856
current case law, 851–852
intimate partner violence, 856–858
“stand your ground” laws, 852–855
traditional view, 851
exceptions, 849–855
grading of offense, 819–820
imminent danger requirement, 842–847
defense of another, 844
Model Penal Code, 845–846
nonconfrontational self-defense, 842–843
other contexts, 844–845
self-defense without imminence, 846–847
self-defense without necessity, 847
third persons, turning to, 843–844
intimate partner violence, 820–836. See also Intimate partner
violence
as justification, 805
mental disability and, 818
Model Penal Code, 860–861
nonconfrontational self-defense, 842–843
nonlethal aggressor, response by, 858–859
nonpsychological defenses, 836–842
objective test, qualifications, 817
past experience and, 819
physical infirmity and, 818
race and, 810–815
racial profiling, 812–813
solutions, 814–815
stereotypes, 812–813
reasonable belief, 805
risk of injury to others, 848–849
specifying actor’s situation, 817–819

--- Page 2418 ---
standards of judgment
culture and, 819
grading of offense, 819–820
mental disability and, 818
objective test, qualifications, 817
past experience and, 819
physical infirmity and, 818
specifying actor’s situation, 817–819
subjective test, 816
“stand your ground” laws, 852–855
protecting rights vs. saving lives, 853
unintended consequences, 853–855
subjective test, 816
sufficient fault, 859–860
third persons, turning to, 843–844
without imminence, 846–847
without necessity, 847
Sentencing
capital cases, 1161–1205
bias, 1168–1170
child rape, 1190
constitutional limitations, 1170–1205
cruel and unusual punishment, 1171–1177, 1180–1199
current context, 1162–1163
DNA testing and, 1167
Eighth Amendment, 1171–1178, 1180–1199
experts and, 1190
future applications, 1191
independent judgment of court and, 1191
individualized capital sentencing, 1178–1180
juvenile offenders, 1189–1190
mentally disabled persons, 1183–1188
method of execution, 1182–1183
methodological questions, 1190–1191

--- Page 2419 ---
overview, 1170
procedural due process, 1170–1171
proportionality, 1188–1190
provisions nature of decisions, 1177–1178
race and, 1168–1170, 1191–1205
p. 1393
p. 1394
risk of wrongful conviction, 1166–1168, 1191–1200
social consensus and, 1190
tension in Court jurisprudence, 1180–1182
theories of punishment, 1163–1166
complicity, 653–655
conspiracy and, 705–706
constitutional limitations
capital cases, 1170–1205
non-capital cases, 1150–1161
death penalty, 1161–1205. See also Death penalty
discretionary sentencing, 1114–1121
Due Process Clause and, 1117–1118
Fourteenth Amendment and, 1115, 1119
purposes of punishment and, 1119–1121
recent developments, 1118–1119
Sixth Amendment and, 1119
duress and
appropriate sentence, 924
murder, as defense to, 921
enhancements, burden of proof, 158–159
Federal Sentencing Guidelines, 785, 1128–1132
guideline sentencing, 1127–1149
advisory vs. mandatory guidelines, 1136–1137
cultural context, 1146–1147
dangers of visibility, 1134
examples, 1138–1144

--- Page 2420 ---
family circumstances and, 1145
Federal Sentencing Guidelines, 785, 1128–1132
increasing in one area when eliminated in another area, 1134–
1135
individual differences in how punishment is experienced, 1147
in jury trials, 1148–1149
personal circumstances and, 1145–1146
predictability of equity, 1132–1133
purposes of punishment and, 1145
social context, 1146–1147
soft factors, 1133–1134
insanity defense, sentencing alternative, 968
in jury trials, 183–186
factfinding, 1148
factual questions shifted from jury to judge, 186
guideline sentencing, implications for, 1148–1149
jury sentencing, 184–185
mandatory minimum sentences, implications for, 1149
Sixth Amendment and, 1148
what jury permitted to know, 185–186
life without parole
juvenile offenders, 1160–1161
other non-capital sentences vs., 1161
mandatory minimum sentences, 1122–1127, 1149
murder, duress as defense to, 921
non-capital cases, 1114–1161
assessing individual sentences, 1156–1160
categorical vs. individual challenges, 1159–1160
constitutional limitations, 1150–1161
cruel and unusual punishment, 1150–1161
discretionary sentencing, 1114–1121
Eighth Amendment, 1150–1161
juvenile offenders, life without parole, 1160–1161
life without parole, 1160–1161

--- Page 2421 ---
reform, 1121–1151
rehabilitation and, 1119–1120
state constitutions, 1161
“three strikes” laws, 1155–1156
presentence reports, 141
presumptive sentencing, 1127–1149
proportionality in, 245–246
reform, 1121–1150
guideline sentencing, 1127–1149
p. 1394
p. 1395
mandatory minimum sentences, 1122–1127, 1149
overview, 1121–1122
presumptive sentencing, 1127–1149
taking second look at sentences, 1149–1150
as stage in criminal case, 82
taking second look at sentences, 1149–1150
Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, 24, 1105, 1108, 1136
Separation of powers, plea bargaining and, 133–134
Services, theft of, 1064
Sex as property, 1066
Sex offenses
Model Penal Code, 1252–1267
prostitution, 49–51
rape, 377–460. See also Rape
registration of offenders, 1104
residence of offenders, restrictions on, 1112–1113
sexual abuse, mistake of fact and, 319–326
sexually violent predator (SVP) laws, 959, 1103
Sexual infidelity as provocation, 482–485, 491
Sexually violent predator (SVP) laws, 959, 1103
Sex work, 50–53
Shaming, 1104–1111, 1113–1114

--- Page 2422 ---
Shared intent, 694–695
Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890, 724, 763–765
Shield laws, 455–460
changing need for, 458–459
constitutional concerns, 458
impact of, 458
prior behavior of defendant, 460
Sixth Amendment
conspiracy and, 703
discretionary sentencing and, 1119
jury trials, 160–188. See also Jury trials
Sleep
automatism and, 982
sleep-related violence, voluntary action requirement, 256–257
somnambulism, voluntary action requirement and, 255–256
Social cohesion, punishment and, 43–44
Social concentration of incarceration, 2–3
Solicitation, 633–637
as attempt, 636
First Amendment and, 636–637
as independent crime, 636
murder, 633–634
Somnambulism, voluntary action requirement and, 255–256
Special prosecutors, 92–94
Specific intent
attempt, 606–610
diminished capacity, 987–988
mens rea, 289–291
Speech. See Freedom of speech
Speedy Trial Act of 1974, 787
Spouse abuse. See Intimate partner violence
Stalking, 623–626
“Stand your ground” laws, 852–855
protecting rights vs. saving lives, 853

--- Page 2423 ---
unintended consequences, 853–855
Starvation, necessity and, 886
State constitutions
proportionality, 247–248
sentencing, non-capital cases, 1161
Status crimes, 992–999
Statutory rape
mistake of fact, 327–329
strict liability, 327–328
Stop-and-frisk, 231–232
Strict liability, 329–349
affirmative defenses, 346–347
alcoholic beverage offenses, 339–341
child pornography
distributing, 337–338
producing, 338–339
constitutionality of, 345
conversion, 331–335
debate regarding, 347–349
drug offenses, 329–331
firearms offenses, 335–336
Model Penal Code, 349
p. 1395
p. 1396
overview, 329
public welfare offenses, 343–344
rape, 441–442
statutory rape, 327–328
vicarious liability
corporate criminality, 795–796
employers as individuals, 341
involuntary acts, 343
omissions and, 342–343

--- Page 2424 ---
parents, 341–342
Structural deprivation, excuse and, 1005–1012
Suicide
assisted suicide, 584–589
prison conditions, 1101
suicide tourism, 902
SVP (sexually violent predator) laws, 959, 1103
Sweden, homicide in, 469
T
Tangible property, finders of, 1027–1028
Tasers, 873–874
Tax offenses, mistake of law, 360–362
“Temporary” insanity, 978–979
Terrorism, material support to, 669–671
Theft, 1013–1093
blackmail, 1049–1059. See also Blackmail
burglary
attempt, 621
Model Penal Code, 1269–1270
consolidation, 1060–1061
by deception, felony murder and, 545–546
embezzlement
mens rea, 1089
as misappropriation, 1025–1027
by false pretenses
as fraud, 1046–1048
mens rea, 1089
as trespassory taking, 1015–1017
fraud, 1037–1049. See also Fraud
honest services, 1076–1085
corruption as theft, 1081–1082
mail fraud, 1076–1077
politics vs. fraud, 1083–1084

--- Page 2425 ---
prosecutorial discretion, 1084–1085
scope of, 1082–1083
securities fraud, 1077–1081
wire fraud, 1077–1081
information, theft of, 1066–1076
confidential business information, 1069–1071
copies, 1068–1069
identity theft, 1074–1076
“Official Secrets Act,” 1068
statutory interpretation, 1072–1073
statutory reform, 1073
larceny as trespassory taking, 1015–1017
means of acquisition, 1013–1061
blackmail, 1049–1059
consolidation, 1060–1061
fraud, 1037–1049
misappropriation, 1024–1037
overview, 1013–1014
trespassory takings, 1014–1024
mens rea, 1085–1093
chattels vs. cash, 1092
embezzlement, 1089
exceptions, 1085–1086
federal law and, 1090
intent to restore, 1089–1090
Model Penal Code, 1090–1093
theft by false pretenses, 1089
misappropriation, 1024–1037
abandoned property, 1029
appropriation of lost property, 1027–1030
embezzlement, 1025–1027
intangible property, finders of, 1028–1029
misdelivered property, 1029–1030
Model Penal Code, 1029–1030, 1033–1035

--- Page 2426 ---
property transferred by mistake, 1027–1030
tangible property, finders of, 1027–1028
wage theft, 1036–1037
Model Penal Code, 1013–1014, 1064, 1090–1093, 1270–1274
overview, 1013
p. 1396
p. 1397
property subject to theft, 1062–1085
honest services, 1076–1085
information, theft of, 1066
theft of information, 1066–1076
traditional theft, 1062–1066
receiving stolen property, 637–639
robbery
attempt, 612–614, 627–629
felony murder and, 534–535, 551–553, 559–561
Model Penal Code, 1023, 1270
as trespassory taking, 1015–1017, 1022–1024
services, theft of, 1064
sex as property, 1066
theft by false pretenses, 1089
traditional theft, 1062–1066
Model Penal Code, 1064
services, theft of, 1064
sex as property, 1066
use of property, theft of, 1065
trespassory takings, 1014–1024
asportation, 1017–1018
consent, 1019–1021
extortion, 1022–1024
feigned accomplices, 1021
larceny, 1015–1017
robbery, 1015–1017, 1022–1024

--- Page 2427 ---
theft by false pretenses, 1015–1017
use of property, theft of, 1065
Theft Act 1968 (UK), 1076, 1088
Theft by deception, felony murder and, 545–546
Theft by false pretenses
as fraud, 1046–1048
mens rea, 1089
as trespassory taking, 1015–1017
Third parties
self-defense and, 843–844
subsequent acts of, 592–594
Threats, Model Penal Code, 1250
“Three strikes” laws, 244, 1155–1156
Torts, corporate criminality vs., 763
Torture, 1161
Transferred intent, 582–584
attempt and, 609
homicide, 584
Model Penal Code, 583
Transformative justice, rape reform and, 453
Trespassory takings, 1014–1024
asportation, 1017–1018
consent, 1019–1021
extortion, 1022–1024
feigned accomplices, 1021
larceny, 1015–1017
robbery, 1015–1017, 1022–1024
theft by false pretenses, 1015–1017
Trials, 139–188
acquittal, 140
bench trials, 140
case-in-chief, 141
cross-examination, 142
directed verdicts, 140

--- Page 2428 ---
direct examination, 142
evidence. See Evidence
jury trials, 160–188. See also Jury trials
mistrial, 141
overview, 139–141
presumption of innocence, 140
reasonable doubt standard, 146–160. See also Reasonable
doubt standard
rebuttal, 141
re-direct examination, 142
as stage in criminal case, 82
“True man” doctrine, 851–852
U
Unborn Victims of Violence Act of 2004, 211–212
Unconsciousness, voluntary action requirement and, 251–252
Unexpected harm, punishment and, 40–41
Unintentional murder, 526–528
United Kingdom
Criminal Damage Act, 357
euthanasia in, 902
Homicide Act 1957, 988
insanity defense in, 949–951
Malicious Damage Act, 287
Malicious Injuries to Property Act, 287
p. 1397
p. 1398
murder in, 462–463
Offences against the Person Act 1861, 285–286
Theft Act 1968, 1076, 1088
Unlawful-act doctrine, 541, 579
Unprotected sex, mens rea and, 604–606
USA PATRIOT Act of 2001, 669

--- Page 2429 ---
Use of force. See Deadly force; Force
Use of property, theft of, 1065
Utilitarian view of punishment, 16–32
death penalty, 1163
deterrence, 18–22
certainty vs. severity, 20
death penalty, 1163–1165
moral influence, 21–22
rational and well-informed actors, 19–20
variations in punishment, effect of, 18–19
incapacitation, 27–32
built-in bias, 30
cost-effective alternatives, 31–32
crime decline in 1990s and, 30–31
empirical problems of prediction, 29–30
estimating benefits, 28–29
selective incapacitation, 29
mistake of law and, 355–356
overview, 16–18
rehabilitation, 22–27
effectiveness of, 24–26
medical model, 23–24
non-capital cases, sentencing in, 1119–1120
V
Vagrancy laws, 226–227
Vagueness
challenges for effective crime control, 230–232
constitutional foundations, 224–225
discriminatory-enforcement prong, 225–226, 228
Equal Protection Clause and, 225
gangs and, 216–224, 227–228
loitering and, 216–224, 227–228
notice prong, 228–230

--- Page 2430 ---
race and, 232–233
stop-and-frisk and, 231–232
vagrancy laws, 226–227
Vengeance, 39–40
Venire, 140
Verdicts
directed verdicts, 140
inconsistent verdicts, 186–188
criticism of prevailing acceptance, 187
problem of, 186–187
solutions, 186–187
Vermont, duty to rescue, 270
Vicarious liability
corporate criminality, 795–796
employers as individuals, 341
involuntary acts, 343
omissions and, 342–343
parents, 341–342
Victim-impact statements, 41–42
Victimless crimes, 98
Victims
accomplice as victim, 698–699
blackmail, threatening lawsuits as, 1052–1053
participation in charging decision, 95–96
prosecutions initiated by, 94–95
Vindictiveness, plea bargaining and, 129–132
Voir dire, 140
“Volitional prong” of insanity defense, 959–961
moral culpability, 960–961
practical concerns, 959–960
sexually violent predator (SVP) laws and, 959
Voluntary action requirement, 248–261
blameworthy acts distinguished, 253–254
concurrence requirement, 258–259

--- Page 2431 ---
contemporary applications, 249–251
culpable thoughts and, 260–261
epilepsy and, 257–258
habit and, 254–255
hypnosis and, 255
intoxication and, 248–249
p. 1398
p. 1399
