Dear class,

For this coming week, please note that the Bluebirds are up first, and then the Goldfinches.

We will begin by picking up with our discussion of comparative negligence versus comparative
causation, as a way of dividing up how much each of the multiple tortfeasors should pay.
(Recall that his relates to pp. 182-184 in KA.)

Then we will move on to the concepts of "proximate cause" and "scope of liability."  These are
parallel frameworks that courts use for narrowing down the list of causes-in-fact to only those
that should be held liable.  Traditionally, courts have done so using the language of "proximate
cause."  But as we will see, the Restatement Third rejects that term and instead calls this a
question of the "scope of liability."  We will cover both approaches.  Along the way we will see
the term "duty" again.

How these terms are used—including how these concepts might relate to each other—is
something that lawyers and judges continue to debate (as we will see in Quisenberry).  Our job
will be to recognize these sources of confusion or disagreement, and to make persuasive
arguments under any rubric favored by a given court.

Best of luck to us on our voyage into this nebulous vocabulary,

BH

* * *

Monday 2/16

Panel: Bluebird

We will use the Berry v. Sugar Notch case to test our intuitions about why not every cause-in-
fact should be held liable.

Then, we will look closely at the traditional "proximate cause" approach (as illustrated by the NJ
jury instructions) and the new "scope of liability" approach (as articulated in the Restatement
Third).  In class, I will walk us through the traditional approach.  Then we will discuss together
how the new approach works.

You may notice that the KA discussion tries to reconcile the traditional and new approaches,
merging their vocabularies.  But in our class, for the sake of conceptual clarity, we will keep
these two frameworks distinct in our minds.

We will give special attention to how the new approach, using the "harm within the risk" rubric,
deals with what were often called "intervening" or "superseding" causes under the traditional
approach.  For practice, we will be using both the illustrative Jones case (a new fact pattern), as
well as our familiar Sabatino case (about the would-be designated driver).

Berry v. Sugar Notch (classic)

The Scope of Liability: Proximate Cause, Basics, pp. 149-154 in KA

Judge, Jury, and Underlying Purpose, pp. 170-172 in KA

Restatement Third, sec. 29 and comment d (new approach)

Restatement Third, illustrations in section 29, comment d (new approach)

NJ jury instructions 6.10, on proximate cause (traditional approach)

NJ jury instructions 6.14, on intervening cause (traditional approach)

Jones v. Roth, paragraphs 1-7, 12-16 (as a fact pattern for practice)

Recall the designated driver issue in Sabatino (no need to bring it to class)

* * *

Wednesday, 2/18

Panel: Goldfinch

Now that we have a grasp of the new and traditional approaches, we are ready for a deep dive
into Palsgraf, probably the most famous torts case of all.  We will be using Palsgraf to explore
how the key words from our two frameworks overlap or differ in their possible meanings.

Be sure to read both the Cardozo and Andrews opinions carefully (our discussion will begin with
the Andrews dissent).  Ask yourself:  Does one seem closer to the traditional framework?  Does
one seem closer to the new approach?

Also ask yourself:  Why is Cardozo using the word "duty" (confusingly), and how does the
Restatement Third commentary address his usage of that term?  Is there really any distinction

between what the Restatement Third calls "scope of liability" and what one might call "duty,"
either as a conceptual or practical matter?

For an illustration of a modern court struggling with the potential confusion around these
concepts, we will then look at Quisenberry, a recent case from the Virginia Supreme Court.
What term is the majority trying to clarify?  What might the writers of the Restatement Third
commentary have to say about this court's understanding of duty?

Palsgraf v. Long Island RR, both opinions (the classic of all time!)

Posner on Cardozo on Palsgraf (notice the facts left unsaid by Cardozo)

Optional: NYT story on Palsgraf

Restatement Third sec. 29, comments e, f, g (read f closely, on "relationship with duty
limitations")

Optional: Unforeseeable Plaintiffs [Palsgraf], in KA 160-164

Quisenberry v. Huntington Ingalls, pp. 1-14, footnotes 5 & 6 (skip the others)
