SPEAKER 0
Right. You're ready for the. What. Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. My name is Brian Lee. I'm here to teach a property course. Am I in the wrong room? All right, good. Off to a good start. Um, uh, so welcome all. Uh, I hope you're all staying warm and I hope you all had a good break. Uh, the order of business for today is a little bit unusual because it's the first day of class, so we're going to start off with a bunch of administrative stuff that we're just going to go through, get that off the, uh, uh, out of the way, and then we can actually get into talking some property laws. So we'll have a large chunk of admin stuff and then we can actually start talking about property, um. Uh, for this course, we will be having 3 teaching assistants, uh, whom I would like to introduce to you now. Come on down, game style, game show style here. All right. All right, we have Jonah Chill, Elijah Emery, and Alyssa Sugar, excellent people who are going to be very helpful to you over the course of the semester, uh, if you take advantage of their services, which I encourage you to do. Um, they will be holding office hours and will also be conducting review sessions. Details about that will be posted soon-ish, but not immediately because we need to work out things like rooms and things like that. But that, uh, that will be information will be forthcoming. Thank you very much. Um, they will be in the classroom, and I think I am going to annoy the 3 people in the back there who have taken the 3 seats in the back figuring, oh, I will lurk in the back and no one will ever notice me. I am dispossessing you of your seats, so we can have the 3 seats, uh, for the TAs. Um, so you're going to have to change your place in the seating chart, and now you can come down in front. Um, if you want, pro tip. If you want to avoid being called upon, and something just for you to know, you'll learn this very quickly, I do not cold call, so you're good, all right, but uh if you want to avoid being called upon in a classroom. Sitting in front is great. Sitting in back is not so great. What you want to do is avoid the professor's eye level. If you're down in front, I can barely see you. Middle row is deadly. Back also fairly dangerous. So, uh, down in front is actually pretty much one of the best places you can be if you want to avoid actually ever being noticed. Um, seating, so seating will be assigned seating. If you really hate your seat currently, uh, you could try to change on the seating chart, but realistically we have 117 enrolled students in this class, and the classroom, yeah, isn't active yet? Oh, great. So now you can just, now it's just chaos. All right, so at some point the seating chart will be activated and then you will be able to pick your seats. So if you hate your seat, uh, you know, keep hitting refresh on that browser until it becomes active and then, uh, take somebody else's. We will be talking about, uh, what gives you entitlement to things like seats in just a bit. Um, but the way the system works here is, you know, first come, first served. Uh, how am I doing on the acoustics here? Can people hear me OK in the back? All right, great. Um, All right, uh, so syllabus, you probably wonder what the syllabus is. There is a syllabus now posted on courseworks. Everything in this course will run through courseworks. So you can look up, uh, you can just go on there and download stuff. You will notice when you download the syllabus and you do not need to be doing it now as I will not be working through it, uh, in this class, but you will notice when you do so that only the 1st 4 weeks of readings are there. That is by design. Um, I, uh, do that because I never know quite how long it's going to take to get through certain material. Um, some years, students are really talking about a certain thing and not at all about something else, and you can't predict from year to year what it is. As a law student, actually as an undergrad student as well, I always hated it when professor. Change the syllabus. They send a syllabus and they're like, oops, I messed it up, sorry, which now I haven't told you that it almost guarantees I'm going to mess up I'm gonna have to change the syllabus. But in order to cut down on that, I dole it out in installments so that way if I have to make changes in the back end, you never even see it. When there's about 1 week to go on the syllabus, uh, I will then post a new installment which will again give you another 4 weeks. So if you're a real gunner and reading ahead all the time, well, you'll be able to do that, um, so you'll always be able to, uh, yeah, know what you need to be doing. Um, one thing you will notice very quickly in this course is that I, I've tried to The best I can, and that's candidly not all that great, but to the best I can, try to kind of equalize the readings so that you don't have like a 3-page reading one day and then a 63 page reading the next day. Try to equalize that. I can't do it perfectly, but I try to. Um, so they're kind of equal-ish. Now, because they are kind of equal-ish, that has the consequence that there will be divergences between the reading and what is covered in lecture. Just because some stuff is quick to read, but it takes a long time to talk through. Some stuff, there's a lot to read, but really there's not that much to talk through. Here's the deal. If you read what is on the syllabus that is a sign for a given day, you will always be fine. You may be ahead of where we are in the class. You will never ever be behind. Um, so just read what is assigned on the day that it's assigned and you will be fine. You will notice that we will diverge almost certainly. I, I would be shocked if we get, we're not going to get through getting rich today. Um, it's, uh, uh, but that's fine. That is, uh, it's all designed, it's all, it's all worked out. Trust me on this. It will all come together in the end. I annotate my notes extensively after every class, including timing notes. It all comes together. Uh, but that's the thing to note about the syllabus. Just stick with the schedule. Uh, let's see here. Courseworks, right. Already mentioned everything's going to go through there. Uh, courseworks has a people tab, which maybe is visible in some classes, maybe is not in others. I have made it visible. Uh, courseworks as Canvas, if you've ever used Canvas as an as an LMS learning management system. Uh, Canvas has like a billion things you'll never use and then about a dozen things you wish it had and it doesn't. So, uh, it's mildly frustrating. One of the first things you do as an instructor is turn off a bunch of stuff that like you don't know what it does to try to cut down the clutter and then occasionally turn on some things. So I have turned on the people tab for you. So you can now. See who the other people are in the course. I do this, uh, for a few reasons. Um, one of them is basically so that you have a way of finding out who the folks around you, uh, are. This can be helpful for forming study groups. If you don't happen to have a friend group that's already in the, uh, uh, in the class and you'd like, you know, like to contact the folks about that, then, you know, that's a way of doing it. Um, also, if you just like had a pleasant conversation with somebody. And now feel embarrassed that you don't remember their name, uh, that you can, uh, that's a way of figuring that out too. Also, if you're hoping, and maybe you should be of meeting that special someone in law school. And might be in the room. This is a way that you could do this. There's all sorts of literature. That says Making friends after age 30 is extremely difficult. It is very hard to make friends after age 30. There's a reason for it too. Turns out that what's a necessary condition for making friends, and that is repeated unplanned interactions. All right, so we have a bunch of interactions, frequently interact with somebody, but it's not, it's not like, OK, we're going to do this on Tuesday at 2 p.m. or something. And what is good for that? Being in school, being in college, being in the workplace, which causes all sorts of problems, right? Um, uh, and what's not good for that, not being in those things. So this is basically the last chance, so um. No pressure, but Um, uh, if you, uh, if you basically just want to have an actual human interaction not mediated by a screen or an Instagram account or something like that, now you can look up the names and see who, uh, who people are. Now there's a couple of downsides to the people thing. Uh, one of them is you would think that it would automatically populate with photos from the ID photos that you all have in the system. It does not. You got to actually put your photo in. There are a tiny, there's a handful of people who've currently done that. If you haven't done that, you might want to. You don't have to put in a photo yourself. You can put in a photo of your dog. I've had dogs, people put in dogs, like a piece of art that you really like, whatever it is, I don't know, but you can do that. The other thing that's kind of annoying about it is that you actually, I didn't check this last night, so I think it's, I think this is, I'm 98% confident this is still true. You would think that you can like click on the link and then you can like message the person or communicate in some way. You cannot. Um, the, uh, that just tells you the name. You're gonna have to look up their name independently and figure out what their email address is. That kind of sucks, but it's the best I can do. So anyway, that, that's there. Um, all downloads for the course will appear in, uh, on courseworks in a module called file downloads. If you go on courseworks now, you will not see that module because I have not made any file downloads currently available for you. Um, and for reasons that I do not know, Canvas does not allow the modules tab to appear until there's actually a module in there. But anyway, there'll be a file download one and you'll be able to find it. It's not gonna be. Um, there is also an integrated, it's not in Canvas, it's in the other thing, uh, the other online registrar thing, uh, where you can, uh, a thing for, uh, names where you can have pronunciations for your names, uh, there. And I'd be grateful if you haven't indicated how to pronounce your name, uh, if you would do so. In doing so, one thing to keep in mind. This is a professional school. We are all grown-ups. We are on a last name basis here. Um, so, uh, we're all adults. So that means that everybody in this room is going to be addressed by, uh, a last name. So please indicate what your last name is. Also, not quite sure how this works there. I think you could do it through indicative pronouns. Please indicate your preferred honorific in whatever way you can there. And one rule on honorifics, I don't care what one you want, except it's got to start with the letter M. Alright, Mr., fine, Ms, fine, mix and X, fine. Um, anything I once had a student who really, really wanted Mrs., fine with me. Well, I had a student once who really wanted miss, fine with me. Uh, you can make one up. I don't care. I just want to know what it is so that I don't get it wrong. Um, the, uh, so if you could indicate that, that would be great, but it's got to be some M variety of that. If you are an admiral, thank you for your service. Still, it's an M sort of thing. This is an egalitarian class. If you are the Pope, welcome to law school, Your Holiness. Nevertheless, Mr, Ms. Mix, whatever, I don't care, just let me know. All right. Um. Course requirements This is a final example. A shocking development that I'm sure you never never saw coming. All right, so there's a final exam and Here instructor sigh. It will be open book. Sigh. Um, all right, it'll be open book. All right. Um, there will be a maximum word limit, uh, on the exam. I don't know what it is because I just finished grading my fall exams about a week and a half ago, so I haven't even started thinking about this exam and don't even want to. There'll be a maximum word limit. I don't know what it is. I will let you know in advance. There'll be a number. Also, it is highly likely that there will be multiple choice, uh, on the exam. I will be distributing sample, multiple choice questions. I'll also be just, I'll, I'll also at some point make available to you a packet that includes every property exam that I have ever given. All right, so you'll be able to download that as well, um. The other thing that could affect your grade but probably won't is class participation. All right, so there's a class participate potential class participation bump up if you have a lot of really good class participation. And you are right on the cusp of uh, between two grades. So you're right between an and an A, right, Jerry, your, your exam score was an, but oh, you're real close to an A and you got good class participation. Yeah, you could get bumped up to an A. Um, so there's a reason to participate. That said, realistically, the odds that that's going to affect your grade are very low, and the maximum it could affect you is by 1/3 of the grade, um, and it's probably not even gonna do that. So, um, at this point you're thinking, great, I am now checked out for the remainder of the semester. Wrong, I mean, you could. We're all grown-ups, right? I don't, uh, I, I don't care what you do with your life, not your dad, uh, but. Uh, I would encourage you to participate. Because doing so is super valuable in learning oral communication concerning the law, which is extremely important because no matter what you do in the law, you are going to have to do that. If you are a litigator, you're going to have to stand up in front of a court and make an argument. If you are a transactional attorney, you are going to have to be in a negotiation, a contract negotiation, and discuss things with the other party. If you're doing an alternative dispute resolution thing, you're going to need to be in that ADR process and communicate. Even if you're doing none of those things, if you're just a trusting a state's lawyer who just does like wills for people, right, you got to talk to the clients, right? You need to be able to explain yourself to the clients and Once you get out in the world and you start being a junior associate, which means you're never you're working for your big law firm. Hey, congratulations. Maybe in year 6 you'll get to see a depot. Um, uh, you know, that's, that's, you know, if you want real, you know, stand up in front of court experience, go work for the government for a minute. But, uh, even so, you're going to need to be able to talk to your supervising attorneys. You're going to need to be able to do that. How do you get good at it? By doing it. You do it by practice. And the key thing to remember here is one of the things you are paying for. Is the ability to be in an environment in which nothing matters. Alright, this classroom is the least important place you will ever be in your law school career. This is important if you, like I, are very shy about talking in public. Makes me extremely nervous. When I'm in a faculty workshop and I'm going to ask a question, worked hard on my question. I've read my paper, read the paper very closely. I'm going to ask a question. I cannot think of anything else. I was going over the question over and over. Don't screw it up. Don't screw it up. Don't screw it up. Don't screw it up. And then I asked the question like, did I screw that up? I think I screwed that up. I might have screwed that up. I don't know. I'm an anxious individual. All right, um, the only way to get over that. Is to practice. The more you practice, the more you realize it's not that hard, it's not that bad. Um, I had a very unusual experience about 3 weeks ago. I don't know. Recently, in which I went, uh, I had a friend from grad school in town, and, uh, so we decided to get dressed up and pretend like we're adults. And so we did a fancy thing and so we went to see a magic show, a dress up magic show. Uh, so it's Steve Cohen chamber magic at the Lotte Palace Hotel. Expensive ticket, but well worth it, I would say. Um, uh, very good show. Um, as part of the, uh, show, there is a big illusion that he does. It's like, whoa, you know, this is sort of the signature illusion for him. And he calls me up out of the room. I'm sitting in the back. I'm in the cheap suits. Calls me up, I think maybe because I was wearing a suit and actually dressed up, you know, properly for the thing. calls me up and so has me like participate in the thing. Some people are being asked like pick a random number. I didn't get that. I have also like I have to do banter. I am doing all these things. I have got the key. There's the key bit in the illusion where I've got to do a thing and it's like I'm just like, don't mess this up. Don't mess this up. Terrifying. But the thing that shocked me, genuinely shocked me, was how relatively non-terrified I was. Um, and I, I, the only explanation I can have for that is because this is like I think my 16th year teaching thereabouts. I have been doing this, which is inherently terrifying for now 16 years. And after you do that, like, so I'm just looking at these people and they're like, oh my God, no, it's like, OK, they're like law students, whatever. I'm just doing the thing. Um, and, uh, so I really think that the practice really, really, really helps. The other thing to keep in mind if you're shy and really nervous about this is like, well, I mean maybe it practice helped, but I haven't had the practice yet, right? So I'm gonna say stuff and everyone's gonna think I'm an idiot. All right, here's an old guy telling you how the world works. I'm gonna have to break something to you here. Nobody cares. Nobody's paying attention to you. Nobody, 5 minutes after the class is over, no one will even remember that you spoke, um, much less what you spoke about. It just doesn't matter. If you mess up in this classroom catastrophically, if you were to make the single worst comment ever made by anyone in the history of law school education, what happens? Nothing. Nothing. You mess up in a court. Your client gets executed. Botched the capital case or You just blew a $1 billion lawsuit, your client's not happy about that. Or the family that you're trying to work through some sort of family dispute thing there has now gotten messed up and so the wrong folks get custody. Bad, really bad stuff that you can mess up in the real world. Law is not a game, not a funny business. This classroom, nothing happens, right? So here is a chance for you to just like try it. And so I encourage you, especially if you don't want to talk, talk. Um, uh, it's what you're paying a lot of money for. Now, I will also say something for, uh, uh, possible 2 or 3 people in the room for whom this might be relevant, maybe nobody. I have been listening to all that going, I don't really care, and that's not me because I am confident in my ability to speak very persuasively about the law and in fact I am highly knowledgeable about all this, and in fact I'm pretty confident the class would benefit from hearing my insights about. If that's you, fantastic. Love it, please do. Um, but I will also suggest to you that there is a thing that you could practice here. It is a useful skill to have, and that is saying less. Um, and I'm serious about this. Uh, so there is a, an enormous amount of value in not doing things, not reading certain stuff. I'm terrible at this. Like I'm just absolutely terrible at this stuff. Uh, not reading certain things because when you're doing that, that takes you away from reading other things, right? Not doing various time wasting things because that just, you know, a huge opportunity cost that keeps you from doing other more valuable stuff. Um, if you are giving presentations or if you're talking about stuff. A really useful skill to have is to cut out various bits of your material, the bits of your material that you think are just pretty good. Cut out the pretty good stuff, leave the really good stuff. When I was in graduate school, I got a doctorate in philosophy. Um, Anglo-American philosophy, so analytic philosophy, very logic choppy. Um, I, uh, we have seminars, graduate seminars, which are just 3 hours of arguing about things. And because of graduate seminars, sometimes you would have faculty sitting in as well, not just grad students, and I vividly remember a seminar in which I don't remember the topic. I just remember this thing that happened in which there was a professor who would sit in, wasn't the one running the seminar, just would sit in. We sit in the back and there would be a Intense discussion for 3 hours, it's a 3 hour seminar, it's like 2 hours and 45 minutes. On, uh, some, you know, the topic of the day. And this guy would say nothing, dead silent for 2 hours and 45 minutes. And then at the 2:45 mark. He would raise his hand and he would chime in and he would say, it seems to me that the discussion here really boils down to 3 competing points of view. And then he would summarize the first point of view beautifully. The second point of view, beautifully, and the 3rd point of view, beautifully. And he said, now once you see that, you realize that what's really going to decide which one of these points of view is, you know, best is this, and they would give us a little argument and then he would be done. 5 minutes tops. Thing is, every grad student wanted to be that guy. Every one of us wanted to be that guy. He didn't say much, but when he said what he did say was great, and as a result, everyone just thought this guy's the greatest guy ever to grace philosophy. If everything you say, if you don't say anything except what you think is like really. Then people are going to think, man, this person's fantastic. They will fill in the blanks and assume that everything else you're thinking, even if you're just thinking about like sandwiches, everything else you're thinking must be brilliant too. So if you're the sort of person who loves to talk, great, fantastic. I do not want to discourage you in the slightest, but it is actually a useful skill to learn how to edit stuff, also useful for editing pros. Um But either way, you know, please do participate. It is super useful and this is an opportunity you're not going to have after another 2 years from now. That's going to be it. So take advantage of it while you go. All right, uh, topic 60, visiting, right, so I am an interloper. I am a visiting professor here. All right, I am not a regular member of the Columbia Law faculty. My home institution is Brooklyn Law School. So yes, not only am I a visitor, I am a visitor from an outer borough. Oh dear. How good can this guy be? Well, we'll find out. Um, so, uh, uh, two things follow from this. So one thing is, I mean, if you saw him, you know, happen to look online, you probably know that already. Um, some of you given a class this size will probably have friends or know somebody who is at Brooklyn. And uh therefore, hey, maybe I like get the, get his Brooklyn notes or Brooklyn stuff from him there and get an edge. Uh, do that if you want to, but just, just be aware, anything I give my Brooklyn students, I will be giving you as well. 100, like it's just like same stuff it's just gonna get posted, uh, and, uh, uh, both places, so, um, I teach. Teach this course Mondays and Wednesdays at Brooklyn, Tuesdays and Thursdays up here. So there's no, there's no insider advantage to be had on this. And also in case you're wondering, two entirely separate exams. So I'm gonna be writing two entirely different exams. So if you, I, I have no idea which exam is given first, but there is no point communicating with your Brooklyn friends about the exam because I've just written two entirely disjoint exams. Um. Um, all right, so that's, uh, that's that. Um, the other thing is, and I, I apologize for this, uh, because of a very weird thing Brooklyn does with its calendar, there will be a conflict on one day, one of our class meetings. So February 17th, which is right after President's Day, um, Brooklyn Brooklyn, so Columbia deals with President's Day sensibly. It just ignores it. Dumb holiday just like Justin does it. Brooklyn not so smart, but it decides to get really weird. So it's like it has, it observes President's Day. OK, so I teach Mondays. Well, I don't, except then having not observed, not had classes on Monday, it then declares that Tuesday is a Monday. And so all of my, all the Monday classes now beat on Tuesday. What happens to Tuesday classes? They seem to have been vaporized. I don't know what's going on. Anyway, I don't do it. So, uh, as a result, I can't be in both places at one time. So, uh, I am going to be, uh, teaching at Brooklyn then. I am not going to be able to be teaching here. I'm very sorry about this. Didn't even realize it until I was making syllabi, uh, a couple of weeks ago that, oh my gosh, they did that to me. Great. All right, so how are we going to handle this? What's going to happen is almost certainly I will. I'll let you know it well in advance, but almost certainly we will not be meeting on the 17th. Um, I will schedule a makeup class. I will probably try to get it in at some point that Friday just to keep things relatively tight. It will be recorded. If you can't attend, it's not a big deal. We will not be keeping attendance. Um, if you have any questions about the material, feel, feel free to contact me. We'll just do it. Again, I'm very sorry about this. Um, hadn't realized that when I accepted the, the gig. Uh, it's just one of those things that's, uh, awkward, but it is what it is. Um. All right. Attendance. Attendance at Brooklyn Law School and attendance at Columbia Law School are two very, very different things. At Brooklyn we say you must attend class and then are hyper diligent about it. At Columbia we say you must attend class, at least 80% of the classes, and then don't actually care as far as I can tell, um, but we will be in fact tracking attendance and so if you miss a bunch of classes, uh, you'll be hearing from somebody in the administration. But, uh, I think mainly that, uh, and this is, I think quite sensible, the main reason for doing that is basically if somebody's missing a lot of classes that often may be a sign that something's going on with that person. Life happens, right? And so people have all sorts of stuff that they get sick, a relative gets sick, something bad happens, and often the institution can actually help with that. And so people missing class is just kind of canary in the coal mine so we can just, you know, alert some folks and then maybe get you some assistance for things. But you know, you should be showing up in class now. You're all adults, right you are all grown up now. As far as I'm concerned, I don't care whether you show up or not. Um, I am hoping that you will find class valuable enough that you will want to be here. You'll figure it's a good use of your time to be here. But if you don't, for whatever reason, maybe you're sick and don't want to infect everybody else sitting around you, they will thank you for that. Or maybe you have something else that you need to do, or maybe you just cannot handle law school that day. And so you are going to, you need to go to the movies. If that is you, by the way, I would highly how many people have ever been to the Lincoln Square giant IMAX. All right, the rest of you are missing out. That thing is the largest tied for the largest IMAX screen in North America. It is enormous. The sound system is fantastic. Watch films there that are shot on IMAX cameras because otherwise you're kind of wasting your money. But if it's shot on IMAX, try to see it there at the Lincoln Square. Fantastic. It's, it's right in the Lincoln Sound, it's like just, just down like just at the 23, 1 of the 23. Anyway, so there's your movie tape. If you have to miss class, you have to miss class. All right. Uh, if you do, you do not need to apologize to me or explain to me what's going on. You don't need to. If I can be helpful in some way, by all means reach out, but you do not need to justify yourself to me. All right, you're grown-ups, you make your own choices. You might be late at some point. Time for a job interview or subways weren't your friend or whatever. That's fine. Come in late, just, you know, don't make a grand entrance, right? Uh, just, you know, try not to be disruptive. Uh, class recordings. Classes should be automatically recorded, and those recordings should be automatically posted or somebody should post it the courseworks, not me. I don't know. I have no idea how this stuff works. But I am making that, I guess different people do it different ways. I had a survey that I can like give me like 12 different options that I could pick. I just picked the record the class and make it available to every student on courseworks. So all of the classes should be recorded and they should all be available to you on courseworks. I filled out the survey at about 3 in the morning today, so it may not be available yet, uh, but I'm hoping by the end of the week these, uh, recordings will start to be available. Um, Questions you may have questions, uh, during the course of the semester about various things in class or out of class. If you have questions after class, uh, I'm happy to field them. Uh, I will have a scheduled office hour. This is written on the syllabus, you don't have to like memorize this. Uh, immediately after class on Thursdays, so like 4:45 or whatever it is. Uh, I was happy to talk with you then. I am also happy to talk to you like informally like. I have to talk to you other times, right? So like after class on Tuesdays, I probably will not have to be running off generally and so I'm happy to chat with you then as well. Um, Because I work and live in downtown Brooklyn, it's a bit of a trek for me to come up to Morningside Heights. So if you need to talk to me on a Monday, Wednesday, or Friday and you need to do it in person, I can do it. Like we got subways. Downtown Brooklyn is really good for subway access, so I can, I can make it up here. But if Zoom will work, Zoom's a bit more convenient for me if I'm doing it on off days. Um, uh, but again, happy to, you know, meet in person, right? I am paid to be here, so, you know, don't, don't feel shy, uh, about that, um. So happy to answer questions in person. Also happy to field questions by email. Uh, the best way generally I think to arrange to meet to talk is typically to send an email to arrange a time, but I'm again, I'm happy to talk during the scheduled, uh, office hour. Um, if you have questions during class, just raise your hand. I will either field it immediately or wait until a natural pausing point and then field the question. Um, and I will periodically stop and ask if anyone has questions, like now. You don't have any questions so far? Um, now. If I do not know the answer to the question. I'm gonna tell you what I'm gonna do. I will say, I do not know the answer to that question. I will have to look it up and get back to you later, and I will do that. Um, I once got an end of year evaluation from a student whose sole comment was this. Professor Lee does not know how discouraging it is to stand up for when he stands up there and admits that he doesn't know the answer to a question. This is just really awful or something like that. That's it. That was it. Um, so here's a, first of many sermons that you'll be getting, uh, this, uh, uh, semester, um. If you do not know the answer to a question in your legal profession, in your legal career. Just admit it. The fact is nobody knows all the law on anything. I do not know all of property law. There's no way I could know all of property law. There is more property law than any single human being could possibly know. What's more, they're making more of it every day. We have 50 plus jurisdictions in the United States of America, and I guarantee you that some property cases are being decided today somewhere in America. You cannot know all there is to know about property law or contract law or commercial paper or whatever it is. What separates you? From random people on the street, and I don't know where I'm not used to this building. It's not like the windows up there, probably a street up there, random people on the street. What separates you from random people on the street, what you're paying a lot of money to go to law school to learn to do, is to be able to look up the answer and get the right answer. All sorts of people now do their own research. Oh, we live in the era of doing your own research on all sorts of things. I don't need a degree in molecular biology. I did my own research and I now know X, Y, or Z. Well, maybe, but there's a good chance that you've come up with something completely wrong. You will not come up with the wrong answers. You will know how to find the right answers. Part of that is because you'll have a base of knowledge about basically basic legal doctrines and how things work, but also you'll have various skills you've learned, be able to read and understand legal materials. You'll be able to find the right answer. I am begging you. Right now If I have to get on my knees, I'll do it. I'm. If somebody, a supervisor asks you a question and you don't know the answer, do not guess. Do not guess. Just say, I'm not sure. I'm going to have to get back to you. If you do that, they'll say, all right, they'll think, OK, doesn't know the answer to that. All right, well, you know, people don't know the answers to things, so I have to look it up. More, more hours to build. Um, if you guess and get it right, well, you know, good for you, you got lucky. If you guess and get it wrong, very bad things can happen. Up to and including being disbarred. So just don't guess, just say, yeah, I don't know, I'll have to get back to you. All right, here I will give you a choice. Um So, Sometimes Law school is not as good as it might be in training people, especially 1Ls, how to do research on unfamiliar areas of the law, and you may bump into that fairly quickly when you do your 1L summer jobs. Um, so, here's a choice, um. You can receive a mini lecture from me right now on how to research absolutely any question in the law, or we can skip that because it's not actually a property fact. So suppose you're you're in a job and somebody asks you a question on Admiralty. Look up this Admiralty thing. Uh, how confident are you that you can do that and get the right answer? All right, so just show of hands here. Like, I don't care, right? I got, I can either do it or I cannot. So how many people here would like to have a mini lecture on how to research any area of the law? OK, about the same number as I go to Brooklyn, so I won't ask for the other folks who are highly competent and highly confident as well, and they can like tell me how much I got wrong. Um, all right, so I will give you just a quick little mini lecture on how to do this. Um, you will note in doing it that I'm not going to say anything until the very end about AI. AI is probably going to change this game, but for reasons that I will talk about in a moment, I'm not going to say anything. We're just going to pretend AI doesn't exist at this point, which I think is actually the smart strategy as of today for doing this. OK. Senior associate is about to hand you a question or you know some supervising attorney has handed you a question. First step, step one, extremely important. Get as clear a statement of that question as you can. Make sure you understand exactly what is being asked. And if over the course of the subsequent steps you start to realize that your grasp on the question is starting to slip, you're not so sure anymore what it's meant, go back and get clarity on it. The person, this may be a little tricky because the person asking you the question often may not actually have a clear idea of what it is they're trying to find. There's the classic thing you will experience as the junior attorney of, you know, there's got to be a case that says X. Find me that case. Senior associates and partners love to give you that, and invariably when you're told to do that, there is no case. It just doesn't exist. It should be. I think it would be, but there isn't. All right, they may have like a vague sense of what the question is. It may be an iterative process, but you really need to know exactly what the question is. You need to be answered. Once you have a clear understanding of that. Step 2 is you look at legal encyclopedias. There are 2 main legal encyclopedias. Oh my. Look at this. Up and down, two people in the back will understand why I'm so excited about this. I've taught at Columbia once before, two years ago across the hallway in 104. Fancy room. These things didn't move. Extremely frustrating. All right, uh, maybe they do now because you've refurbished everything. OK, so you got your two big legal encyclopedias. American jurisprudence. Which has some state-specific spinoffs. I believe New York is one. There's a New York jurisprudence. There's California jurisprudence for a few major jurisdictions. There's a lot of overlap between NY juror and Amjuror. The New York one just has some New York, New York specific stuff. Um, and the other big one is CJS. Corpus urosecundum, right, um. Are, uh, both, they exist as printed volumes, which how I feel you used like a printed legal encyclopedia. Yeah, you're missing out. Oh, wait. OK, so, uh, you're missing out. Uh, it's actually better than doing it online, but online is so much more convenient because they're all in Westlaw or Lexus that I too always use them online because, you know, it's available at 3 in the morning. Um, so you can get them on Westlaw, you can get them on Lexus, right? Uh, these are encyclopedias. What are legal encyclopedias? Uh, that's what it says on the 10. They cover like all of the law. Multi-volume things like 20 volumes. All the wall is in there. Now, as you can imagine because it's 20 volumes covering all the law. It does so at a pretty high level of generality, right? It is not really super detailed, which is great when you're starting out because you don't know anything about admiralty, say, and so you need to get sort of an overview on this. So what you do, if you have the physical volume, you're going to have to adjust this in your head for doing it online. But the physical volume, what you do is like you look at some terms on that and you go to the Index, there's a thing on the back called the index, and you look at that, and you look at the index and you try to find like the relevant terms on these things. You go, OK, maybe look at like terms nearby and associated terms, and then you write down those page numbers and you read the bit in the encyclopedia. When you do this, you will see a bunch of cases mentioned. Write them down. Do not look them up. Just write them down. All right. At this stage, you should have a sort of general idea of the kind of, you know, the lay of the land with respect to this, uh, your, your, your question. Step 3, look at treatises, subject matter treatises. These are more detailed, more focused works on just one particular topic. They may also be multi-volume. Um, they, because they are more detailed and often denser, you don't want to go to them first. You want to get the background information from the legal encyclopedia first, then you can take a look at the treatises. There are a bunch of famous ones and some less famous ones. So there's Powell on real property, Nichols on eminent domain, C Corbin on contracts, Nimer on copyright. Once upon a time 100 years ago, you made your name in the law by being the author of a great treatise, and very much not so today, but back in the day that's where it was, and so that's why we have these like Nimer on copyright. It's a big deal. A useful website to find treatises on a thing is Georgetown Georgetown Law Library has a web page that categorizes treatises by subject area. Quite comprehensive. So you can just look for, OK, here's a subject area, and you click on that and oh, here's like 4 or 5 treatises. Obviously the links there are then to the Georgetown catalog and you can't check them out from there, but you get the names, which is good enough. So take a look at the treatises. You will also see cases listed there. Write those down. Now at that point. Once you think you understand what you're reading in the treatise, you probably have a pretty good idea of what you think the answer is. Now is the time that you start looking at cases. And one of the things you are going to discover to your dismay. Is that these encyclopedias and treatises are not always 100% accurate in what they characterize cases as saying. Um, it is, uh, frustrating to have an encyclopedia tell you, oh, the law and such, uh, you know, and some question is such and such and it's exactly what you need. Oh yeah, this is it, great, and it cites a case and then you read the case and didn't actually say that. All right, so you got to read the cases to make sure that they're doing what they claim to, what the people who wrote about them claim to do. Also, you're going to need to find other cases. These things are not updated that often. Um, and a lot of the cases in them are old, and that's fine because there's nothing wrong with old cases, but some of them are quite stale. So what you need to do now is see what's going on more broadly. So, one thing to look at, the cases that you've written down, what cases do they cite? So you're going to look backward in time, what cases do they cite? Look them up. Also, look forward in time, what cases are citing the cases that you looked up, and you want to do that search probably in your jurisdiction. So if you like doing something in New York, New York State court, you know, limit it to New York. And The more recent cases, look at like, are there cases that they keep citing on the same topic that were not in the encyclopedias, but these are cases that keep popping up. All right, those are probably central cases. You do that a bit, and eventually you will get to the point at which you realize you're starting to see the same case names pop up over and over. When you're at that point, you know you're pretty much done. Yeah, you've got a good sense of what's going on there, and at that point you have an answer, which may in fact be, uh, well, this is uncertain. But you have an answer for that. OK, um, so at that point, you, uh, um, have come up with an answer to the question and have done so without. Just throwing in random search terms into the Westlaw little thing that looks like a Google thing, and you've done so without using AI. All right, how about the AI thing? Should you use AI? Well, maybe. Um, Anything you say about AI is going to be obsolete about 15 minutes. Uh, so I will just tell you that as somebody who is old and out of touch, I'm probably reflecting the old and out of touch view. Um, but I have to say that my experience is limited. With using AI to do legal research have not been encouraging because there have been, and this is basically based on Westlaw and Lexus stuff, they just keep making mistakes, pretty big mistakes. Recently, I like to say 2 months ago. A lifetime ago, maybe in AI times, but about 2 months ago, 1 month or two ago, I was in. Researching a student question. A student asked me a question preparing for an exam. It's like, yeah, don't know what the answer is to that. I'm going to have to look it up. As I told you, I'm gonna have to look it up. I was about to go and do a treatise search on it because I figured that would be the best way to do it. It's like, you know, Westlock keeps shoving this. Use the AI, you idiot thing in front of you. So it's like, well, all right, I'll ask the AI, you know, ask the question to AI. And there's a question about whether expert testimony is required for a certain thing in copyright law. So I throw in the question and it gives you 3 choices of like 3 different kind of models you could use like the super quick one and then the 7 minute one and the really long one, and they recommend doing the 7 minute one. OK, do 7 minutes of thinking and then get back to me. So I do that and then go off and do something else and 7 minutes later I get the report. It says there at the very top, um, expert testimony is in boldface, not required. Stop the ball phase 4, the thing that I was asking about. OK, great, super useful summary right up there, couldn't be clearer, right up there in front and then it gives me a bunch of supporting information on that. Go down and start reading the supporting information. The very first sentence says there is a circuit split about whether whether expert testimony is required. And then it starts citing various cases and so I'm looking up the cases and reading the cases, and it turns out that for certain things expert testimony is 100% required for that question under some circumstances. The thing in bold was just wrong. It's like completely wrong. It's like, OK, uh, no maybe they got it fixed, you know, maybe it's better now, but right now, uh, my big problem with AI is I just don't trust the dang. Awesome if it would work. Don't trust it for that. Uh, a couple of days ago I had dinner with a friend from grad school who's super crazy smart guy was in a math PhD program, dropped out to just work on computer programming stuff because he cared about that. 30 odd years ago, made a bunch of money doing it. Now I don't even know what he does with it. Like he's like just like, he's been taking a bunch of cruises around. He, uh, like he's working for some crypto company doing smart stuff for the crypto company. Anyway, um, he's, uh, super duper smart guy. Really loves AI for coding. He thinks you know super knowledgeable, thinks AI for coding actually works really well, maybe great for certain things, for faking photos. Nano Banana Pro, the new Google thing, amazing how good it is at making realistic looking stuff. Um, the way I describe AI currently, nobody likes this formulation, but I keep trying to make it catch on. It's never going to, but here we are. AI is great at verisimilitude, it is not good at veracity. It is great at making things that look plausible. It is not so good at telling you things that are actually true, and that's a really dangerous combination. Because it looks good, but it's not good. Um, so, uh, when you're doing your legal research. Feel like certainly if you've done your research the way I was suggesting you do it, then trying AI afterwards, no harm in that whatsoever, right? It might come up with stuff that you didn't find. It might through its predictive engine there, come up with some point of view that hadn't occurred to you, could be useful, might be a helpful brainstorming tool. I'm not suggesting don't use it at all. I am suggesting that just be very careful in using it because in my experience, I just can't rely on it yet. I would love. For it to get good because I think there's all sorts of really interesting things that you can do once you have something like that, stuff that's just not possible now. I just don't think it's there. Um, quick show of hands here. How many people here found that, uh, bit about how to research things useful? OK, good. Um Oh, and one other super important thing about AI. If your supervisor tells you to use AI, use AI. Do what the people who can fire you tell you to do. It's just like if they say, Hey, we're doing AI now, great, you just love it. You're you're you're 100%. With respect to AI in this course, I don't care. Uh, do not use AI on the exam. You are not allowed to use AI on the exam. It's going to be an open book exam so you can bring in like any paper printed things that you want, but you can't use go online and do. All right, um, so no AI on the exam. Other than that though, I don't care how you learn. I just care that you learn. If you find AI useful in doing things, in helping you learn stuff, great, by all means use it. Be a little careful with it. My guess is for something like a 1L course it might be pretty useful because I'm guessing that there's a lot of just standard material out there that it's trained on and so it's responding, you know, it's based on that, so it's probably not so far off in its accuracy and it's interactive, so you can ask questions, which is great, right? So it might actually be useful. I don't know. I don't feel obligated to use it, but you know, don't feel shy about doing it either. You're welcome to do so, um. 01 other thing that I do want to say about AI. This is you folks probably are just on the cusp of. Needing to have somebody tell you this, but probably not quite. Two years from now, a lot of people are going to need to hear this because a lot of people have used AI to get through college. It's great. I can use it to write my papers. How many people here knew people in college who were like using AI a lot to get through things? I don't like, but yeah, OK, so not that many yet. In 2 years, it's like everybody's gonna be. Um I'm not here to tell you how to lead your life, but I am here to warn you that you're going to want to be employable in the future. Right now it is unclear what effect AI is going to have on things, but one thing we know about AI is that it is cheap compared to human beings. So if your legal skills are no better than what somebody working overseas in a cheap cost of living country can do using AI in 10 minutes, but if your skills, hey, I can use the AI and just generate the thing. If that's all you've got to offer, you are unemployable. And that's the fact, right? The AI is vastly cheaper than you are. No one's going to be paying you mid to high. You're going to be starting at probably around 150, I'm guessing to actually that's probably 200,000 base if you're starting. What's what's the, what's the standard big law first year salary? 225 up to 225. Good for you. And then. Starting at 225. All right, no one's going to pay you 225,000 bucks a year. You'd be just throwing stuff in a chat GPT or Claude or Harvey. All right, um, uh, I remember seeing about a year or so ago, something that just it made my heart sink, somebody on Reddit who just didn't get a little clueless. I would feel bad for him. Um, so it was on the thing about coding academies, these coding boot camps that used to exist, they're now pretty much dead where you go and you pay like 10,000 bucks and you're in for like 6 months or something, you learn how to code and then you get a job. Well, those jobs have gone away, so they're kind of dead. But anyway, this person was doing it and then there was somebody who was asking on Reddit. Should, uh, should I like, is this worthwhile, Should I do this thing? And the responder, the commenter said, yeah, it's great, you know, uh, you pay the money and you do the class and it's super easy cause all the exercises you could just do doing chat GPT. And I was just like, Didn't realize that if all she's doing is just putting in chat the stuff in the chat GPT, no one's going to hire her because you could just hire somebody else to just do the chat GPT thing super easily. All right, so you're going to need to build up skills that are not just replaced by chat GPT. And if you're using Pre-AI if you're using Quimpy. Or something, or they used to have bound volumes of like ah case brief things, things to brief your cases, so you're not reading the cases or AI to summarize the cases for you. It's pretty much like getting in shape to run a marathon or to compete in the Olympics. By going to the gym. Paying people to work out while you stand there and watch. When you're done, grab the water bottle and sort of pour it over yourself. It's like, oh, good workout, and then you walk out of there. It's like, uh, you've done something, but you haven't really done what you need in order to, uh, uh, get um. Get where you're gonna want to be. Um, so one thing to think about as you're working through your law school career is what kind of knowledge do you really need to have in order to be able to use AI well? And I am inclined to think that a fair amount of memorization stuff actually is really useful, um, because then you'll be able to read something like, wait, that, that can't be right, or that seems wrong to me. Um, and you won't have to spend a lot of asking AI to double it. Are you sure about that? And of course the AIs are like super friendly. Why yes, brilliant insight that maybe I'm wrong there. It's like I really need you to just objectively know whether this is right or not. Um, so I am inclined to think, but this is just, I'm old, so maybe I'm just like fooling myself, but I'm inclined to think like memorizing things and actually knowing stuff will actually be really useful. Um, you'll be able to use AI then well, as opposed to other people who are just sort of hammering away at things. That's my mom. OK, um. Segue here, computers, right? Artificial intelligence runs on computers. Other things that run on computers like Word and taking notes and Google Docs, laptop policy, if you got them, use them. I don't care. Just two things about it. One, when I was in law school, I was sat in the back. And as a result, I was aware of what the students in front of me were doing on the laptops, and shockingly, it was not always 100% taking detailed notes. Or there are some professors who actually think people are going online and doing additional research on the fascinating topics in class. No, I was aware of the fact that people were shopping on things. Google Earth had just come out because I'm old, so people were like traveling the world on Google Earth. What Uh, was in law school right if the real estate bubble was happening. I am pretty convinced that in my, uh, intellectual property course, there was a guy two rows ahead of me who was flipping properties. Actually doing real estate trades in class. Well, if you're making good money, I mean, I, who am I to complain, but I, I, I don't care what you do. You're grown-ups. Do whatever you think is the best use of your time, but don't be distracted. Just don't distract the people around you. I will tell you that the longest interval of time ever measured by science. Is that interval of time between when you are in a classroom like this surfing the web and you land on a web page that has an autoplay video and your audio is not muted. That's the start point. And then the time between that and your figuring out how to mute the audio or close out that web page. It happens like once every 3 years or so that happens to a student there. I don't even have to say anything. Everyone just stops and watches and the look of sheer terror in this person's face as he or she is just hammering every possible combination. Trying to get it to stop. Anything to get it to stop. Don't even say anything. Just. It teaches itself. So you don't do that because that will happen to you. You don't want that. You'll take 2 years off your office. Um, the other thing that I will note is there does seem to be some research that indicates that handwriting things is beneficial. It helps it stick in your brain better. Uh, so there can be uh pedagogical advantages to actually handwriting stuff. I didn't do that when I was in law school. I was just a transcriber. I did exactly what you're not supposed to do. Just type in everything the professor says, um, in large part because the professors often like we're not well organized, so like I have no idea. Like I have to figure out later what that was supposedly going on in the class. So I mean, I, I, I'm not going to fault you if you don't, but you, if you're on the fence, maybe try the handwriting thing. I don't know. Um Supplements, you may wonder, are there like commercial study aids that are recommended for this class? Um, none in particular. Uh, I am firmly convinced that the aids that are good for one person are not going to be good for somebody else. When I was in law school, I had a lot of classmates who loved examples and explanations. They swore by them, thought they were great. Never worked for me. Gilbert's outlines I liked. I liked Gilbert's. It was more of an outline format that was better for me. Other people didn't like Gilbert's. So I think that the best thing you could do is basically just try various ones and see what one speaks to you. My experience of trying to get a study aid, what I would do in a class is try to get 2 or 3. Um, and then just come up with some question, like some topic, and then compare how they, how each one of them addressed that one topic. And the one that seemed clearest to me was like, oh, that, that one clicks for me. All right, all right, that one probably is going to be my first choice, but then do that for 2 or 3 topics to make sure it wasn't just a one-off. And then that, that I found a fairly good way of finding something that was meeting whatever need I personally had from the study aid there. Now that said, I will give you a name of one thing that some students have said they found useful. Um, again, It's fine, it's pretty good, but it's not necessarily better than other things. Give you something, um. In understanding property law, I think it's 4th edition. Decent, you know, it's, uh, you know, it's kind of a treatise-like thing, you know, pretty good. Um, uh, one other thing, uh, and then we will, uh, uh, finish up with this. One other thing. Is that uh when you're doing your research. Or learning something in class, or learning something you're doing reading, and you encounter a term that you do not know, please look it up. Look it up in the legal dictionary. Learning the vocabulary is an important part of this gig. And legal vocabulary sometimes has meanings that's not obvious on its face. Now When I was in law school, very end of the era in which everybody, when you went to law school, the first thing you did is you bought a bound copy of Black's Law Dictionary. Anyone here own a physical copy of Black's? One of you. Congrats on a couple of you. Good. All right, so old school, that's great. You got the, the blacks. Most of you aren't going to do that now because it's big and it's heavy and like, really, uh, Westlaw has blacks in it. You can make it a favorite. So that anytime you log into Westlaw, you can just do click on the blacks thing and look up stuff. Also, if you don't want to deal with the fact that Westlaw is just always slow, it's been slow for decades, um, don't want to deal with that? Merriam-Webster, M-.w.com. Merriam-Webster's dictionary online, you know, it's free, you just go there online. They actually have a built-in legal dictionary that's not bad. So if you type in a legal term, uh, and then basically you have to scroll way down to get to the legal thing also I think off to the left it's like a You know, a kind of like set of tabs you can click on and jump to the legal one maybe more quickly. Uh, that legal dictionary, really not bad, not bad at all. Um, and so don't even need to have Westfall access for that. Please do look up the terms, learn what the words mean. Um All right, any questions on this? All right, my plan is to take a 10 minute break, uh, halfway through this, through the class, every class, and it looks like we're about halfway through the class, so let's take a 10 minute break. Um, uh, so see everybody in 10 minutes. know I'm just That. Right. And she was like Right. I. OK, folks. Get back into this here. Now I have in my notes an indication that at this point you folks have received your grades. Is that right? You've received your first semester grades. All right, so here's a few, pardon? Oh, sorry, I gotta say. You didn't say anything. OK, all right, I'm hallucinating I'm at the, I'm not hallucinating thing it says here. Um, the, uh, all right, so, uh, so you guys, hey, yeah, you've gotten your grades, is that right? Is this OK. So, uh, some of you will be, uh, thrilled, other, other, others of you will be less thrilled, uh, with, uh, what you saw there. Just a few, uh, a few thoughts about this, and then we can talk properly. So first off, if you are thrilled with your grades, then, uh, in the immortal words of, uh, career advisor Han Solo. Great shot, kid. Don't get cocky. All right, so good. Just keep on doing what you're doing. By the way, the original Star Wars, not the messed up one from 1998, the special the original Star Wars, will be re-released in theaters February 2027. Disney's finally bringing it up. George Lucas claimed that it didn't exist anymore. All the prints were gone, so no, you can't see it. That was a lie. Anyway, it exists. Get your tickets now. Anyway, uh, in 2 years you'll be able to see it. OK. Um, so if you did great, great, uh, that's swell. Uh, maybe you didn't do so great. All right, that, that happens. You got mandatory curves, these things happen. Um, in that case, I've got, uh, a couple of bits of a couple of thoughts for you. So first off, Um, one thing to keep in mind is there are more opportunities to get grades. You've had one semester's worth of grades, uh, For some people, just learning how to do law school is a thing that just takes a certain amount of adjustment, and then you got it figured out. Um, I am quite confident that at the end of your 3rd year, when you look at your transcript, you will believe that overall it pretty accurately represents how well you did. Um, now, any individual grade is subject to a lot of randomness. So if I'm reading a transcript and candidly, very rarely do I ever have occasion to do so anymore. But if I do, I, I don't look at any individual grade, like whatever. I just look over, is this person an A student? Is this person a B+ student? Like what, what are they, right? Um, and you get a sort of sense of that. Any individual grade, all sorts of things could happen. So don't get hung up on individual grades. Try to look at it sort of overall and just be aware that by the end of your 3rd year. There's a lot of opportunity to get more grades. Um, you've only done 1/6 of your, uh, education. Um, Also, another thing that I can say to you and I cannot say to my Brooklyn. Uh, you're in Colombia, you're gonna get jobs. I that that's the, that's the thing, right? I mean, you're Columbia, you're. gonna be out on the street you're gonna get a job, uh, you got the Columbia, you got that Columbia degree, alright, um, so, uh, and. Realistically, I know what it's like to be sitting in your chair. I, I went to, I, I was old when I went to law school. I turned 40 in law school. So I was like more stressed than even probably most of you are, uh, about this, because I was on my plan R at that point. I wasn't even plan. Um, and it worked out OK, but it was like, OK, this is kind of stressful. But you know, it's, uh, let me tell you, as an old guy looking back on my life, uh, and that's what you do when you get old, you look back on your life. Um, the sorts of things that are going to determine like how happy you are with your life, how satisfied you are with it, have very, very little to do with your academic performance in school or what job you have. It just, it's just, that's going to be trivial compared to the other stuff that goes well or does not go well in your life. So try to keep it in perspective, although I am well aware that it's extremely hard to do. OK. Now, uh, I do have something else that I will say, uh, to maybe nobody in the classroom, but I don't know who you are, so I don't know if this is relevant. But there may be some people for whom both of the following are true. One, you didn't do as well as you don't like you're, you're really not happy with your grade. And 2, you did not like law school. First semester, so like You did not do well and you are not having a good time. There may be none of you, but if those two characteristic, if both of them apply to you, I have two things to say to you. One is be aware that. First year in law school is really weird in its focus in that it's basically exclusively litigation focused. There is far more to the law than litigation, but one is really about litigation. And you may not be a litigator. In fact, probably less than half of this room is destined to be a litigator, I'm guessing. A place like Columbia, a lot of transactional attorneys, I think, um, and that's great, but they're also like there are transactional attorneys. There are like prosecutors, there's like family law, which is like a completely different set of stuff. This is all sorts of things other than litigation. And yeah, maybe you don't like litigation, but that doesn't mean you don't like the law. And as soon as this semester is over, you're going to basically get to pick your, your curriculum. I gather you got, you have one elective, right? Is that right? This, but is it like a constrained list of things you can pick for your elective, right? So you know, after that you can then start doing like stuff you actually want to do. So just keep that in mind, right? This is not really a representative thing. Now there may be nevertheless somebody in this room. Probably not, but maybe somebody who just like just knows, and, uh, those grades were not good and I just, I'm just miserable with the law. I just, I'm not into law at all. I just say. If that's you, I am here to give you permission to do something else with your life. It is OK to walk away. I spent a large chunk of my life getting a PhD, um, and one of the weird things that I experienced as a PhD student was other PhD students in other fields who would drop out and felt the need to justify their decision. To me, somebody I didn't even know that well. Oh, I got to explain why I'm like I'm, you know, it felt like a failure in some way or something. I don't know. It was weird, but the really striking thing about it is that every single one of those people, as far as I can tell, and I think I've got a fairly good sense of this, was much happier and much more successful professionally after they decided to do something they really wanted to do rather than what they were doing. Um, grad school is good in some ways, really terrible in others, um, and, uh, it takes a long time. There are probably some people in this room who have PhDs. Maybe your experience was different from mine. My best friends were all people that I met getting a PhD. Um, so that's great, but, uh, there are a lot of downsides to it. And same thing with law. You know, law is a great profession, fantastic profession. But not for everybody, and maybe it's not for you. And if it's not for you, I, Brian A. Lee, random person whom you have never even heard of 75 minutes ago, am giving you permission to do something else with your life. It's OK. Now, note that that permission applies only if you absolutely hated it. And you know that it's not just because you're doing litigation stuff and you also didn't do well. If either of those doesn't apply to you, then don't stick it out, right? So if you liked it but didn't do well, there's tons of opportunity to do more, right, to get better grades, and you're going to get a job coming out of Columbia. I guarantee you 5 years after you graduate, no one will care about your GPA. Almost certainly 2 years after you graduate, no one will care about your GPA. Every once in a while I will see somebody who's applying for an academic job. The academic job market has tons of people trying to get jobs and they submit all sorts of stuff, and every once in a while I will get a CV of somebody who has placed their law school class rank or GPA on there. And I will tell you my colleagues laugh at that person. It's like that that's just like not relevant anymore. Does help for your first job, except now apparently you're getting your first job before you even have any grades. Like I don't. I figure like we are about 2 years away from like just doing like genetic testing. Oh, congratulations, you got a walk tell baby. It's like I don't get how the world's going. It just seems weird to me. So maybe grades just don't matter at all anymore, but I can guarantee you 5 years after you're out and almost certainly 2 years after you're out, it's just not going to matter. So if you like the law, but it's just like you didn't do as well as you're gonna, alright, great, you know, you can do better. Um, if you're in a weird situation of you actually did really well, but you just hated the law, stick it out. I strongly encourage you to stick it out because first of all, things may change as far as what you're doing, but also finding something you're good at is really, really beneficial, right? And the law is an honorable profession and it's an important profession. If you're good at it, Stick it out, you know, you, uh, uh, you can do a lot of good and yeah, it doesn't pay badly and you know, it's intellectually challenging and because they're always making more law, like it's like, it's, it's not a boring field at all. So, you know. Give it a chance. All right, that concludes the second sermon of the day. Um, all right, any questions on any of the, any of this preliminary stuff before we start talking about actual property? OK, woo, let's talk about property. I'll start with an anecdote. About a dozen years ago, um, I found out belatedly that Kenneth Brenner was staging a performance of Macbeth at the Park Avenue Armory, and I desperately wanted to see it, but I wasn't a subscriber, so I was only going to have to try to get day of tickets. So that meant that they had day of tickets, so that meant that I was schlepping from Brooklyn into the Park Avenue, up to the Park Avenue Armory hours before tickets became available like at 9 a.m. And uh I did that on 3 separate days and never once got tickets. Raining one of the days, he just got it out. It's like go up there and never once actually got to see Kenneth Brenner do his thing. Uh, kind of sad, but it gave me a lot of time to think about standing in line. So, let me ask you a question about standing in line. Suppose that there is a line for some event, get tickets or something, right? You're lining up for something Suppose there are 5 people in line. And I arrive. After these 5 people have been standing in line for a while. Is it permissible? Is it OK the right for me to just go to the front of the line on the theory that, well, lines have two ends, there's the back end. And the front end seems better. I'll take the front end. Um, is that OK? And why or why not? Yeah, and I, I don't have a seating chart so. I don't have any names, so I'm gonna be rude and just point, I'm pointing.

SPEAKER 1
Um, I would, in connection to the reading or just like our thoughts.

SPEAKER 0
What we're doing here, I don't want, I don't care what the law as it is on the books is, right? We are going to be thinking about what the law should be. Property is an artificial system. These new rules are made up, not necessarily arbitrarily, but they are made up. It could be different. There are different systems in the world where they are different. So we are trying to understand the basic principles of property and why they should or should not be certain ways. So, forget the law, we are now figuring out what should the rules be, all right? So, you can now withdraw your 10 on the bill if you want to.

SPEAKER 1
Oh, well, not good. Uh, unfortunately it's sort of informed by it, but like you should not be able to just cut in front of the line because, uh, like the custom of lines in the society that we're in is that if you're in the line, you've been there and it's you really there like someone can't just come to the front and say like, oh I'm gonna go in basically. Like it just would mess up the social norm of that.

SPEAKER 0
OK, so there's a social norm about queuing, as the Brits would say, and apparently the Brits are really into queuing customs, so we have that, but Is it a good norm? Does it make sense, or is it a bad one? That's the big question right over here, uh, pointing. Yeah, Sorry, that's the best thing I got you.

SPEAKER 2
It so I, I think back to this experience I had on a study abroad where I would go to the sandwich shop every like afternoon for lunch and there was no line and it was complete chaos and it would just be like this horde of people and you would have to like have your like bill and you'd have to like be waving it at them and just hope that they would like reach out and pluck out your cash and then ask for what your order was and it was like intensely anxiety inducing and it was like very inefficient um and I feel like just from. Not to like cast aspersions on like different kinds of customs, but it felt like the queue would have cut back a lot of that. So just from an efficiency rationale, um, I, I, I really appreciated queues after that.

SPEAKER 0
OK, so. One advantage the queuing might have over, so if you're asking like what's the justification for it, like what makes sense, well, you got to think about what the alternatives are, right? What other ways might we do this? And if the alternative is just having a sort of mob. About by the ticket window, then that could be disadvantage. It could just, so it could be anxiety inducing. You could get people getting trampled. Um, it could just take longer to sort things out. Um, there might be potential for mayhem. It could be a bunch of bad things that could happen there. So having some sort of orderly process. Um, maybe socially advantageous. So here we're thinking about just what's going to make society work best overall and maybe society works best overall if we have a rule that says once people are sort of lined up, you anyone who comes later has to go to the end of the line right in the front, yeah.

SPEAKER 3
I guess it would just be to, uh, piggyback on what Dan was saying that I think the inevitable result of a lack of line would be that sort of chaotic system because if I can choose to go to the front of that line, then the people who are, the 5 people behind me have every reason to choose to go in front of me after that, and it creates a race to the bottom where there is no line. And the result is chaos. So I guess I think if I can choose my place in line, then every other person in line can too, and suddenly there is no line.

SPEAKER 0
All right, so given that we, so given that we want to have a system in which, uh, so the suggestion is that we're better off if there's some fixed procedure rather than just milling about, then one, the next question that follows is, well, what procedure? We've got various ways of doing this, um, and one thing, one, thought is, is the procedure a stable one? So if we have a rule that basically says, You got to do it in line, but anyone can go to the front of the line when they show up, then that's just going to have a race to the front of the thing and the thing's going to collapse. It's going to be an unstable thing. So we need to have something that's practically stable there. You don't have to get fancy in the game theory to realize, OK, we've got to have something that's going to work out reasonably well as far as that goes.

SPEAKER 4
I, I think it's maybe worth also noting it's kind of like an auction where instead of paying cash you're paying with your time and the person who waited the longest, meaning to say the person who's at the front, paid the most and so they also kind of deserve to be served now versus somebody who came later who's paying less and therefore has signaled less of a desire or a need for this thing.

SPEAKER 0
All right, excellent. So one thing that is true about somebody who's standing in line, I assume that everybody just shows up and then stands in line and I've now shown up, is that the person who was standing in line first probably got there first and so has spent the most time, invested the most time in doing so. The person who's there second has done the second most time and so forth. And then we might think that therefore that effort, that time spent. Is something that gives an entitlement to those people to have priority with respect to the tickets. We don't know how many tickets are available there, but if there's only 3 available, then the first person should get first crack at it, second person, 3rd person, 4th person's out of luck. Too bad because they didn't invest as much time. So we might think that that's, for example, fair to do it that way. Alright, that raises a question though. Um, suppose that the 5 people in line. When I arrive, all live nearby. And I traveled a long distance to get to the line. This is in fact, I think what probably was happening at the Park Avenue Armory, right, it looked like the folks at the front of the line were all basically young people who I think probably didn't get up early. I think they just stayed up all night and were living nearby. They were living on the Upper East Side and so we're able to just do that. I had to schlep all the way in from Brooklyn, so I'm coming in a much longer distance than so suppose that I spent an hour getting to the line. Everybody else in line spent no more than 10 minutes getting to the. They've spent maximum of 20 minutes. The first person who spent 20 minutes in line. Add that up, that's 30 minutes. I have spent an hour. Should I therefore get to?

SPEAKER 4
So I, I, this is really a pointing a question at how are we counting the line and maybe if you had an online queue where you could virtually be on the line when you when you go into some app or website, then you would be able to queue first but because we're constrained and it's just a practical constraint, I can't interview every person in the line and find out what time they woke up and how far they had to travel to get to this line. I, I have no choice but to start counting by when they showed up, not because the person in the front actually deserves it, but it's just impractical for me to have to now investigate who started investing towards this line and who really wants it the most. It's just a proxy. How long you've been waiting here is the most convenient and cheap way to find out who who's most invested in getting that ticket.

SPEAKER 0
OK, so. Uh, a term that you may have encountered before, um, is, uh, a term about uh. The term is administrability. How administrable is the rule going to be? So if we have a rule that says based purely on effort for the time spent, which includes time spent, say, traveling to the thing, that may be difficult to figure out, very difficult to administer. Um, we may want to have a system in which it's quite easy. Clear, certain who has an entitlement to that, right? And so looking at who's been who's in the front position on the line is relatively clear sharp edge, we know who it is, we can determine that at low cost, which is look, as opposed to, well, how far did you travel, how much effort did you put into it. Um, if we're using effort rather than just time, it can be, well, did you travel using the subway or did you have a fancy car? Bring you in, right? There might be other complications. How are we going to work all this out? So we may want to have an administrable system and that can interact with the fairness-based rationale, right? We might say, well, we want fairness but constrained by administrability, right? We can only get fairness to a point. So me, yeah.

SPEAKER 5
Um, I was also going to say that then for people where it might be more convenient for them to get to the line first, then they're actually being disadvantaged if we were to base it on effort because now they're in effect being punished for having something be more convenient for them and because they like failed to spend an hour commuting and they just walked outside for 5 minutes um and were able to get in the line as well.

SPEAKER 0
Yeah, so you may have of Weird distributional effects on these things here, right? So you need to figure out like is it is spending effort really something that we want to reward, right? So this is the question, right? Should we prioritize that? So one thing that the people who live nearby could do is take a pointless subway ride. You know, so they get on the subway and take it 30 minutes north and then swap over to the other platform and take it 30 minutes south to get back to the same place. Hey, I've put in now an hour and then they go stand in line for 10 minutes. Therefore their hour and 10 trumps my hour. That seems Non-optimal, right, utterly wasteful, right? So we want to be, so the idea is that we want to be allocating things based on some sort of maybe investment if that's the view that you have, but you want it to be some sort of sensible investment, right, rather than just an investment, right? And that then leads to a question like, well, what things do we really want to be rewarding and what ones don't wait. I saw another hand. I thought, yeah. All right, just talk loudly then. Project. Um already lined up, they have the right to that position. Like if you go to the front end, you're effectively, effectively the new number one and then you're pushing everyone into the other person's uh position. It's, it's like type of like. And, and so for the entitlement to that property, it's, it's like, um, it's like the reading like who whoever killed the fox got the fox, so whoever got to the position. position and you cannot just. because um that would be like a trespass, that's how I. All right, so, um, and, uh, an issue that's coming out of here, right, is that, um, uh, my jumping to the front of the line, it doesn't just affect me, it also affects a large number of other people who are now knocked down the queue by one, right? Um, in economics terminology, we could say that those has, has various externalities, right? You're familiar with the internal internalization how many people, if I say internalize, externalize, how many people are go, yeah, I know this all this stuff. All right, um, not so many. This is OK. I will hit upon that, but I'm probably not going to do it now because I think this is not the optimal point to explain that, but I will talk about it in a bit, so we will, uh, not today probably, but uh, so let me rephrase this right straightforwardly. So the idea with externalities is just it affects other people. You can do things that affect other people external to you. All right, um, so, um, we have, uh, all right, so there's a bunch of other people who are going to be affected by that. And maybe that matters. How does that matter? All right, so here, let me give you, let me change the hypo ever so slightly. So we got the 5 people in line. I show up and I'm like, Well, OK, uh, 5 people ahead of me, so I go to the end of the line. So here I am, I'm number 6. And let's say that the, I don't know, we call it a ticket window, so the ticket window is gonna open at 10:00 a.m. At 9:55 a.m. Four other people who are friends with the person who is number 1 in line show up and say hi, and the friend says, come on. Go ahead and join me. All right, um, so they've now brought in all these other people. Should that be allowed? I mean, I've seen that happen many times in lines. Should that be allowed? Should that not? Why or why not? Yeah.

SPEAKER 6
Um, I would say yes, uh, dictated, at least from my understanding of custom, um, when you're waiting in line and somebody has a bunch of people join them at the front, it's like normal to be irritated, but if I was really irritated by it, I would just voice my opinion and be like, that's a little too much, like there's like 10 people joining them in the front. I think that it's contextual, right? Like everybody in the line always has the ability to reject that from happening, right? If the other 4 people line are like, actually, no, you guys need to get in the back, then I think that there's like, uh, the opportunity there to have some nuance. But, um, I don't know. I think if that's allowed, then I think that somebody who's an expert social manipulator should be able to cut their way through the line also by asking, Hi, can I cut you? Can I cut you? You should be able to do that too then in that circumstance.

SPEAKER 0
So why should you be allowed to do that? you're good at doing.

SPEAKER 6
I think that um it is not good to use social manipulation to do that because then in effect if that's the rule that you're allowed to do that you're incentivizing people and rewarding people to do that which can cause chaos as we spoke about before but um on the flip side though, I think that I mean if you're good at doing it then why not so.

SPEAKER 0
The question is whether, uh, uh, what is our optimal, the set of rules that we want to have, right? So I handle it, yeah. Yeah, I was just gonna say it probably depends on like what the line is for and how coveted like the item is. Like if it was like really that deep, like I feel like they would have like a limit on the number of like tickets you would get, for example, but if it was like, I don't know, like entry into like a bar, like I don't think that's a really big deal. OK, so you, you might, you might think that it matters whether the resource is such. That there's a finite amount of it and so if you are at an unfavorable place in line, you don't get it, period, as opposed to if you're in an unfavorable place in line, if you don't, you have to wait a little longer to get it. It's just a little bit more inconvenient. So is it a binary thing or is it a continuum thing. Yeah, in the back.

SPEAKER 7
I mean, honestly, my view is, if you really want to stand in line with your friends, you can go to the back with them, um, instead of letting them cut in front. Uh, I just, I, I guess it's almost like a utilitarian view, whereas like if there are other people in the line, if there are 5 people behind you and you have your 4 friends, you're doing more harm to those 5 people who are now bumped back than you are doing a benefit to the 4 people who now get to cut.

SPEAKER 0
Yeah, so there's a interesting question there, right, as to, um, uh, how much that's happened, but all right, so if you're gonna make the utilitarian argument, right, so the utilitarian argument basically tries to just sum up the total payoffs to each person in society and you want to maximize it overall. All right, that is a super simplified version of utilitarianism, but the basic idea is, OK, let's look at, let's just like tally together all the pluses and minuses that everybody suffers as a result of, uh, various options, and then pick the option that has the greatest net positive over negative. Um, maybe not in the, so I'll, I'll push you on that hypo there, all right, so suppose the line is 100 people long. As in fact probably it was when I was lining up for these tickets. And the 4 people who are going to come in, the latecomers, uh, their friend is #1 in line. If you, if they, if you allow those 4 people to come in. Right, then everybody gets pushed back 4. Well, How much of a cost is that? Whereas if those four aren't allowed to go there, they've got to go all the way back to the very end, and so each of them has a huge cost. They're much worse off when you do the sums, it's not clear how that's going to work. It's probably terminology here, don't worry if it doesn't mean anything to you, but you know you have to worry about the marginal utilities that each each person's getting from these things. And so I don't know, when you do the math, it may not come out that way, might, but might not.

SPEAKER 7
I mean, I would argue though that I guess it's like the, the knoll of them not cutting in line is still not getting the tickets. So whether or not they go to the back or don't show up, they don't get the tickets, whereas you're still doing harm to an additional 4 people who were able to get the tickets in the null version but are now bumped from not being able to get them. That's my view at least.

SPEAKER 0
All right, um, let me, let me give you another variant on this. variant that I actually observed while I was in line. I think I may have saw somebody somebody else in, but a variant that I observed while I was in line as the time was approaching for the box office to open up and people to get tickets. There was a guy wearing a suit who walked up to somebody about 40 or 20 people ahead of me in line and handed some money to this young lady who then left and he took her place in line. Under different contexts, it would look like a completely different kind of. But uh she sold, had sold her place in line. This guy shows up, pays the money. She leaves. He takes it. Should that be allowed or not? Should you be allowed to transfer your ownership in line? So in the first scenario, the previous one that we had, we've got somebody, the person in front holds on to his or her position in line and then adds in some other people. Here we do not have that. We have a one for one swap. The people standing behind that person are not any farther back than they were before, but somebody who's just got some money and shows up like 10 minutes before the box office opens gets to get a ticket, or at least gets that chance of getting a ticket without having spent the hours that the rest of us were doing there. Be personal or not, yeah.

SPEAKER 8
I think yes, because they're not technically disadvantaging anybody else in line and also other people might have the same resource to do so, and they just chose not to, so it's not necessarily unfair that person just used what they had.

SPEAKER 0
All right, so nobody else is being disadvantaged. Maybe, all right, in the sense, so nobody's being disadvantaged when that transaction occurs, but if we didn't allow wine selling at all. Right, then the person who was staying in line just in order to sell that position would not have been there, and everybody else would have been one step further up, right? So maybe, so depending upon your comparison class, right, what you're comparing it to, maybe there's been a disadvantage, maybe there hasn't, depending upon the rule. Um, but you know, you could have to have an argument just suggested, well, yeah, anyone could have done that, right? So some people could choose to stand in line. And some people can choose not to. Um, uh, and, uh, some people can, you know, instead pay for it. Um, should we prioritize one over the other, uh, yeah.

SPEAKER 9
I don't think so. I think some people have time and others have money, and there's, you know, the saying like time value of money. I think it's actually really common on like the the West Side Highway tennis courts. People will pay TaskRabbits to wait in line for them, um, and I think that's fair if they have the time instead of or if they have the money instead of the time, they should be allowed to utilize that.

SPEAKER 0
Yeah, in my experience at the Park Avenue, the folks were in front were all very young people. I mean, not like 8 years old, right, but they were like basically college, so this was during the summer, so this is basically college kids who aren't in college, I think, or maybe high school kids who aren't in high school, um, lived nearby, were able to just hang out there. The guy who was, um, uh, doing, uh, who did that transaction, um, actually now that I think about it, he's probably like only 4 or 5 ahead of me, um, so I got a good look at him. He, uh, and they ended up talking to somebody else about it. Basically this is uh. This is a thing that he he had a job that didn't allow him to hang out in a long line for hours on a weekday in order to get tickets, but he did have money because he had a job, so he is investing money rather than time. that disturb us or should that actually we think that that's actually a good thing to allow right? There's a question there, right? So you can start to worry about distributional effects, but then you have to worry about distributing what so having a system in which you have people who are allowed to pay to get spots in line is one in which people who have more money, more disposable income, are going to be privileged over people who don't. But by the same token, people allocating these based on these spots based on who just has stood there longest privileges people who have more time over people who don't. And one of the things that's interesting about money as opposed to time is that you can save up money. In a way you can't save up time. So suppose that you know that oh this is going to be happening in a year and it's going to cost a bunch of money to be able to do it, but then you can like, you know, you can cut back on various things, right, and you slowly save the money and then you've accumulated it and then you can go do that. If you're so if you're money poor, if you're really poor you can't because you just don't have the money, you don't have any extra income. But if you're a relatively poor. As compared to your time, you could save up the money. You can't do that with time, right? If you save 10 minutes today, you cannot stock that up to use 6 months from now. Those 10 minutes are gone one way or another. So money is much more fungible than time is. And so therefore maybe we should have. A system that allows that there was a note, so I didn't realize this was happening with the tennis courts, but it is well established that line standards are just a thing throughout human history. I've got a, it's a thing in The Economist, somebody wrote in a letter to the editor of The Economist about a decade ago. I'll just read this out to you. As early as the 18th century, Romans made money by occupying seats in restaurants and theaters for wealthy folk, running errands and standing in line. The practice was so rampant that travelers to Rome reported pubs full of sitters. People paid to reserve a seat hours before a wealthy patron would arrive for lunch. During the high season when thousands of pilgrims visited Rome's churches. Poor Romans were paid to stand in line and wait the arrival of rich Germans, Swedes, and Britons so that they may be spared the indignity of being seen standing in the muddy streets, according to one book. All right, so this is the thing that's been happening for centuries. It was becoming an issue with the courts in 2017. The DC Circuit prohibited line standards for oral arguments. The first court to do that, the Supreme Court, the first circuit court to do that. The Supreme Court briefed it in 2015. So this is the thing in which some folks think that that's inappropriate for that. I will say that at this line that I was standing in. Uh, where they had the transaction, the guy who ran the line standing service then showed up and started walking down the line, handing out business cards. And when he got to me, I was like, I don't know that I think that this is appropriate. My, my personal intuitions were I feel like there's something off about this. So when he came to me, I, I said, here's card. I said, no thank you. And he stopped, shocked. He was just stunned, and he looked at me and he pointed at me and he said, Your rejection is my motivation. No. You have to hand it off, handing out cards to be. All right, so there's an issue, uh, with that. All right, um, uh, here's a related issue. Who should that we just touched upon at the very beginning. Who should decide what the rules should be? Should it be set by custom? Should it be set maybe by whoever runs the organization. All right. In many places there is a form of queuing that doesn't actually involve queuing that happens like at deli's. It used to be a thing you'd go in there and you'd pull a ticket, right, and you take the ticket, um, uh, so you have priority that way. Uh, Should it be set by the legal system? We have the city of New York established rules for that. How should that be set? Um, So there are various questions that are fundamental property questions that are coming out of this discussion. Alright, what sorts of things should be owned? Alright, um, our spots in line property. Do you have a property right to it? What kinds of things should be owned? Um, how does one come to have ownership of the thing? Is it by being first in time? First person to be in that position in line, is it by effort, the amount of effort you put into getting the thing? Is it by purchasing it? Um, spending money, um, could the right be transferred? Should the right be transferable or not? People who have invested money in getting it, well, if you've transferred for money, that seems to make sense. But if somebody's invested labor in it and they're transferring money, maybe that's two different things. Should that not be allowed? And how should the rule be decided? How should we figure out what the rules ought to be? All of these issues will show up again throughout the course, and we will start talking about them in the context of a particular legal case when we talk about Pearson against Post. All right, any questions on any of this? Did anyone by any chance see the Kenneth Brenner Macbeth Park Avenue Armory? I know you're young and so maybe all right. It's supposed to be fantastic. Like he literally had battle scenes staged there in which it would rain from the ceiling, and you were told that if you were sitting in the front row, you should expect to have mud and fake blood splashed on you. Um, sorry I missed it. OK, I think I am out of time, right? I think. 40. All right, thank you very much. Have a great afternoon. See you folks on Thursday. It's OK. I didn't buy that. Um, just something like random. Like really started with a low expectation, so it can only go up from here. But I heard like low-key bad things about the tourists professor. Yeah, um.
