Act No. 81-178 H. 297-Reps. Manley, Bowling,
McCorquodale, Owens, Gilmer,
Waggoner, Carothers, Turner,
Barton, Shoemaker, Sasser, Blake,
Ward, Wyatt, Cosby, Roberts,
Daniels, Willis, Moore, Dial,
Turnham, Kelley, Gafford,
Venable, Clark (G), Campbell,
Cooley, Patton, Zoghby, Parker,
Stewart, Cates, Dixon, Laird,
Williams, Holley, Minus,
Drinkard, Smith (C), Carter,
Brakefield, Naramore, Whatley,
Harvey, Payne, Olive, Trammell,
Cheatwood, Hammett, Lewis,
Amari, Gregg, Riddick, Greer,
Cobb, Hall, Johnson (R. G.),
Mitchell, Cabaniss, McKee,
McMillan, Smith (M), Ford,
Harper (0), Harper (T), Johnson
(Roy), Adams (C), Grimsley,
Rains, Seibels, Penry, Boles
AN ACT
To define capital offenses; to provide for a sentence of life imprisonment without
parole or death as punishment for capital offenses; to provide for the trial of capital
offenses; to provide for sentence proceedings to be conducted following a conviction
for a capital offense; to provide for appellate review of convictions and sentences in
cases in which defendants are sentenced to death; to provide for the Alabama Supreme
Court to promulgate pattern indictment forms, verdict forms, and jury instructions

for use in cases tried under this act; to provide for the manner in which the act is
to be interpreted and if necessary re-interpreted; to provide for severability; to specify
the way the act is to be applied if the death penalty provisions of it are declared
unconstitutional and cannot be re-interpreted to provide a constitutional death penalty;
to specify the conduct to which the act applies; to repeal Code of Alabama 1975, §13-11-1
through §13-11-9, also codified as §13A-5-30 through §13A-5-38 (the existing death
penalty statute), and any other laws or parts of laws in conflict herewith; and to provide
an effective date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislatureo f Alabama:
Section 1. As used in this act, these terms shall be defined as
follows:
(a) "capital offense" - means an offense for which a defendant
shall be punished by a sentence of death or life imprisonment without
parole according to the provisions of this act;
(b) "during" as used in section 2(a) of this act means in the
course:of or in connection with the commission of, or in immediate
flight from the commission of the underlying felony or attempt
thereof;
(c) "explosives" and "explosion" - shall be defined as provided
in Code of Alabama 1975, §13A-7-40(2) and (3);
(d) "burden of interjecting the issue" - shall be defined as pro-
vided in Code of Alabama 1975, §13A-1-2(14);
(e) "murder" and "murder by the defendant" - shall be defined
as provided in section 2(b) of this act;
(f) "previously convicted" as used in section 11(b) of this act
and "prior criminal activity" as used in section 13(a) of this act shall
be defined as referring to events occurring before the date of the sen-
tence hearing;
(g) "under sentence of imprisonment" - as used in section 11(a)
of this act means while serving a term of imprisonment, while under
a suspended sentence, while on probation or parole, or while on work
release, furlough, escape, or any other type of release or freedom while
or after serving a term of imprisonment, other than unconditional
release and freedom after expiration of the term of sentence.
Section 2. (a) The following are capital offenses:
(1) Murder by the defendant during a kidnapping in the first
degree or an attempt thereof committed by the defendant;
(2) Murder by the defendant during a robbery in the first degree
or an attempt thereof committed by the defendant;

(3) Murder by the defendant during a rape in the first or second
degree or an attempt thereof committed by the defendant; or murder
by the defendant during sodomy in the first or second degree or an
attempt thereof committed by the defendant;
(4) Murder by the defendant during a burglary in the first or
second degree or an attempt thereof committed by the defendant;
(5) Murder of any police officer, sheriff, deputy, state trooper,
federal law enforcement officer, or any other state or federal peace
officer of any kind, or prison or jail guard, while such officer or guard
is on duty or because of some official or job-related act or performance
of such officer or guard;
(6) Murder committed while the defendant is under sentence
of life imprisonment;
(7) Murder done for a pecuniary or other valuable consideration
or pursuant to a contract or for hire;
(8) Murder by the defendant during sexual abuse in the first
or second degree or an attempt thereof committed by the defendant;
(9) Murder by the defendant during arson in the first or second
degree committed by the defendant; or murder by the defendant by
means of explosives or explosions;
(10) Murder wherein two or more persons are murdered by the
defendant by one act or pursuant to one scheme or course of conduct;
(11) Murder by the defendant when the victim is a state or
federal public official or former public official and the murder stems
from or is caused by or is related to his official position, act, or capac-
ity;
(12) Murder by the defendant during the act of unlawfully
assuming control of any aircraft by use of threats or force with intent
to obtain any valuable consideration for the release of said aircraft
or any passenger or crewmen thereon or to direct the route or move-
ment of said aircraft, or otherwise exert control over said aircraft;
(13) Murder by a defendant who has been convicted of any other
murder in the twenty years preceding the crime; provided that the
murder which constitutes the capital crime shall be murder as defined
in section 2(b) of this act; and provided further that the prior murder
conviction referred to shall include murder in any degree as defined
at the time and place of the prior conviction;
(14) Murder when the victim is subpoenaed, or has been sub-
poenaed, to testify, or the victim had testified, in any preliminary

hearing, grand jury proceeding, criminal trial or criminal proceeding
of whatever nature, or civil trial or civil proceeding of whatever nature,
in any municipal, state, or federal court, when the murder stems from,
is caused by, or is related to the capacity or role of the victim as a
witness.
(b) Except as specifically provided to the contrary in the last
part of section 2(a) (13) of this act, the terms "murder" and "murder
by the defendant" as used in section 2 of this act to define capital
offenses mean murder as defined in Code of Alabama 1975, §13A-6-2(a)
(1), but not as defined in Code of Alabama 1975, §13A-6-2(a) (2) and
(3). Subject to the provisions of section 3 of this act, murder as defined
in Code of Alabama 1975, §13A-6-2(a) (2) and (3), as well as murder
as defined in §13A-6-2(a) (1), may be a lesser included offense of the
capital offenses defined in section 2(a) of this act.
(c) A defendant who does not personally commit the act of
killing which constitutes the murder is not guilty of a capital offense
defined in section 2(a) of this act unless that defendant is legally
accountable for the murder because of complicity in the murder itself
under the provisions of Code of Alabama 1975, §13A-2-23, in addition
to being guilty of the other elements of the capital offense as defined
in section 2(a) of this act.
(d) To the extent that a crime other than murder is an element
of a capital offense defined in section 2(a) of this act, a defendant's
guilt of that other crime may also be established under Code of Ala-
bama 1975, § 13A-2-23. When the defendant's guilt of that other crime
is established under §13A-2-23, that crime shall be deemed to have
been "committed by the defendant" within the meaning of that phrase
as it is used in section 2(a) of this act.
Section 3. Subject to the provisions of Code of Alabama 1975,
§13A-1-9(b), the jury may find a defendant indicted for a crime defined
in section 2(a) of this act not guilty of the capital offense but guilty
of a lesser included offense. Lesser included offenses shall be defined
as provided in Code of Alabama 1975, §13A-1-9(a), and when there
is a rational basis for such a verdict, include but are not limited to,
murder as defined in Code of Alabama 1975, §13A-6-2(a), and the
accompanying other felony, if any, in the provision of section 2(a) of
this act upon which the indictment is based.
Section 4. A defendant who is indicted for a capital offense may
plead guilty to it, but the State must in any event prove the defen-
dant's guilt of the capital offense beyond a reasonable doubt to a jury.
The guilty plea may be considered in determining whether the State
has met that burden of proof. The guilty plea shall have the effect
of waiving all non-jurisdictional defects in the proceeding resulting

in the conviction except the sufficiency of the evidence. A defendant
convicted of a capital offense after pleading guilty to it shall be sen-
tenced according to the provisions of section 5(d) of this act.
Section 5. (a) In the trial of a capital offense the jury shall
first hear all the admissible evidence offered on the charge or charges
against the defendant. It shall then determine whether the defendant
is guilty of the capital offense or offenses with which he is charged
or of any lesser included offense or offenses considered pursuant to
section 3 of this act.
(b) If the defendant is found not guilty of the capital offense
or offenses with which he is charged, and not guilty of any lesser
included offense or offenses considered pursuant to section 3 of this
act, the defendant shall be discharged.
(c) If the defendant is found not guilty of the capital offense
or offenses with which he is charged, and is found guilty of a lesser
included offense or offenses considered pursuant to section 3 of this
act, sentence shall be determined and imposed as provided by law.
(d) If the defendant is found guilty of a capital offense or of-
fenses with which he is charged, the sentence shall be determined as
provided in sections 7 through 15 of this act.
Section 6. (a) The selection of the jury for the trial of a capi-
tal case shall include the selection of at least two alternate jurors
chosen according to procedures specified by law or court rule.
(b) The separation of the jury during the pendency of the trial
of a capital case shall be governed by applicable law or court rule.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the defendant
with the consent of the State and with the approval of the court may
waive the participation of a jury in the sentence hearing provided in
section 8 of this act. Provided however, before any such waiver is valid,
it must affirmatively appear in the record that the defendant himself
has freely waived his right to the participation of a jury in the sentence
proceeding, after having been expressly informed of such right.
Section 7. (a) Upon conviction of a defendant for a capital
offense, the trial court shall conduct a separate sentence hearing to
determine whether the defendant shall be sentenced to life impris-
onment without parole or to death. The sentence hearing shall be
conducted as soon as practicable after the defendant is convicted.
Provided however, if the sentence hearing is to be conducted before
the trial judge without a jury or before the trial judge and a jury
other than the trial jury, as provided elsewhere in this act, the trial
court with the consent of both parties may delay the sentence hearing

until it has received the pre-sentence investigation report specified in
section 9(b) of this act. Otherwise, the sentence hearing shall not be
delayed pending receipt of the pre-sentence investigation report.
(b) The State and the defendant shall be allowed to make open-
ing statements and closing arguments at the sentence hearing. The
order of those statements and arguments and the order of presenta-
tion of the evidence shall be the same as at trial.
(c) At the sentence hearing evidence may be presented as to any
matter that the court deems relevant to sentence and shall include
any matters relating to the aggravating and mitigating circumstances
referred to in sections 11, 13, and 14 of this act. Evidence presented
at the trial of the case may be considered insofar as it is relevant to
the aggravating and mitigating circumstances without the necessity
of re-introducing that evidence at the sentence hearing, unless the
sentence hearing is conducted before a jury other than the one before
which the defendant was tried.
(d) Any evidence which has probative value and is relevant to
sentence shall be received at the sentence hearing regardless of its
admissibility under the exclusionary rules of evidence, provided that
the defendant is accorded a fair opportunity to rebut any hearsay
statements. This subsection shall not be construed to authorize the
introduction of any evidence secured in violation of the Constitution
of the United States or the State of Alabama.
(e) At the sentence hearing the State shall have the burden of
proving beyond a reasonable doubt the existence of any aggravating
circumstances. Provided however, any aggravating circumstance
which the verdict convicting the defendant establishes was proven
beyond a reasonable doubt at trial shall be considered as proven
beyond a reasonable doubt for purposes of the sentence hearing.
(f) Unless at least one aggravating circumstance as defined in
section 11 of this act exists, the sentence shall be life imprisonment
without parole.
(g) The defendant shall be allowed to offer any mitigating
circumstance defined in sections 13 and 14 of this act. When the
factual existence of an offered mitigating circumstance is in dispute,
the defendant shall have the burden of interjecting the issue, but once
it is interjected the State shall have the burden of disproving the
factual existence of that circumstance by a preponderance of the
evidence.
Section 8. (a) Unless both parties with the consent of the
court waive the right to have the sentence hearing conducted before
a jury as provided in section 6(c) of this act, it shall be conducted
before a jury which shall return an advisory verdict as provided by

section 8(e) of this act. If both parties with the consent of the court
waive the right to have the hearing conducted before a jury, the trial
judge shall proceed to determine sentence without an advisory verdict
from a jury. Otherwise, the hearing shall be conducted before a jury
as provided in the remaining subsections of this section.
(b) If the defendant was tried and convicted by a jury, the sen-
tence hearing shall be conducted before that same jury unless it is
impossible or impracticable to do so. If it is impossible or impracticable
for the trial jury to sit at the sentence hearing, or if the case on appeal
is remanded for a new sentence hearing before a jury, a new jury shall
be impanelled to sit at the sentence hearing. The selection of that
jury shall be according to the laws and rules governing the selection
of a jury for the trial of a captial case.
(c) The separation of the jury during the pendency of the sen-
tence hearing, and if the sentence hearing is before the same jury
which convicted the defendant, the separation of the jury during the
time between the guilty verdict and the beginning of the sentence
hearing, shall be governed by the law and court rules applicable to
the separation of the jury during the trial of a capital case.
(d) After hearing the evidence and the arguments of both parties
at the sentence hearing, the jury shall be instructed on its function
and on the relevant law by the trial judge. The jury shall then retire
to deliberate concerning the advisory verdict it is to return.
(e) After deliberation, the jury shall return an advisory verdict
as follows:
(1) if the jury determines that no aggravating circum-
stances as defined in section 11 of this act exist, it shall return an
advisory verdict recommending to the trial court that the penalty be
life imprisonment without parole;
(2) if the jury determines that one or more aggravating
circumstances as defined in section 11 of this act exist but do not
outweigh the mitigating circumstances, it shall return an advisory
verdict recommending to the trial court that the penalty be life
imprisonment without parole;
(3) if the jury determines that one or more aggravating
circumstances as defined in section 11 of this act exist and that they
outweigh the mitigating circumstances, if any, it shall return an advi-
sory verdict recommending to the trial court that the penalty be
death.
(f) The decision of the jury to return an advisory verdict recom-
mending a sentence of life imprisonment without parole must be based

on a vote of a majority of the jurors. The decision of the jury to
recommend a sentence of death must be based on a vote of at least
ten jurors. The verdict of the jury must be in writing and must specify
the vote.
(g) If the jury is unable to reach an advisory verdict recom-
mending a sentence, or for other manifest necessity, the trial court
may declare a mistrial of the sentence hearing. Such a mistrial shall
not affect the conviction. After such a mistrial or mistrials another
sentence hearing shall be conducted before another jury, selected
according to the laws and rules governing the selection of a jury for
the trial of a capital case. Provided however, that , subject to the
provisions of section 6(c) of this act, after one or more mistrials both
parties with the consent of the court may waive the right to have
an advisory verdict from a jury, in which event the issue of sentence
shall be submitted to the trial court without a recommendation from
a jury.
Section 9. (a) After the sentence hearing has been conducted,
and after the jury has returned an advisory verdict, or after such a
verdict has been waived as provided in section 8(a) or section 8(g) of
this act, the trial court shall proceed to determine the sentence.
(b) Before making the sentence determination, the trial court
shall order and receive a written pre-sentence investigation report.
The report shall contain the information prescribed by law or court
rule for felony cases generally and any additional information speci-
fied by the trial court. No part of the report shall be kept confidential,
and the parties shall have the right to respond to it and to present
evidence to the court about any part of the report which is the subject
of factual dispute. The report and any evidence submitted in connec-
tion with it shall be made part of the record in the case.
(c) Before imposing sentence the trial court shall permit the
parties to present arguments concerning the existence of aggravating
and mitigating circumstances and the proper sentence to be imposed
in the case. The order of the arguments shall be the same as at the
trial of a case.
(d) Based upon the evidence presented at trial, the evidence
presented during the sentence hearing, and the pre-sentence inves-
tigation report and any evidence submitted in connection with it, the
trial court shall enter specific written findings concerning the exis-
tence or nonexistence of each aggravating circumstance enumerated
in section 11 of this act, each mitigating circumstance enumerated
in section 13 of this act, and any additional mitigating circumstances
offered pursuant to section 14 of this act. The trial court shall also

enter written findings of facts summarizing the crime and the defen-
dant's participation in it.
(e) In deciding upon the sentence, the trial court shall determine
whether the aggravating circumstances it finds to exist outweigh the
mitigating circumstances it finds to exist, and in doing so the trial
court shall consider the recommendation of the jury contained in its
advisory verdict, unless such a verdict has been waived pursuant to
section 8(a) or 8(g) of this act. While the jury's recommendation con-
cerning sentence shall be given consideration, it is not binding upon
the court.
Section 10. The process described in section 8(e) (2) and 8(e)
(3) and in section 9(e) of this act of weighing the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances to determine the sentence shall not be de-
fined to mean a mere tallying of aggravating and mitigating circum-
stances for the purpose of numerical comparison. Instead, it shall be
dbfined to mean a process by which circumstances relevant to sen-
tence are marshalled and considered in an organized fashion for the
purpose of determining whether the proper sentence in view af all the
relevant circumstances in an individual case is life imprisonment
without parole or death.
Section 11. Aggravating circumstances shall be the following:
(a) The capital offense was committed by a person under sen-
tence of imprisonment;
(b) The defendant was previously convicted of another capital
felony or a felony involving the use or threat of violence to the person;
(c) The defendant knowingly created a great risk of death to
many persons;
(d) The capital offense was committed while the defendant was
engaged or was an accomplice in the commission of, or an attempt
to commit, or flight after committing, or attempting to commit, rape,
robbery, burglary or kidnapping;
(e) The capital offense was committed for the purpose of avoid-
ing or preventing a lawful arrest or effecting an escape from custody;
(f) The capital offense was committed for pecuniary gain;
(g) The capital offense was committed to disrupt or hinder the
lawful exercise of any governmental function or the enforcement of
laws; or
(h) The capital offense was especially heinous, atrocious or cruel
compared to other capital offenses.

Section 12. The fact that a particular capital offense as defined
in section 2(a) of this act necessarily includes one or more aggravating
circumstances as specified in section 11 shall not be construed to
preclude the finding and consideration of that relevant circumstance
or circumstances in determining sentence. By way of illustration and
not limitation, the aggravating circumstance specified in section 11(d)
of this act shall be found and considered in determining sentence in
every case in which a defendant is convicted of the capital offenses
defined in section 2(a) (1) through (4) of this act.
Section 13. Mitigating circumstances shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(a) The defendant has no significant history of prior criminal
activity;
(b) The capital offense was committed while the defendant was
under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance;
(c) The victim was a participant in the defendant's conduct or
consented to it;
(d) The defendant was an accomplice in the capital offense
committed by another person and his participation was relatively
minor;
(e) The defendant acted under extreme duress or under the
substantial domination of another person;
(f) The capacity of the defendant to appreciate the criminality
of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law
was substantially impaired; and
(g) The age of the defendant at the time of the crime.
Section 14. In addition to the mitigating circumstances speci-
fied in section 13 of this act, mitigating circumstances shall include
any aspect of a defendant's character or record and any of the circum-
stances of the offense that the defendant offers as a basis for a sen-
tence of life imprisonment without parole instead of death, and any
other relevant mitigating circumstance which the defendant offers as
a basis for a sentence of life imprisonment without parole instead of
death.
Section 15. (a) In any case in which the death penalty is im-
posed, in addition to reviewing the case for any error involving the
conviction the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals, subject to review
by the Alabama Supreme Court, shall also review the propriety of
the death sentence. This review shall include the determination of
whether any error adversely affecting the rights of the defendant was

made in the sentence proceedings, whether the trial court's findings
concerning the aggravating and mitigating circumstances were sup-
ported by the evidence, and whether death was the proper sentence
in the case. If the court determines that an error adversely affecting
the rights of the defendant was made in the sentence proceedings or
that one or more of the trial court's findings concerning aggravating
and mitigating circumstances were not supported by the evidence, it
shall remand the case for new proceedings to the extent necessary
to correct the error or errors. If the appellate court finds that no error
adversely affecting the rights of the defendant was made in the sen-
tence proceedings and that the trial court's findings concerning aggra-
vating and mitigating circumstances were supported by the evidence,
it shall proceed to review the propriety of the decision that death was
the proper sentence.
(b) In determining whether death was the proper sentence in
the case the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals, subject to review
by the Alabama Supreme Court, shall determine:
(1) whether the sentence of death was imposed under the
influence of passion, prejudice, or any other arbitrary factor;
(2) whether an independent weighing of the aggravating
and mitigating circumstances at the appellate level indicates that
death was the proper sentence; and
(3) whether the sentence of death is excessive or dispropor-
tionate to the penalty imposed in similar cases, considering both the
crime and the defendant.
(c) The Court of Criminal Appeals shall explicitly address each
of the three questions specified in section 15(b) of this act in every
case it reviews in which a sentence of death has been imposed.
(d) After performing the review specified in section 15 of this
act, the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals, subject to review by the
Alabama Supreme Court, shall be authorized to:
(1) affirm the sentence of death;
(2) set the sentence of death aside and remand to the trial
court for correction of any errors occurring during the sentence
proceedings and for imposition of the appropriate penalty after any
new sentence proceedings that are necessary, provided that such
errors shall not affect the determination of guilt and shall not pre-
clude the imposition of a sentence of death where it is determined
to be proper after any new sentence proceedings that are deemed
necessary; or
(3) in cases in which the death penalty is deemed inappro-

priate under section 15(b) (2) or section 15(b) (3), set the sentence
of death aside and remand to the trial court with directions that the
defendant be sentenced to life imprisonment without parole.
Section 16. Each person indicted for an offense punishable
under the provisions of this act who is not able to afford legal counsel
must be provided with court appointed counsel having no less than
five years' prior experience in the active practice of criminal law.
Section 17. In all cases in which a defendant is sentenced to
death, the judgment of conviction shall be subject to automatic
review. The sentence of death shall be subject to review as provided
in section 15 of this act.
Section 18. The Alabama Supreme Court shall promulgate
pattern indictment forms for ase in cases in which indictments charg-
ing offenses defined in section 2(a) of this act are thereafter returned.
The Alabama Supreme Court shall also promulgate pattern verdict
foi'ms and pattern jury instructions for the trial and sentencing
aspects of cases tried thereafter under this act, insofar as such verdicts
and instructions relate to the particularities of cases tried under this
act.
Section 19. This act applies only to conduct occurring after its
effective date. Conduct occurring before the effective date of this act
shall be governed by pre-existing law.
Section 20. Code of Alabama 1975, §13-11-1 through §13-11-9
[also compiled as Code of Alabama 1975, §13A-5-30 through §13A-5-
38] is hereby repealed. All other laws or parts of laws in conflict with
this act are hereby repealed. This repealer shall not affect the applica-
tion of pre-existing law to conduct occurring before the effective date
of this act.
Section 21. This act shall be interpreted, and if necessary rein-
terpreted, to be constitutional.
Section 22. The provisions of this act are severable. If any part
of this act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration
shall not affect the part which remains. The provision or provisions
declared unconstitutional shall be severed, and the remainder of the
act shall be interpreted or reinterpreted to be constitutional the same
as if the offending provision or provisions did not exist.
Section 23. It is the intent of the Legislature that if the death
penalty provisions of this act are declared unconstitutional and if the
offensive provision or provisions cannot be reinterpreted so as to pro-
vide a constitutional death penalty, or if the death penalty is ever
declared to be unconstitutional per se, that the defendants who have

been sentenced to death under this act shall be re-sentenced to life
imprisonment without parole. It is also the intent of the Legislature
that in the event that the death penalty provisions of this act are
declared unconstitutional and if they cannot be reinterpreted to pro-
vide a constitutional death penalty, or if the death penalty is ever
declared to be unconstitutional per se, that defendants convicted
thereafter for committing crimes specified in section 2(a) of this act
shall be sentenced to life imprisonment without parole.
Section 24. This act shall become effective at 12:01 a.m. on
July 1, 1981.
Approved March 31, 1981
Time: 4:15 P.M.