ocratic gaze, open to things,

t in Sophocles’ play Oedipus
what I would call knowledge-
s because he exercises a cer-
of from both the oracle of the
-and what the people say and
y discovering for himself, he
‘e of those who have seen.

‘s could function, and how, at
-fluous figure. He is superflu-
knowledge of one who wants
ning either to the gods or to
at the gods had said and what
|, Oedipus succeeds in estab-
ophecy of the gods and the
the excess of power and the
he became unnecessary: the
wo fragments of the tessera
3 solitary power, became un-
vere conjoined, the image of
3 tyrannical power, Oedipus
towledge, he knew too much.
is mother’s husband and his
»xcess, the man who has too
8s knowledge, his family, his
vas excessive with regard to
e shepherds knew and what

ose, then, to what will be, a
should be said that for Plato
ral recollection of what has
‘of a deeper, essential mem-
s seen in intelligible heaven.
> fundamentally devalorized,
7 and in Plato’s Republic: the
‘a political knowledge both
geted by Sophocles’ tragedy
placed in a historical dimen-

Truth and Juridical Forms 51

Michel Foucault, “Truth and Juridical Forms,” in

Foucault, Power, ed. James D. Faubion, pp. 31-45 (New

York: “New Press, 2000)

In European societies of the Mediterranean East, at the end of
the second millennium and the beginning of the first, political
power always implied the possession of a certain type of knowl-
edge. By the fact of holding power, the king and those around him
held a knowledge that could not and must not be communicated to
the other social groups. Knowledge and power were exactly recip-
rocal, correlative, superimposed. There couldn’t be any knowledge
without power; and there couldn’t be any political power without
the possession of a certain special knowledge.

This is the form of power-knowledge that Georges Dumézil, in
his studies concerning the three functions, has isolated, showing
that the first function was that of a magical and religious political
power.** Knowledge of the gods, knowledge of the action that can
be brought to bear on us by the gods—that whole magico-religious
knowledge is present in the political function,

What occurred at the origin of Greek society, at the origin of the
Greek age of the fifth century, at the origin of our civilization, was
the dismantling of that great unity of a political power that was, at
the same time, a knowledge—the dismantling of that unity of a
magico-religious power which existed in the great Assyrian em-
pires; which the Greek tyrants, impregnated with Oriental
civilization, tried to restore for their own purposes; and which the
sophists of the sixth and fifth centuries still used as they could, in
the form of lessons paid for in cash. We witness that long decom-
position during the five or six centuries of archaic Greece. And


52 Power

when classical Greece appeared—Sophocles represents its starting
date, its sunrise—what had to disappear for this society to exist was
the union of power and knowledge. From this time onward, the
man of power would be the man of ignorance. In the end, what
befell Oedipus was that, knowing too much, he didn’t know any-
thing. From then on, Oedipus would function as the man of power,
the blind ruler who didn’t know, and who didn’t know because he
could do too much,

So, whereas power was taxed with ignorance, inattention, obliv-
iousness, obscurity, there would be, on one side, the seer and the
philosopher in communication with the truth, the eternal truths of
the gods or of the mind, and, on the other, the people, holding none
of the power, who bore the memory or could still give evidence of
the truth. Thus, beyond a power that had become monumentally
blind like Oedipus, there were the shepherds who remembered and
the prophets who spoke the truth.

The West would be dominated by the great myth according to
which truth never belongs to political power: political power is
blind—the real knowledge is that which one possesses when one
is in contact with the gods or when one remembers things, when
one looks at the great eternal Sun or one opens one’s eyes to what
came to pass. With Plato there began a great Western myth: that
there is an antinomy between knowledge and power. If there is
knowledge, it must renounce power. Where knowledge and science
are found in their pure truth, there can no longer be any political
power.

This great myth needs to be dispelled. It is this myth which Nietz-
sche began to demolish by showing, in the numerous texts already
cited, that, behind all knowledge [savoir], behind all attainment of
knowledge [connaissance], what is involved is a struggle for power.
Political power is not absent from knowledge, it is woven together
with it.

Tit

In the preceding lecture I referred to two forms or types of judicial
settlement, litigation, contest, or dispute that were present in Greek
civilization. The first, rather archaic form is found in Homer. Two
warriors came face to face to determine who was wrong and who

Truth and J

was right, who had violated the
that question comes down to ar
between the two warriors. One}

swear before the gods that you d

In a procedure like this there v
testimony to determine who spi
deciding—not who spoke the |
trusted to the fight, the challeng

The second form is the one t
King. To solve a problem that, i
testation, a criminal issue—wh:
a new figure, absent from the
herd. Though a man of no imp:
the shepherd saw what he saw,

- fragment of a recollection, bec

evidence of what he saw, he cai
of the king or the presumptuou
humble witness, solely by the
utters, can single-handedly de:
dipus the King is a kind of comy
Several of Sophocles’ plays, suc
of theatrical ritualization of th:
of the history of Greek law offe
conquests of Athenian democri
which the people took possessi
to tell the truth, to set the truth
those who governed them.
That great conquest of Gree
ness, to oppose truth to power
born and instituted in a defin
fifth century. That right to set i
power gave rise to a series of r
acteristic of Greek society.
First, there was the elaborat
forms of proof and demonstri
what conditions, what forms to
forms are philosophy, rational
and in relation to the previous
oped, an art of convincing pe:



r

ophocles represents its starting
dear for this society to exist was
3. From this time onward, the
of ignorance. In the end, what
00 much, he didn’t know any-
| function as the man of power,
d who didn’t know because he

h ignorance, inattention, obliv-
on one side, the seer and the
the truth, the eternal truths of
sther, the people, holding none
or could still give evidence of
at had become monumentally
epherds who remembered and

y the great myth according to
ical power: political power is
hich one possesses when one
one remembers things, when
‘one opens one’s eyes to what
in a great Western myth: that
vledge and power. If there is
Where knowledge and science
can no longer be any political

ed. It is this myth which Nietz-
in the numerous texts already
voir], behind all attainment of
volved is a struggle for power.
owledge, it is woven together

two forms or types of judicial
ite that were present in Greek
form is found in Homer. Two
ine who was wrong and who

Truth and Juridical Forms 33

was right, who had violated the other’s rights. The task of resolving
that question comes down to a rule-governed dispute, the challenge
between the two warriors. One would challenge the other, “Can you
swear before the gods that you didn’t do what I am accusing you of?”
In a procedure like this there was no judge, judgment, inquiry, or
testimony to determine who spoke the truth. The responsibility for
deciding—not who spoke the truth, but who was right—was en-
trusted to the fight, the challenge, the risk that each one would run.

The second form is the one that unfolds throughout Oedipus the
King. To solve a problem that, in a sense, is also a problem of con-
testation, a criminal issue—who killed King Laius?—there appears
a new figure, absent from the old Homeric procedure, the shep-
herd. Though a man of no importance, a slave holed up in his hut,
the shepherd saw what he saw, and because he possesses that little
fragment of a recollection, because in his discourse he bears the
evidence of what he saw, he can challenge and overthrow the pride
of the king or the presumptuousness of the tyrant. The witness, the
humble witness, solely by the action of the truth he saw and he
utters, can single-handedly defeat the most powerful of men. Oe-
dipus the King is a kind of compendium of the history of Greek law.
Several of Sophocles’ plays, such as Antigone and Electra, are a kind
of theatrical ritualization of the history of law. This dramatization
of the history of Greek law offers us a summary of one of the great
conquests of Athenian democracy: the story of the process through
which the people took possession of the right to judge, of the right
to tell the truth, to set the truth against their own masters, to judge
those who governed them.

That great conquest of Greek democracy, that right to bear wit-
ness, to oppose truth to power, was established in a long process
born and instituted in a definitive way in Athens throughout the
fifth century. That right to set a powerless truth against a truthless
power gave rise to a series of major cultural forms that were char-
acteristic of Greek society.

First, there was the elaboration of what we may call the rational
forms of proof and demonstration: how to produce truth, under
what conditions, what forms to observe, what rules to apply. Those
forms are philosophy, rational systems, scientific systems. Second,
and in relation to the previous forms, an art of persuading devel-
oped, an art of convincing people of the truth of what is said, of


54 Power

winning the victory for truth or, what is more, by means of truth.
Here we have the problem of Greek rhetoric. Third, there was the
development of a new type of knowledge—knowledge gained
through witnessing, through recollection, through inquiry. A
knowledge by inquiry which historians such as Herodotus, a short
time before Sophocles, naturalists, botanists, geographers, Greek
travelers, would develop and Aristotle would totalize and make en-
cyclopedic.

In Greece there was, then, a sort of great revolution which,
through a series of political struggles and contestations, resulted in
the elaboration of a specific form of judicial, juridical discovery
of truth. The latter constituted the mold, the model on the basis
of which a series of other knowledges—philosophical, rhetorical,
and empirical—were able to develop and to characterize Greek
thought.

Quite curiously, the history of the birth of the inquiry remained
forgotten and was lost, having been taken up again, in other forms,
several centuries later, in the Middle Ages.

In the European Middle Ages, one sees a kind of second birth of
the inquiry which was slower and more obscure than the first, but
had much more success. The Greek method of inquiry had re-
mained stationary, had not achieved the founding of a rational
knowledge capable of indefinite development. By contrast, the in-
quiry that arose in the Middle Ages would acquire extraordinary
dimensions. Its destiny would be practically coextensive with the
particular destiny of so-called “European” or “Western” culture.

The old law that settled disputes between individuals in Ger-
manic societies, at the time when these came into contact with the
Roman Empire, was in a sense very close in some of its forms to
archaic Greek law. It was a law in which the system of inquiry did
not exist; disputes between individuals were settled by the testing
game.

Ancient Germanic law during the period when Tacitus began to
analyze that odd civilization extending to the gates of the Empire
can be characterized, schematically, in the following way.

In the first place, there was no public legal action; that is, there
was no one—representing society, the group, authority, or the
holder of power—charged with bringing accusations against indi-
viduals. For a penal type of trial to take place, there had to be a

Truth an

wrong, or at least someone
presenting himself as a victir
name his adversary. The vii
fended or someone who bel
the relative’s suit. What char
kind of duel, an opposition be
there was no intervention by
a matter of a complaint madi
ing only these two parties, th
know of two rather curious cé
action—treason and homos¢
vened, considering itself as
manded reparation from th
condition for a penal action
istence of two personages, n¢

The second condition was
duced—once any individual
called for reparation from th
would ensue as a kind of cc
individuals. A kind of privat
penal procedure was merely
tween individuals. Germanic
tween war and justice, or an j
the contrary, it assumed thal
conducting war between inc
venge. Law was thus a regule
when someone was killed, 0
use of the judicial practice of}
the possibility of killing some:
the domain of law meant killin
to certain rules, certain forms
in such-and-such manner, it )
ting him to pieces or by cut!
stake at the entrance to his t
gesture of revenge and char
then, was the ritual form of v

The third condition was’ the
opposition between law and
reach an agreement—that is, |



r

hat is more, by means of truth.
k rhetoric. Third, there was the
knowledge—knowledge gained
collection, through inquiry. A
ians such as Herodotus, a short
, botanists, geographers, Greek
‘tle would totalize and make en-

sort of great revolution which,
es and contestations, resulted in
of judicial, juridical discovery
: mold, the model on the basis
dges—philosophical, rhetorical,
lop and to characterize Greek

e birth of the inquiry remained
taken up again, in other forms,
le Ages.

.e sees a kind of second birth of
nore obscure than the first, but
‘ek method of inquiry had re-
ved the founding of a rational
‘velopment. By contrast, the in-
‘s would acquire extraordinary
wactically coextensive with the
opean” or “Western” culture.

:s between individuals in Ger-
aese came into contact with the
‘y close in some of its forms to
which the system of inquiry did
uals were settled by the testing

> period when Tacitus began to
ling to the gates of the Empire
', in the following way.

ublic legal action; that is, there
; the group, authority, or the
nging accusations against indi-
) take place, there had to be a

Truth and Juridical Forms 355

wrong, or at least someone claiming he had suffered a wrong or
presenting himself as a victim, and this self-declared victim had to
name his adversary. The victim could be the person directly of-
fended or someone who belonged to his family and was handling
the relative’s suit. What characterized a penal action was always a
kind of duel, an opposition between individuals, families, or groups;
there was no intervention by any representative of authority. It was
a matter of a complaint made by one individual to another, involv-
ing only these two parties, the defendant and the accuser. We only
know of two rather curious cases in which there was a sort of public
action—treason and homosexuality. The community then inter-
vened, considering itself as being injured, and collectively de-
manded reparation from the individual. Consequently, the first
condition for a penal action in the old Germanic law was the ex-
istence of two personages, never three.

The second condition was that, once the penal action was intro-
duced—once any individual declared himself to be a victim and
called for reparation from the other party—the judicial settlement
would ensue as a kind of continuation of the clash between the
individuals. A kind of private, individual war developed, and the
penal procedure was merely the ritualization of that conflict be-
tween individuals. Germanic law did not assume an opposition be-
tween war and justice, or an identity between justice and peace; on
the contrary, it assumed that law was a special, regulated way of
conducting war between individuals and controlling acts of re-
venge. Law was thus a regulated way of making war. For example,
when someone was killed, one of his close relatives could make
use of the judicial practice of revenge, which meant not renouncing
the possibility of killing someone, normally the murderer. Entering
the domain of law meant killing the killer, but killing him according
to certain rules, certain forms. If the killer had committed the crime
in such-and-such manner, it would be necessary to kill him by cut-
ting him to pieces or by cutting his head off and placing it on a
stake at the entrance to his house. These acts would ritualize the
gesture of revenge and characterize it as judicial revenge. Law,
then, was the ritual form of war.

The third condition was that, while it was true that there was no
opposition between law and war, it was nonetheless possible to
reach an agreement—that is, to break off those regulated hostilities.


36 Power

Ancient Germanic law always offered the possibility, throughout
that long series of reciprocal and ritual acts of revenge, to arrive at
an understanding, a compromise. The series of vengeful actions
could be broken with a pact. In that event, the two adversaries
would appeal to an arbiter who, in harmony with them and with
their mutual consent, would set a sum of money that would con-
stitute the compensation—not compensation for a transgression
[faute], for there was no transgression but only a wrong [tort] and
a vengeance. In this procedure of Germanic law, one of the two
adversaries would buy back the right to have peace, to escape the
possible revenge of his adversary. He would redeem his own life,
and not the blood that he had spilled, by thus bringing an end to
the war. The cessation of the ritual war was the third act or the
final act of the judicial drama in ancient Germanic law.

The system that regulated conflicts and disputes in the Germanic
societies of that era was therefore entirely governed by struggle and
compromise, involving a test of strength that could end with an
economic settlement. It depended on a procedure that did not allow
for the intervention of a third individual who would stand between
the two others as a neutral party seeking the truth, trying to deter-
mine which of the two had told the truth. A procedure of inquiry,
a search for the truth, never intervened in this type of system. This
was how the old Germanic law was constituted, before the invasion
of the Roman Empire.

I won’t linger over the long series of vicissitudes that brought
this Germanic law into rivalry, competition, and at times collusion
with Roman law. Between the fifth and sixth centuries of our age,
there was a series of penetrations and conflicts between those two
systems of law. Every time a state would begin to take form on the
ruins of the Roman Empire, every time a state structure began to
emerge, Roman law, the old law of the state, would then be rein-
vigorated. Thus, in the Merovingian reigns, and above all during
the epoch of the Carolingian Empire, Roman law overshadowed
Germanic law in a certain way. Moreover, every time there was a
disintegration of those embryonic forms, those first lineaments of
a state, the old Germanic law would reappear. When the Carolin-
gian Empire collapsed in the tenth century, Germanic law tri-
umphed, and Roman law fell into oblivion for several centuries,
slowly reappearing only at the end of the twelfth century and in the

Truth and.

course of the thirteenth centur
of the Germanic type. It doesn’
inquiry procedures, the truth-:
societies or the Roman Empire

In feudal law, disputes betw
the system of the test. When .
claim, a contestation, accusing
the dispute between the two w
tests accepted by both individu
This system was a way of pro’
the weight, the importance of |

First of all there were social
importance. In the old law of
person was accused of murde
innocence by gathering about I
he had not committed the m
example, on the fact that they
on an alibi for the alleged mur
an individual had not killed, or
One had to have social relatior
youch not for his innocence
showed the solidarity that a pi
weight, his influence, the imp:
longed and of the persons re.
conflict. The proof of his innoc
mitted the act in question wa:
witnesses delivered.

Second, there were tests ol
was accused of something—ro
that accusation with a certain
he had not committed any m
formulas, he could fail or succ
utter the formula and lose—n:
cause it was proved that he |
uttered the formula in the corr
alteration would invalidate th
what one asserted. That only
level of the test is confirmed b
a woman, or a priest, the aci



d the possibility, throughout
il acts of revenge, to arrive at
ie series of vengeful actions
t event, the two adversaries
larmony with them and with
m of money that would con-
ensation for a transgression
o but only a wrong [tort] and
ermanic law, one of the two
to have peace, to escape the
» would redeem his own life,
l, by thus bringing an end to
war was the third act or the
ent Germanic law.

and disputes in the Germanic
rely governed by struggle and
agth that could end with an
1 procedure that did not allow
tal who would stand between
ing the truth, trying to deter-
ruth. A procedure of inquiry,
+d in this type of system. This
nstituted, before the invasion

of vicissitudes that brought
‘tition, and at times collusion
id sixth centuries of our age,
| conflicts between those two
ild begin to take form on the
1e a state structure began to
1e state, would then be rein-
reigns, and above all during
:, Roman law overshadowed
over, every time there was a
ms, those first lineaments of
seappear. When the Carolin-
century, Germanic law tri-
ilivion for several centuries,
he twelfth century and in the

Truth and Juridical Forms 37

course of the thirteenth century. Hence feudal law was essentially
of the Germanic type. It doesn’t present any of the elements of the
inquiry procedures, the truth-establishment procedures of Greek
societies or the Roman Empire.

In feudal law, disputes between two individuals were settled by
the system of the test. When an individual came forward with a
claim, a contestation, accusing another of having killed or robbed,
the dispute between the two would be resolved through a series of
tests accepted by both individuals and by which both were bound.
This system was a way of proving not the truth, but the strength,
the weight, the importance of the one who spoke.

First of all there were social tests, tests of an individual’s social
importance. In the old law of eleventh-century Burgundy, when a
person was accused of murder, he could completely establish his
innocence by gathering about him twelve witnesses who swore that
he had not committed the murder. The oath was not based, for
example, on the fact that they had seen the alleged victim alive, or
on an alibi for the alleged murderer. To take an oath, to testify that
an individual had not killed, one had to be a relative of the accused.
One had to have social relations of kinship with him, which would
vouch not for his innocence but for his social importance. This
showed the solidarity that a particular individual could obtain, his
weight, his influence, the importance of the group to which he be-
longed and of the persons ready to support him in a battle or a
conflict. The proof of his innocence, the proof that he had not com-
mitted the act in question was by no means what the evidence of
witnesses delivered.

Second, there were tests of a verbal type. When an individual
was accused of something—robbery or murder—he had to reply to
that accusation with a certain number of formulas, affirming that
he had not committed any murder or robbery. By uttering these
formulas, he could fail or succeed. In certain cases, a person would
utter the formula and lose—not for having told a falsehood, or be-
cause it was proved that he had lied, but, rather, for not having
uttered the formula in the correct way. A grammatical error, a word
alteration would invalidate the formula, regardless of the truth of
what one asserted. That only a verbal game was involved at the
level of the test is confirmed by the fact that in the case of a minor,
a woman, or a priest, the accused could be replaced by another


38 Power

person. This other person, who later in the history of law would
become the attorney, would utter the formulas in place of the ac-
cused. If he made a mistake in uttering them, the person on whose
behalf he spoke would lose the case.

Third, there were the old magico-religious tests of the oath. The
accused would be asked to take an oath and if he declined or hes-
itated he would lose the case.

Finally, there were the famous corporal, physical tests called or-
deals, which consisted in subjecting a person to a sort of game, a
struggle with his own body, to find out whether he would pass or
fail. For example, in the time of the Carolingian Empire, there was
a famous test imposed on individuals accused of murder, in certain
areas of northern France. The accused was required to walk on
coals and two days later if he still had scars he would lose the case.
There were yet other tests such as the ordeal by water, which con-
sisted in tying a person’s right hand to his left foot and throwing
him into the water. If he didn’t drown he would lose the case, be-
cause the water didn’t accept him as it should; and if he drowned
he had won the case, seeing that the water had not rejected him.
All these confrontations of the individual or his body with the nat-
ural elements were a symbolic transposition of the struggle of in-
dividuals among themselves, the semantics of which would need to
be studied. Basically, it was always a matter of combat, of deciding
who was the stronger. In old Germanic law, the trial was nothing
more than the regulated, ritualized continuation of war.

I could have offered more convincing examples, such as the
fights between two opponents during a trial, physical fights, the
famous judgments of God. When two individuals clashed over prop-
erty ownership, or because of a killing, it was always possible, if
they agreed, for them to fight, so long as they obeyed certain rules—
length of the fight, type of weapons—in front of an audience present
only to ensure that what occurred was consistent with the rules.
The winner of the combat would win the case, without being given
the possibility of telling the truth, or rather, without being asked to
prove the truth of his claim.

In the system of the feudal judicial test, it was a matter not of
truth-seeking but of a kind of game with a binary structure. The
individual accepted the test or declined it. If he declined, if he didn’t
want to try the test, he would lose the case in advance. If the test

Truth an

took place he would win or |
sibility. The binary form is th
The second characteristic
victory or a defeat. There was
one who lost, the stronger an
an unfavorable outcome. The
[sentence] of the sort that wou.
twelfth century and beginning
in a declaration by a third pa
the truth is judged to be righ
to be wrong. Consequently, j
the separation of truth and u:
role in it—there existed only
The third characteristic is
automatic. The presence of a
to distinguish the two adversa
vigor, physical resistance, anc
the individuals, according to
matically. Authority interven
of the procedure. When the j
there who bore the name of ju
one appointed with the muti
simply to verify that the fight
not to the truth but to the reg
The fourth characteristic i
not serve to name, to identify
it established that the strong
the one who was right. The
war or of transposing it sym
certain number of secondary,
would be designated thereby
was a mechanical executor [a
force into law, a sort of gearii
law. It didn’t have an apopha
tion of designating or manife
a legal device, and not a truth
is how the test operated in ol
This system of judicial pra
twelfth century and in the coi



er in the history of law would
1e formulas in place of the ac-
ing them, the person on whose

religious tests of the oath. The
yath and if he declined or hes-

rporal, physical tests called or-
a person to a sort of game, a
out whether he would pass or
Sarolingian Empire, there was
} accused of murder, in certain
sed was required to walk on
1 scars he would lose the case.
\e ordeal by water, which con-
! to his left foot and throwing
n he would lose the case, be-
sit should; and if he drowned
2 water had not rejected him.
dual or his body with the nat-
position of the struggle of in-
antics of which would need to
matter of combat, of deciding
nic law, the trial was nothing
ontinuation of war.
icing examples, such as the
g a trial, physical fights, the
ndividuals clashed over prop-
ng, it was always possible, if
as they obeyed certain rules—
n front of an audience present
as consistent with the rules.
the case, without being given
ather, without being asked to

] test, it was a matter not of
with a binary structure. The
dit. If he declined, if he didn’t
e case in advance. If the test

Truth and Juridical Forms 39

took place he would win or be defeated: there was no other pos-
sibility. The binary form is the first characteristic of the test.

The second characteristic is that the test always ended with a
victory or a defeat. There was always someone who won and some-
one who lost, the stronger and the weaker, a favorable outcome or
an unfavorable outcome. There was never anything like a judgment
[sentence] of the sort that would come into practice at the end of the
twelfth century and beginning of the thirteenth. Judgment consisted
in a declaration by a third party that, a certain person having told
the truth is judged to be right, another having told a lie is judged
to be wrong. Consequently, judgment did not exist in feudal law;
the separation of truth and untruth between individuals played no
role in it—there existed only victory or defeat.

The third characteristic is that this test was, in a certain way,
automatic. The presence of a third party was not necessary in order
to distinguish the two adversaries. It was the balance of forces, luck,
vigor, physical resistance, and mental agility that would distinguish
the individuals, according to a mechanism that developed auto-
matically. Authority intervened only as a witness to the regularity
of the procedure. When the judicial tests took place, someone was
there who bore the name of judge—the political sovereign or some-
one appointed with the mutual consent of the two adversaries—
simply to verify that the fight went by the rules. The judge attested
not to the truth but to the regularity of the procedure.

The fourth characteristic is that in this mechanism the test did
not serve to name, to identify the one who had told the truth; rather,
it established that the stronger individual was, at the same time,
the one who was right. The judicial test was a way of ritualizing
war or of transposing it symbolically. It was a way of giving it a
certain number of secondary, theatrical forms, so that the stronger
would be designated thereby as the one who was right. The test
was a mechanical executor [opérateur] of the law, a commutator of
force into law, a sort of gearing that enabled the shift from force to
law. It didn’t have an apophantic function, it didn’t have the func-
tion of designating or manifesting or discovering the truth. It was
a legal device, and not a truth device or an apophantic device. That
is how the test operated in old feudal law.

This system of judicial practices disappeared at the end of the
twelfth century and in the course of the thirteenth. During the en-


40 Power

tire second half of the Middle Ages, one would witness the trans-
formation of those old practices and the invention of new forms of
judicial practice and procedure—forms that were absolutely essen-
tial for the history of Europe and for the history of the whole world,
inasmuch as Europe violently imposed its dominion on the entire
surface of the earth. What was invented in this reformulation of law
was something that involved not so much the contents of knowl-
edge as its forms and conditions of possibility. What was invented
in law during this period was a particular way of knowing, a con-
dition of possibility of knowledge whose destiny was to be crucial
in the Western world. That mode of knowledge was the inquiry,
which appeared for the first time in Greece and which, after the
fall of the Roman Empire, remained hidden for several centuries.
However, the inquiry that reappeared in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries was of a somewhat different type than the one we saw
exemplified in Oedipus.

Why did the old judicial form, some of whose basic features I
have presented to you, disappear during that era? We may say,
schematically, that one of the fundamental traits of Western feudal
society was that a relatively small segment of the circulation of
goods was carried out by commerce. It was handled through mech-
anisms of inheritance or testamentary transmission, and above all
through warlike, military, extrajudicial, or judicial contestation.
One of the most important means of ensuring the circulation of
goods in the early Middle Ages was war, rapine, occupation of a
piece of land, a castle, a town. There was a moving border between
law and war, seeing that law was a certain way of continuing war.
For example, someone in command of an armed force would oc-
cupy an estate, a forest, any kind of property, and then assert his
right; thus began a long dispute at the end of which the one who
possessed no armed force and wanted to recover his land obtained
the invader’s departure only by means of a payment. This stood on
the border between the judicial and the bellicose, and it was one
of the most frequent ways for someone to become rich. In early
feudalism, the circulation and exchange of goods, impoverishment
and enrichment were brought about in most cases through this
mechanism.

It is interesting, moreover, to compare feudal society in Europe
and the so-called primitive societies currently studied by ethnolo-

Truth and

gists. In these, the exchange ¢
and rivalry enacted above all i
displays and signs. In a feudal
took place in the form of riva
contestation that were bellige
so-called primitive societies, tk
petitive levies because they a
feudal societies, things of valu
they were goods and signs, but
weapons. Wealth was the mei
were brought to bear on the |
the Middle Ages war, judicial li
were part of one great fluctuai

So a dual tendency characte
a concentration of arms in th
tended to prevent their use by |
was to deprive him of his wea
of armed power that, in feudal
powerful and finally to the mo
ond and at the same time, the:
that were a way of causing go:
stand why the most powerful
preventing them from develor
uals, and why they tried to ta
circulation of goods—which in
of the judicial power that was
hands of the same individuals.

The existence of executive
thought to be a rather old ide
that it’s a recent idea, which
quieu. But what interests us |
judicial power took form. In t
judicial power. Settlements wei
ple asked the most powerful |
eignty, not to see that justice v
of the procedure, as a functio:
gious powers. There was no i
judicial power in the hands of
power. Insofar as judicial conti



one would witness the trans-
the invention of new forms of
as that were absolutely essen-
he history of the whole world,
ed its dominion on the entire
ad in this reformulation of law
much the contents of knowl-
\ossibility. What was invented
cular way of knowing, a con-
ose destiny was to be crucial
* knowledge was the inquiry,
Greece and which, after the
hidden for several centuries.
1 in the twelfth and thirteenth
nt type than the one we saw

ne of whose basic features I
uring that era? We may say,
1ental traits of Western feudal
iegment of the circulation of
[t was handled through mech-
y transmission, and above all
cial, or judicial contestation.
if ensuring the circulation of
war, rapine, occupation of a
was a moving border between
ertain way of continuing war.
of an armed force would oc-
property, and then assert his
ie end of which the one who
d to recover his land obtained
is of a payment. This stood on
the bellicose, and it was one
one to become rich. In early
ige of goods, impoverishment
t in most cases through this

pare feudal society in Europe
currently studied by ethnolo-

Truth and Juridical Forms 4l

gists. In these, the exchange of goods occurs through contestation
and rivalry enacted above all in the form of prestige, at the level of
displays and signs. In a feudal society, the circulation of goods also
took place in the form of rivalry and contestation, but rivalry and
contestation that were belligerent rather than prestige-driven. In
so-called primitive societies, things of value are exchanged in com-
petitive levies because they are not just goods but also signs. In
feudal societies, things of value were exchanged not only because
they were goods and signs, but because they were goods, signs, and
weapons. Wealth was the means by which both violence and law
were brought to bear on the life and death of others. Throughout
the Middle Ages war, judicial litigation, and the circulation of goods
were part of one great fluctuating process.

So a dual tendency characterized feudal society. First, there was
a concentration of arms in the hands of the most powerful, who
tended to prevent their use by the less powerful. To defeat someone
was to deprive him of his weapons; the result was a concentration
of armed power that, in feudal states, gave more force to the most
powerful and finally to the most powerful of all, the monarch. Sec-
ond and at the same time, there were judicial actions and contests
that were a way of causing goods to circulate. We can thus under-
stand why the most powerful sought to control judicial disputes,
preventing them from developing spontaneously between individ-
uals, and why they tried to take hold of the judicial and litigious
circulation of goods—which implied the concentration of arms and
of the judicial power that was forming during that period—in the
hands of the same individuals.

The existence of executive, legislative, and judicial power is
thought to be a rather old idea in constitutional law. The truth is
that it’s a recent idea, which dates approximately from Montes-
quieu. But what interests us here is to see how something like a
judicial power took form. In the early Middle Ages, there was no
judicial power. Settlements were reached between individuals. Peo-
ple asked the most powerful figure, or the one exercising sover-
eignty, not to see that justice was done but to verify the regularity
of the procedure, as a function of his political, magical, and reli-
gious powers. There was no autonomous judicial power, and no
judicial power in the hands of the holder of military and political
power. Insofar as judicial contest ensured the circulation of goods,


42 Power Truth and Ji

the right to regulate and control that judicial contest was usurped ©
by the richest and most powerful because it was a means of accu- ©
mulating wealth.

The accumulation of wealth and armed power and the concen-
tration of judicial power in the hands of a few were one and the
same process operating in the early Middle Ages, reaching its ma- .
turity at the time of the formation of the first great medieval mon-
archy, in the middle and at the end of the twelfth century. At that
time, things appeared that were completely new relative to feudal”
society, the Carolingian Empire, and the old rules of Roman law,

First: A mode of proceeding [wne justice] that is no longer a con- ~
testation between individuals and a voluntary acceptance by those ~
individuals of a certain number of rules of settkement but, rather, ~
one imposed from above on individuals, adversaries, and parties, ©
Thereafter individuals would no longer have the right to resolve
their own disputes, whether regularly or irregularly; they would —
have to submit to a power external to them, imposing itself as ar
judicial political power. 5

Second: There appeared a totally new figure, without precedent ©
in Roman law—the prosecutor. That curious personage, who ap- 7
peared in Europe around the twelfth century, would present him-~
self as the representative of the sovereign, the king, or the master.
When there was a crime, an offense, or a dispute between individ-
uals, he would appear as a power that was injured by the mere fact ©
that an offense or a crime had occurred. The prosecutor would 7
make common cause with the victim; he would be behind the one ©
instituting an action, saying: “If it is true that that man did injury —
to another, I can affirm, as the representative of the sovereign, that ©
his sovereignty, his power, the order that he ensures, and the law _
that he established have also been injured by that individual. Thus, ”
I too stand against him.” In this way, the sovereign and political 7
authority stood in for and gradually replaced the victim. This utterly”
new phenomenon would enable political power to take control of”
the judicial procedures. The prosecutor, therefore, appeared as the | q
representative of the sovereign, who was injured by the offense. ‘

Third: An absolutely new concept appeared—the infraction. So
long as the judicial drama unfolded between two individuals, the |
victim and the accused, it was only a matter of the wrong that one
individual had done to another. The question was whether there 7

had been a wrong committed an
that the sovereign, or his repres¢
as injured by the offense,” the
one individual against another
against the state, against the sov
not an attack upon an individu:
the state itself. Thus, in the co
_ wrong was to be replaced by thi
_ not a wrong committed by one
an offense or injury done by an
the law, to society, to sovereign!
_ is one of the great inventions of 1
“state power appropriated the er
Mechanism of interindividual s
"Middle Ages.

_ Fourth: There is one more dis
diabolical as that of the prosecul
“rather, the sovereign (since we c
ig that period), was not only the
emanded the compensation. V
was declared guilty and still owe
the compensation was absolutel
incient Germanic law: it was n
mne’s peace by settling account:
ty was required not just to c
committed against another indi
he offense he had committed a,
iw. In this way there appeare
nes, the great mechanism of cc
/ property were one of the chief n
irchies to enrich and enlarge th
es were founded on the apt
ich enabled them to apply t
hat is the political background
Now we need to explain the e
ce], to explain how one react
one of the principal figures was
‘an infraction was the king, i
plaintiff, it is understandable |


t judicial contest was usurped
cause it was a means of accu-

umed power and the concen-
is of a few were one and the
Middle Ages, reaching its ma-
the first great medieval mon-
of the twelfth century. At that
pletely new relative to feudal
the old rules of Roman law.

istice] that is no longer a con-
‘oluntary acceptance by those
ues of settlement but, rather,
tals, adversaries, and parties.
ger have the right to resolve
ly or irregularly; they would
to them, imposing itself as a

ew figure, without precedent
curious personage, who ap-
century, would present him-
eign, the king, or the master.
or a dispute between individ-
was injured by the mere fact
wred. The prosecutor would
he would be behind the one
rue that that man did injury
¢mtative of the sovereign, that
that he ensures, and the law
wed by that individual. Thus,
, the sovereign and political
dlaced the victim. This utterly
ical power to take control of
or, therefore, appeared as the
vas injured by the offense.

appeared—the infraction. So
yetween two individuals, the
matter of the wrong that one
question was whether there

Truth and Juridical Forms 43

had been a wrong committed and who was right. From the moment
that the sovereign, or his representative, the prosecutor, said, “I too
was injured by the offense,” the wrong was not just an offense of
one individual against another, but also an individual’s offense
against the state, against the sovereign as the state’s representative;
not an attack upon an individual but an attack against the law of
the state itself. Thus, in the concept of crime the old concept of
wrong was to be replaced by that of infraction. The infraction was
not a wrong committed by one individual against another, it was
an offense or injury done by an individual to order, to the state, to
the law, to society, to sovereignty, to the sovereign. The infraction
is one of the great inventions of medieval thought. We thus see how
state power appropriated the entire judicial procedure, the entire
mechanism of interindividual settlement of disputes in the early
Middle Ages.

Fourth: There is one more discovery still, a last invention just as
diabolical as that of the prosecutor and the infraction. The state, or
rather, the sovereign (since we cannot speak of a state existing dur-
ing that period), was not only the injured party but also the one that
demanded the compensation. When an individual lost a trial, he
was declared guilty and still owed a compensation to his victim. But
the compensation was absolutely not that of ancient feudal law or
ancient Germanic law: it was no longer a matter of buying back
one’s peace by settling accounts with one’s adversary. The guilty
party was required not just to compensate for the offense he had
committed against another individual but also to compensate for
the offense he had committed against the sovereign, the state, the
law. In this way there appeared, along with the mechanism of
fines, the great mechanism of confiscations. These confiscations of
property were one of the chief means for the great emerging mon-
archies to enrich and enlarge their holdings. The Western monar-
chies were founded on the appropriation of the judicial system,
which enabled them to apply these mechanisms of confiscation.
That is the political background of this transformation.

Now we need to explain the establishment of the judgment [se7-
tence], to explain how one reached the end of a process in which
one of the principal figures was the prosecutor. If the main victim
of an infraction was the king, if the prosecutor was the primary
plaintiff, it is understandable that judicial settlement could no


44 Power

longer be obtained through the mechanisms of the test. The king
or his representative, the prosecutor, could not risk their own lives
or their own possessions every time a crime was committed. The
accused and the prosecutor did not confront each other on even
ground, as in a clash between two individuals; it was necessary to
find a new mechanism that was no longer that of the test, of the
struggle between two adversaries, to determine whether someone
was guilty or not. The warlike model could no longer be applied.
What model was to be adopted? This was one of the great mo-
ments of the history of the West. There were two models for solving
the problem. One was a model indigenous to the judicial institution,
In feudal law itself, in ancient Germanic law, there was a circum-
stance in which the collectivity as a whole could intervene, accuse
someone, and obtain his conviction: this was the flagrant offense,
where an individual was surprised in the very act of committing
the crime. In that instance, the persons who surprised him had the
right to bring him before the sovereign, the holder of a political
authority, and say, “We saw him doing such-and-such thing and so
he must be punished or made to pay a compensation.” Thus, in the
very sphere of law, there was a model of collective intervention and
authoritative judgment for the settlement of a judicial suit. It ap-
plied to the flagrant offense, when the crime was discovered as it
was taking place. Obviously that model couldn’t be used when the
individual was not caught in the act, which was usually the case.
The problem, then, was to determine under what conditions the
model of the flagrant offense could be generalized and used in the
new legal system that was emerging, completely controlled by po-
litical sovereignty and by the representatives of the political sov-
ereign.

The authorities preferred to use a second, extrajudicial model,
which was in turn subdivided in two or, rather, during that period,
had a double existence, a double usage. This was the inquiry
model, which had existed in the time of the Carolingian Empire.
When the representatives of the sovereign had to resolve a problem
of law, of power, or a question of taxes, morals, ground rent, or
ownership, they initiated something that was perfectly ritualized
and regular—the inquisitio, the inquiry. The representative of
power would summon the persons regarded as being knowledge-
able about morals, law, or property titles. He would assemble these

Truth and

ersons, making them swear
knew, what they had seen or
heard it said. Then, left to the
erate; at the end of this delib
solution to the problem. This
agement, which the officials |
applied. It was still employed,
William the Conqueror in Eng
ors occupied England; they se
entered into litigation with t
other over the possession of th
_ integrate the new Norman pop
a population, William the Cong
quiry concerning the status o
system of ground rent, and so
Book, the only comprehensive
quiries that were an old admii
_ emperors.

This procedure of administi
characteristics:

1. Political power was the e.

2. Power was exercised first
rogating; it did not know

3. In order to determine the
bles, to the persons fit to ]
their wealth, their notabil

4. Contrary to what one see
king consults the notabl
truth through the use of
are asked to meet volunta
they are allowed to say
truth.

We thus have a type of tru
administrative management of
the West. Yet these inquiry pr



hanisms of the test. The king
could not risk their own lives
a crime was committed. The
confront each other on even
dividuals; it was necessary to
longer that of the test, of the
determine whether someone
could no longer be applied.
his was one of the great mo-
2 were two models for solving
tous to the judicial institution.
nic law, there was a circum-
thole could intervene, accuse
his was the flagrant offense,
1 the very act of committing
‘s who surprised him had the
ign, the holder of a political
3 such-and-such thing and so
compensation.” Thus, in the
of collective intervention and
ient of a judicial suit. It ap-
2 crime was discovered as it
+1 couldn’t be used when the
which was usually the case.
: under what conditions the
generalized and used in the
sompletely controlled by po-
ntatives of the political soyv-

second, extrajudicial model,
r, rather, during that period,
sage. This was the inquiry
of the Carolingian Empire.
ign had to resolve a problem
es, morals, ground rent, or
hat was perfectly ritualized
tiry. The representative of
sarded as being knowledge-
‘s. He would assemble these

Truth and Juridical Forms 45

persons, making them swear to tell the truth, to tell what they
knew, what they had seen or what they had learned from haying
heard it said. Then, left to themselves, these persons would delib-
erate; at the end of this deliberation they would be asked for the
solution to the problem. This was a model of administrative man-
agement, which the officials of the Carolingian Empire routinely
applied. It was still employed, after the breakup of the empire, by
William the Conqueror in England. In 1066, the Norman conquer-
ors occupied England; they seized the Anglo-Saxon properties and
entered into litigation with the indigenous population and each
other over the possession of those properties. To establish order, to
integrate the new Norman population into the ancient Anglo-Saxon
population, William the Conqueror carried out an enormous in-
quiry concerning the status of properties, the status of taxes, the
system of ground rent, and so on. This was the famous Domesday
Book, the only comprehensive example that we have of those in-
quiries that were an old administrative practice of the Carolingian
emperors.

This procedure of administrative inquiry had several important
characteristics:

1. Political power was the essential personage.

2. Power was exercised first of all by posing questions, by inter-
rogating; it did not know the truth and sought to discover it.

3. In order to determine the truth, power appealed to the nota-
bles, to the persons fit to know, given their position, their age,
their wealth, their notability, etc.

4. Contrary to what one sees at the end of Oedipus the King, the
king consults the notables without forcing them to tell the
truth through the use of violence, pressure, or torture. They
are asked to meet voluntarily and give their collective opinion;
they are allowed to say collectively what they deem to be the
truth.

We thus have a type of truth-establishment closely tied to the
administrative management of the first great state form known in
the West. [..-]
