Cite as: 576 U. S. ____ (2015) 1
Opinion of the Court
NOTICE: This opinion is subject to formal revision before publication in the
preliminary print of the United States Reports. Readers are requested to
notify the Reporter of Decisions, Supreme Court of the United States, Wash-
ington, D. C. 20543, of any typographical or other formal errors, in order
that corrections may be made before the preliminary print goes to press.
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
_________________
No. 14–7955
_________________
RICHARD E. GLOSSIP, ET AL., PETITIONERS v.
KEVIN J. GROSS, ET AL.
ON WRIT OF CERTIORARI TO THE UNITED STATES COURT OF
APPEALS FOR THE TENTH CIRCUIT
[June 29, 2015]
JUSTICE ALITO delivered the opinion of the Court.
Prisoners sentenced to death in the State of Oklahoma
filed an action in federal court under Rev. Stat. §1979, 42
U. S. C. §1983, contending that the method of execution
now used by the State violates the Eighth Amendment
because it creates an unacceptable risk of severe pain.
They argue that midazolam, the first drug employed in the
State’s current three-drug protocol, fails to render a per-
son insensate to pain. After holding an evidentiary hear-
ing, the District Court denied four prisoners’ application
for a preliminary injunction, finding that they had failed
to prove that midazolam is ineffective. The Court of Ap-
peals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed and accepted the
District Court’s finding of fact regarding midazolam’s
efficacy.
For two independent reasons, we also affirm. First, the
prisoners failed to identify a known and available alterna-
tive method of execution that entails a lesser risk of pain,
a requirement of all Eighth Amendment method-of-
execution claims. See Baze v. Rees, 553 U. S. 35, 61 (2008)
(plurality opinion). Second, the District Court did not

2 GLOSSIP v. GROSS
Opinion of the Court
commit clear error when it found that the prisoners failed
to establish that Oklahoma’s use of a massive dose of
midazolam in its execution protocol entails a substantial
risk of severe pain.
I
A
The death penalty was an accepted punishment at the
time of the adoption of the Constitution and the Bill of
Rights. In that era, death sentences were usually carried
out by hanging. The Death Penalty in America: Current
Controversies 4 (H. Bedau ed. 1997). Hanging remained
the standard method of execution through much of the
19th century, but that began to change in the century’s
later years. See Baze, supra, at 41–42. In the 1880’s, the
Legislature of the State of New York appointed a commis-
sion to find “‘the most humane and practical method
known to modern science of carrying into effect the sen-
tence of death in capital cases.’” In re Kemmler, 136 U. S.
436, 444 (1890). The commission recommended electrocu-
tion, and in 1888, the Legislature enacted a law providing
for this method of execution. Id., at 444–445. In subse-
quent years, other States followed New York’s lead in the
“‘belief that electrocution is less painful and more humane
than hanging.’” Baze, 553 U. S., at 42 (quoting Malloy v.
South Carolina, 237 U. S. 180, 185 (1915)).
In 1921, the Nevada Legislature adopted another new
method of execution, lethal gas, after concluding that this
was “the most humane manner known to modern science.”
State v. Jon, 46 Nev. 418, 437, 211 P. 676, 682 (1923). The
Nevada Supreme Court rejected the argument that the
use of lethal gas was unconstitutional, id., at 435–437, 211
P., at 681–682, and other States followed Nevada’s lead,
see, e.g., Ariz. Const., Art. XXII, §22 (1933); 1937 Cal.
Stats. ch. 172, §1; 1933 Colo. Sess. Laws ch. 61, §1; 1955
Md. Laws ch. 625, §1, p. 1017; 1937 Mo. Laws p. 222, §1.

Cite as: 576 U. S. ____ (2015) 3
Opinion of the Court
Nevertheless, hanging and the firing squad were retained
in some States, see, e.g., 1961 Del. Laws ch. 309, §2 (hang-
ing); 1935 Kan. Sess. Laws ch. 155, §1 (hanging); Utah
Code Crim. Proc. §105–37–16 (1933) (hanging or firing
squad), and electrocution remained the predominant
method of execution until the 9-year hiatus in executions
that ended with our judgment in Gregg v. Georgia, 428
U. S. 153 (1976). See Baze, supra, at 42.
After Gregg reaffirmed that the death penalty does not
violate the Constitution, some States once again sought a
more humane way to carry out death sentences. They
eventually adopted lethal injection, which today is “by far
the most prevalent method of execution in the United
States.” Baze, supra, at 42. Oklahoma adopted lethal
injection in 1977, see 1977 Okla. Sess. Laws p. 89, and it
eventually settled on a protocol that called for the use of
three drugs: (1) sodium thiopental, “a fast-acting barbitu-
rate sedative that induces a deep, comalike unconscious-
ness when given in the amounts used for lethal injection,”
(2) a paralytic agent, which “inhibits all muscular-skeletal
movements and, by paralyzing the diaphragm, stops respi-
ration,” and (3) potassium chloride, which “interferes with
the electrical signals that stimulate the contractions of the
heart, inducing cardiac arrest.” Baze, supra, at 44; see
also Brief for Respondents 9. By 2008, at least 30 of the
36 States that used lethal injection employed that particu-
lar three-drug protocol. 553 U. S., at 44.
While methods of execution have changed over the
years, “[t]his Court has never invalidated a State’s chosen
procedure for carrying out a sentence of death as the
infliction of cruel and unusual punishment.” Id., at 48. In
Wilkerson v. Utah, 99 U. S. 130, 134–135 (1879), the Court
upheld a sentence of death by firing squad. In In re
Kemmler, supra, at 447–449, the Court rejected a chal-
lenge to the use of the electric chair. And the Court did
not retreat from that holding even when presented with a

4 GLOSSIP v. GROSS
Opinion of the Court
case in which a State’s initial attempt to execute a pris-
oner by electrocution was unsuccessful. Louisiana ex rel.
Francis v. Resweber, 329 U. S. 459, 463–464 (1947) (plu-
rality opinion). Most recently, in Baze, supra, seven Jus-
tices agreed that the three-drug protocol just discussed
does not violate the Eighth Amendment.
Our decisions in this area have been animated in part
by the recognition that because it is settled that capital
punishment is constitutional, “[i]t necessarily follows that
there must be a [constitutional] means of carrying it out.”
Id., at 47. And because some risk of pain is inherent in
any method of execution, we have held that the Constitu-
tion does not require the avoidance of all risk of pain.
Ibid. After all, while most humans wish to die a painless
death, many do not have that good fortune. Holding that
the Eighth Amendment demands the elimination of essen-
tially all risk of pain would effectively outlaw the death
penalty altogether.
B
Baze cleared any legal obstacle to use of the most com-
mon three-drug protocol that had enabled States to carry
out the death penalty in a quick and painless fashion. But
a practical obstacle soon emerged, as anti-death-penalty
advocates pressured pharmaceutical companies to refuse
to supply the drugs used to carry out death sentences.
The sole American manufacturer of sodium thiopental, the
first drug used in the standard three-drug protocol, was
persuaded to cease production of the drug. After suspend-
ing domestic production in 2009, the company planned to
resume production in Italy. Koppel, Execution Drug Halt
Raises Ire of Doctors, Wall Street Journal, Jan. 25, 2011,
p. A6. Activists then pressured both the company and the
Italian Government to stop the sale of sodium thiopental
for use in lethal injections in this country. Bonner, Letter
from Europe: Drug Company in Cross Hairs of Death

Cite as: 576 U. S. ____ (2015) 5
Opinion of the Court
Penalty Opponents, N. Y. Times, Mar. 30, 2011; Koppel,
Drug Halt Hinders Executions in the U. S., Wall Street
Journal, Jan. 22, 2011, p. A1. That effort proved success-
ful, and in January 2011, the company announced that it
would exit the sodium thiopental market entirely. See
Hospira, Press Release, Hospira Statement Regarding
PentothalTM (sodium thiopental) Market Exit (Jan. 21,
2011).
After other efforts to procure sodium thiopental proved
unsuccessful, States sought an alternative, and they even-
tually replaced sodium thiopental with pentobarbital,
another barbiturate. In December 2010, Oklahoma be-
came the first State to execute an inmate using pentobar-
bital. See Reuters, Chicago Tribune, New Drug Mix Used
in Oklahoma Execution, Dec. 17 2010, p. 41. That execu-
tion occurred without incident, and States gradually shifted
to pentobarbital as their supplies of sodium thiopental
ran out. It is reported that pentobarbital was used in all
of the 43 executions carried out in 2012. The Death
Penalty Institute, Execution List 2012, online at www.
deathpenaltyinfo.org/execution-list-2012 (all Internet
materials as visited June 26, 2015, and available in Clerk
of Court’s case file). Petitioners concede that pentobarbi-
tal, like sodium thiopental, can “reliably induce and main-
tain a comalike state that renders a person insensate to
pain” caused by administration of the second and third
drugs in the protocol. Brief for Petitioners 2. And courts
across the country have held that the use of pentobarbital
in executions does not violate the Eighth Amendment.
See, e.g., Jackson v. Danberg, 656 F. 3d 157 (CA3 2011);
Beaty v. Brewer, 649 F. 3d 1071 (CA9 2011); DeYoung v.
Owens, 646 F. 3d 1319 (CA11 2011); Pavatt v. Jones, 627
F. 3d 1336 (CA10 2010).
Before long, however, pentobarbital also became una-
vailable. Anti-death-penalty advocates lobbied the Danish
manufacturer of the drug to stop selling it for use in exe-

6 GLOSSIP v. GROSS
Opinion of the Court
cutions. See Bonner, supra. That manufacturer opposed
the death penalty and took steps to block the shipment of
pentobarbital for use in executions in the United States.
Stein, New Obstacle to Death Penalty in U. S., Washing-
ton Post, July 3, 2011, p. A4. Oklahoma eventually be-
came unable to acquire the drug through any means. The
District Court below found that both sodium thiopental
and pentobarbital are now unavailable to Oklahoma. App.
67–68.
C
Unable to acquire either sodium thiopental or pentobar-
bital, some States have turned to midazolam, a sedative in
the benzodiazepine family of drugs. In October 2013,
Florida became the first State to substitute midazolam for
pentobarbital as part of a three-drug lethal injection pro-
tocol. Fernandez, Executions Stall As States Seek Differ-
ent Drugs, N. Y. Times, Nov. 9, 2013, p. A1. To date,
Florida has conducted 11 executions using that protocol,
which calls for midazolam followed by a paralytic agent
and potassium chloride. See Brief for State of Florida as
Amicus Curiae 2–3; Chavez v. Florida SP Warden, 742
F. 3d 1267, 1269 (CA11 2014). In 2014, Oklahoma also
substituted midazolam for pentobarbital as part of its
three-drug protocol. Oklahoma has already used this
three-drug protocol twice: to execute Clayton Lockett in
April 2014 and Charles Warner in January 2015. (Warner
was one of the four inmates who moved for a preliminary
injunction in this case.)
The Lockett execution caused Oklahoma to implement
new safety precautions as part of its lethal injection proto-
col. When Oklahoma executed Lockett, its protocol called
for the administration of 100 milligrams of midazolam, as
compared to the 500 milligrams that are currently re-
quired. On the morning of his execution, Lockett cut
himself twice at “‘the bend of the elbow.’” App. 50. That

Cite as: 576 U. S. ____ (2015) 7
Opinion of the Court
evening, the execution team spent nearly an hour making
at least one dozen attempts to establish intravenous (IV)
access to Lockett’s cardiovascular system, including at his
arms and elsewhere on his body. The team eventually
believed that it had established intravenous access
through Lockett’s right femoral vein, and it covered the
injection access point with a sheet, in part to preserve
Lockett’s dignity during the execution. After the team
administered the midazolam and a physician determined
that Lockett was unconscious, the team next administered
the paralytic agent (vecuronium bromide) and most of the
potassium chloride. Lockett began to move and speak, at
which point the physician lifted the sheet and determined
that the IV had “infiltrated,” which means that “the IV
fluid, rather than entering Lockett’s blood stream, had
leaked into the tissue surrounding the IV access point.”
Warner v. Gross, 776 F. 3d 721, 725 (CA10 2015) (case
below). The execution team stopped administering the
remaining potassium chloride and terminated the execu-
tion about 33 minutes after the midazolam was first in-
jected. About 10 minutes later, Lockett was pronounced
dead.
An investigation into the Lockett execution concluded
that “the viability of the IV access point was the single
greatest factor that contributed to the difficulty in admin-
istering the execution drugs.” App. 398. The investiga-
tion, which took five months to complete, recommended
several changes to Oklahoma’s execution protocol, and
Oklahoma adopted a new protocol with an effective date of
September 30, 2014. That protocol allows the Oklahoma
Department of Corrections to choose among four different
drug combinations. The option that Oklahoma plans to
use to execute petitioners calls for the administration of
500 milligrams of midazolam followed by a paralytic agent

8 GLOSSIP v. GROSS
Opinion of the Court
and potassium chloride.1 The paralytic agent may be
pancuronium bromide, vecuronium bromide, or rocuronium
bromide, three drugs that, all agree, are functionally
equivalent for purposes of this case. The protocol also
includes procedural safeguards to help ensure that an
inmate remains insensate to any pain caused by the ad-
ministration of the paralytic agent and potassium chlo-
ride. Those safeguards include: (1) the insertion of both a
primary and backup IV catheter, (2) procedures to confirm
the viability of the IV site, (3) the option to postpone an
execution if viable IV sites cannot be established within an
hour, (4) a mandatory pause between administration of
the first and second drugs, (5) numerous procedures for
monitoring the offender’s consciousness, including the use
of an electrocardiograph and direct observation, and
(6) detailed provisions with respect to the training and
preparation of the execution team. In January of this
year, Oklahoma executed Warner using these revised
procedures and the combination of midazolam, a paralytic
agent, and potassium chloride.
II
A
——————
1The three other drug combinations that Oklahoma may admin-
ister are: (1) a single dose of pentobarbital, (2) a single dose of
sodium thiopental, and (3) a dose of midazolam followed by a dose of
hydromorphone.

26 GLOSSIP v. GROSS
Opinion of the Court
C
Petitioners’ remaining arguments about midazolam all
lack merit. First, we are not persuaded by petitioners’
argument that Dr. Evans’ testimony should have been
rejected because of some of the sources listed in his report.
Petitioners criticize two of the “selected references” that
Dr. Evans cited in his expert report: the Web site
drugs.com and a material safety data sheet (MSDS) about
midazolam. Petitioners’ argument is more of a Daubert
challenge to Dr. Evans’ testimony than an argument that
the District Court’s findings were clearly erroneous. The
District Court concluded that Dr. Evans was “well-
qualified to give the expert testimony that he gave” and
that “his testimony was the product of reliable principles
and methods reliably applied to the facts of this case.”
App. 75–76. To the extent that the reliability of Dr.
Evans’ testimony is even before us, the District Court’s con-
clusion that his testimony was based on reliable sources is
reviewed under the deferential “abuse-of-discretion”
standard. General Elec. Co. v. Joiner, 522 U. S. 136, 142–
143 (1997). Dr. Evans relied on multiple sources and his
own expertise, and his testimony may not be disqualified
simply because one source (drugs.com) warns that it “ ‘is
not intended for medical advice’” and another (the MSDS)
states that its information is provided “‘without any war-
ranty, express or implied, regarding its correctness.’”
Brief for Petitioners 36. Medical journals that both par-
ties rely upon typically contain similar disclaimers. See,
e.g., Anesthesiology, Terms and Conditions of Use, online
at http://anesthesiology.pubs.asahq.org/ss/terms.aspx
(“None of the information on this Site shall be used to
diagnose or treat any health problem or disease”). Dr.
Lubarsky—petitioners’ own expert—relied on an MSDS to
argue that midazolam has a ceiling effect. And petitioners
do not identify any incorrect statements from drugs.com
on which Dr. Evans relied. In fact, although Dr. Sasich

Cite as: 576 U. S. ____ (2015) 27
Opinion of the Court
submitted a declaration to the Court of Appeals criticizing
Dr. Evans’ reference to drugs.com, that declaration does
not identify a single fact from that site’s discussion of
midazolam that was materially inaccurate.
Second, petitioners argue that Dr. Evans’ expert report
contained a mathematical error, but we find this argu-
ment insignificant. Dr. Evans stated in his expert report
that the lowest dose of midazolam resulting in human
deaths, according to an MSDS, is 0.071 mg/kg delivered
intravenously. App. 294. Dr. Lubarsky agreed with this
statement. Specifically, he testified that fatalities have
occurred in doses ranging from 0.04 to 0.07 mg/kg, and he
stated that Dr. Evans’ testimony to that effect was “a true
statement” (though he added those fatalities occurred
among the elderly). Id., at 217. We do not understand
petitioners to dispute the testimony of Dr. Evans and their
own expert that 0.071 mg/kg is a potentially fatal dose of
midazolam. Instead, they make much of the fact that the
MSDS attached to Dr. Evans’ report apparently contained
a typographical error and reported the lowest toxic dose as
71 mg/kg. That Dr. Evans did not repeat that incorrect
figure but instead reported the correct dose supports
rather than undermines his testimony. In any event, the
alleged error in the MSDS is irrelevant because the Dis-
trict Court expressly stated that it did not rely on the
figure in the MSDS. See id., at 75.
Third, petitioners argue that there is no consensus
among the States regarding midazolam’s efficacy because
only four States (Oklahoma, Arizona, Florida, and Ohio)
have used midazolam as part of an execution. Petitioners
rely on the plurality’s statement in Baze that “it is difficult
to regard a practice as ‘objectively intolerable’ when it is in
fact widely tolerated,” and the plurality’s emphasis on the
fact that 36 States had adopted lethal injection and 30
States used the particular three-drug protocol at issue in
that case. 553 U. S., at 53. But while the near-universal

28 GLOSSIP v. GROSS
Opinion of the Court
use of the particular protocol at issue in Baze supported
our conclusion that this protocol did not violate the Eighth
Amendment, we did not say that the converse was true,
i.e., that other protocols or methods of execution are of
doubtful constitutionality. That argument, if accepted,
would hamper the adoption of new and potentially more
humane methods of execution and would prevent States
from adapting to changes in the availability of suitable
drugs.
Fourth, petitioners argue that difficulties with Oklaho-
ma’s execution of Lockett and Arizona’s July 2014 execu-
tion of Joseph Wood establish that midazolam is sure or
very likely to cause serious pain. We are not persuaded.
Aside from the Lockett execution, 12 other executions
have been conducted using the three-drug protocol at issue
here, and those appear to have been conducted without
any significant problems. See Brief for Respondents 32;
Brief for State of Florida as Amicus Curiae 1. Moreover,
Lockett was administered only 100 milligrams of midazo-
lam, and Oklahoma’s investigation into that execution
concluded that the difficulties were due primarily to the
execution team’s inability to obtain an IV access site. And
the Wood execution did not involve the protocol at issue
here. Wood did not receive a single dose of 500 milligrams
of midazolam; instead, he received fifteen 50-milligram
doses over the span of two hours.8 Brief for Respondents
——————
8The principal dissent emphasizes Dr. Lubarsky’s testimony that it is
irrelevant that Wood was administered the drug over a 2-hour period.
Post, at 20. But Dr. Evans disagreed and testified that if a 750-
milligram dose “was spread out over a long period of time,” such as one
hour (i.e., half the time at issue in the Wood execution), the drug might
not be as effective as if it were administered all at once. Tr. 667. The
principal dissent states that this “pronouncement was entirely unsup-
ported,” post, at 20, n. 6, but it was supported by Dr. Evans’ expertise
and decades of experience. And it would be unusual for an expert
testifying on the stand to punctuate each sentence with citation to a

Cite as: 576 U. S. ____ (2015) 29
Opinion of the Court
12, n. 9. And Arizona used a different two-drug protocol
that paired midazolam with hydromorphone, a drug that
is not at issue in this case. Ibid. When all of the circum-
stances are considered, the Lockett and Wood executions
have little probative value for present purposes.
Finally, we find it appropriate to respond to the princi-
pal dissent’s groundless suggestion that our decision is
tantamount to allowing prisoners to be “drawn and quar-
tered, slowly tortured to death, or actually burned at the
stake.” Post, at 28. That is simply not true, and the prin-
cipal dissent’s resort to this outlandish rhetoric reveals the
weakness of its legal arguments.
VI
For these reasons, the judgment of the Court of Appeals
for the Tenth Circuit is affirmed.
It is so ordered.
——————
medical journal.
After the Wood execution, Arizona commissioned an independent
assessment of its execution protocol and the Wood execution. According
to that report, the IV team leader, medical examiner, and an independ-
ent physician all agreed that the dosage of midazolam “would result in
heavy sedation.” Ariz. Dept. of Corrections, Assessment and Review of
the Ariz. Dept. of Corrections Execution Protocols 46, 48 (Dec. 15,
2014), online at https://corrections.az.gov/sites/default/files/documents/
PDFs/arizona_final_report_12_15_14_w_cover.pdf. And far from
blaming midazolam for the Wood execution, the report recommended
that Arizona replace its two-drug protocol with Oklahoma’s three-drug
protocol that includes a 500-milligram dose of midazolam as the first
drug. Id., at 49.