https://nyti.ms/2DcZoA0
Opinion | OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR
The Ghoulish Pursuit of Executing a
Terminally Ill Inmate
By BERNARD E. HARCOURT DEC. 20, 2017
When judges schedule a lethal injection for a terminally ill prisoner whose struggle
against lymphatic cancer and extensive medical history has left him without any
easily accessible veins, our law descends into a ghoulish inferno. It is a dreadful
place where our most august jurists ruminate over catheter gauges and needle
sizes, and ponder whether to slice deep into the groin or puncture internal jugular
veins. History will not judge us favorably.
Last week, only a few hours after the stunning electoral victory of a Democratic
candidate in the Alabama senatorial race, the justices of the Alabama Supreme
Court signed a death warrant in the case of a 60-year-old man who has been
languishing on death row for 30 years and fighting cranial cancer since 2014.
I had barely managed to absorb the news from Alabama’s election when I got
the call at noon the next day. I recognized the Alabama area code but thought it
was a reporter seeking a comment on the election. Instead, a clerk from the
Alabama Supreme Court dryly notified me that the justices had just set an
execution date for my longtime client, Doyle Lee Hamm.
Mr. Hamm has been on Alabama’s death row since 1987, after being convicted
of murdering a motel clerk, Patrick Cunningham, during a robbery. For over three
years now, he has been battling a fierce lymphatic and cranial cancer. In February
2014, Mr. Hamm was found to have a large malignant tumor behind his left eye,
filling the socket where the nerves from his brain went into his eye. The doctors
found B-cell lymphoma, a type of blood cancer of the lymph nodes, with a large

mass protruding through the holes of his skull. They also discovered “numerous
abnormal lymph nodes” in the abdomen, lungs and chest.
The doctors at Brookwood Cancer Center in Birmingham determined that the
cancer was fast-growing, so they recommended immediate radiation therapy and
the possibility of cytotoxic chemotherapy. Thus began a course of radiation
treatment and medication that continues to the present. The doctors in
Birmingham were able to get most but not all of the cancerous mass out of his skull
by means of severe radiation and other treatments, but since then, the cancer has
returned and progressed.
Today, Mr. Hamm has inflammation of the lymph nodes in his neck, chest and
abdomen, which is most likely associated with worsening lymphoma cancer, and a
cancerous lesion on the left side of his face that is eating through his cheek and
bone. He was scheduled for surgery to remove the cancerous lesion on Dec. 13, but
the prison warden canceled the surgery to instead read Mr. Hamm his death
warrant.
His medical treatment and history has left him without any usable peripheral
veins. Back in late September, an anesthesiologist from Columbia University
Medical Center, Dr. Mark Heath, conducted an extensive physical examination to
determine whether there were any veins suitable to deliver a lethal injection.
Dr. Heath found no usable veins. He also found that Mr. Doyle’s lymphatic
cancer was likely to interfere with any attempt to utilize his central veins. In Dr.
Heath’s expert opinion, “the state is not equipped to achieve venous access in Mr.
Hamm’s case.”
Yet, without even addressing the risks associated with attempting venous
access for a man who will be 61 years old with no usable veins in his arms or legs,
the justices of the Alabama Supreme Court set an execution date. Some other
judges — perhaps on the federal bench — now will have to deal with the bloody
mess. And a bloody mess it would be.
Those other judges will have to pore over medical reports and sonograms — as
a federal judge did in the case of David Nelson, another Alabama death row
inmate, in 2006, before he died of cancer — to decide whether they can insert an

18-gauge catheter into Mr. Hamm’s femoral vein in his groin, or scalpel him open
to find a subclavian vein, or poke around his neck to find his internal jugular vein;
whether the thickness of the catheter would preclude pricking a vein in his hand
where a butterfly needle can no longer enter; and how to navigate around
malignant lymph nodes while trying to achieve percutaneous access to his central
veins.
In Nelson’s case, the federal judge appointed an expert anesthesiologist to
determine whether venous access was even possible. The doctor conducted an
extensive physical exam with tourniquets and palpation, as well as an ultrasonic
examination using sonographic equipment. The doctor’s 15-page report, brimming
with color photographs and ultrasound imaging, read like “Frankenstein.”
“The largest and most commonly cannulated (see Glossary) peripheral vein in
the leg is the saphenous vein, which courses up the medial (inside) portion of the
ankle and leg,” the doctor’s report explained to the federal judge. “While I was not
able to see this vein on the left ankle, it was distinctly palpable and clearly visible
on ultrasound. See Photos C and D, and Ultrasound 2.”
In his famous dissent in Callins v. Collins in 1994, Justice Harry Blackmun
declared, “From this day forward, I no longer shall tinker with the machinery of
death.” He was referring to all the constitutional rules of capital jurisprudence —
the Eighth Amendment principles requiring consistency and individualization of
punishment, the intricate rules about aggravating and mitigating circumstances,
about judicial discretion and review, and so on.
Little did Justice Blackmun realize that his metaphor would turn so gruesome
and ghoulish — and so horrifyingly accurate.
More than 20 years later, our justices have injected themselves into the most
minute details of the machinery of death, as they did in 2015 after reviewing the
botched execution of Clayton D. Lockett in Oklahoma as they considered a
challenge to the state’s lethal injection protocol.
“The execution team spent nearly an hour making at least one dozen attempts
to establish intravenous (IV) access to Lockett’s cardiovascular system, including at
his arms and elsewhere on his body,” the majority recounted in Glossip v. Gross.

But after the executioners “administered the midazolam [and] the paralytic agent
(vecuronium bromide) and most of the potassium chloride,” they discovered that
“the IV had ‘infiltrated,’ which means that ‘the IV fluid, rather than entering
Lockett’s bloodstream, had leaked into the tissue surrounding the IV access point.’”
This is justice today. Court opinions filled with ghastly details about how we
prick and poke, and slice and cut, and poison other human beings. Opinions that,
someday soon, we will look back on with embarrassment and horror. Our justice is
so engrossed with how we kill that it does not even stop to question the humanity
of executing a frail, terminally ill prisoner.
In Doyle Hamm’s case, the lack of peripheral veins and lymphatic
inflammations create the unconstitutional risk of a cruel and unnecessarily painful
execution. But the constitutional violation is only half of it. It is justice itself that is
in peril.
You may recall the machine that Franz Kafka brilliantly described in the
haunting pages of “The Penal Colony.” That machine tattooed the penal sentence
on the condemned man’s body, over hours and hours, before sucking the life out of
him. Our machinery of death today makes Kafka’s imaginative machine seem
almost quaint. Ours not only tattoos the condemned man’s body with needles and
scalpels but also irremediably taints our justice for years to come.
Bernard E. Harcourt is a professor of law and political science at Columbia University
and the author of the forthcoming book “The Counterrevolution: How Our Government
Went to War Against Its Own Citizens.”
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion),
and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.
© 2018 The New York Times Company