This depiction of a suspect being tortured

comes from a series of engravings appended

to the official text of the Austrian Empire’s

Criminal Procedure Code of 1769, called

the Constitutio Criminalis Theresiana. The

engravings, which illustrate various means

for inflicting torture in the courts of Prague

and Vienna, were intended as guides for

local craftsmen and court functionaries in

constructing and operating such devices.

This plate shows a flaming torch being

applied to the chest of an accused who is

being racked.

AXNVE

A Collection

Fbura WV Eval hel
online Bef
Spevesioff bes abuene LAbo grads sar peintisS?

ter Fagunviten. wie jelber " Trgup rreretg:

- | dee Feuerne
iing won wonie assis,

EDITED BY

SANFORD
LEVINSON

OXFORD

UNIVERSITY PRESS

2004


CAPVT XXXVIII.

De repetitione queftionis, fiue tor-
ture.

I

ix <A
SKF}

|

i

~

Po
Lat)
> ATTN

cl
gm,

This woodcut from a leading sixteenth-century European criminal procedure
manual shows the accused being examined under torture in the presence of the
court, clerk, and court functionaries. ‘The illustration is from Joost Damhoulder’s
Praxis Rerum Criminalium (Antwerp edition, 1562) and appears here courtesy of
the D’Angelo Law Library at the University of Chicago Law School.

John H. Langbein

The Legal History of Torture

Efforts to accommodate the use of torture within the Western legal tradi-
tion have a long history. For half a millennium the law courts of continen-
tal Europe tortured suspected persons to obtain evidence. They acted openly
and according to law. Investigation under torture was a routine part of
criminal procedure in late medieval and early modern times. The jurists
and judges who elaborated and administered this system were aware of the
dangers of coerced evidence, and accordingly, they framed rules of safe-
guard meant to make tortured confessions reliable. Across the centuries it
became clear that the safeguards were far from safe. In the end, the Euro-
pean states conceded that the long experiment with torture was a failure,
and across the eighteenth century they banned the use of torture from their
legal systems.

At the dawn of the twenty-first century we are hearing fresh suggestions
that the authorities should be allowed to resort to torture, now for the pur-
pose of dealing with suspected terrorists. The future may bring circum-
stances in which the need for information is so great that governments will
again experiment with torture. The deep lesson of the past, however, is that
the error rate will be high—probably too high.

This essay explains how European criminal procedure became dependent
on the use of torture, and why that torture-centered law of proof failed.
The experience on the Continent is contrasted with that in England, where,
despite some temptations in early modern times, the use of torture did not
become a part of ordinary criminal procedure.



The European Law of Torture

The law of torture developed as an adjunct to the law of proof, that is, to
the rules that governed the quality and quantity of evidence needed to con-
vict someone accused of a serious crime. Because it was the judges who
administered the rules about whom, how, and when to torture, the system
has come to be known as “judicial torture.”* The European law of proof
emerged in the city-states of northern Italy in the thirteenth century. It
spread across the Continent together with the rest of Roman-canon crimi-
nal and civil procedure as part of the broader movement known as the re-
ception of Roman law.? Investigation under torture was reserved for cases
of serious crime, for which the sanction was death or maiming.

The European law of proof displaced an earlier system of proof, the or-
deals, conducted under the auspices of the church. The ordeals purported
to achieve absolute certainty in criminal adjudication through the happy
expedient of having the judgments rendered by God, who could not err.?
The church effectively destroyed the ordeals by a decision of the Fourth
Lateran Council in 1215.5 The new criminal procedure aspired to an equiva-
lent level of safeguard—absolute certainty—for adjudication by mortals.
Although mere humans, judges, were to replace God in the judgment seat,
they would be constrained by a law of proof so objectively sound that the
awesome substitution of mortal for divine adjudication would be unobjec-
tionable. The new law of proof would eliminate human discretion, hence the
possibility of human error, from the determination of guilt or innocence.

The Two-Eyewitness Rule

The Italian glossators who developed the European law of proof based it on
the rule that conviction would require the testimony of two unimpeach-
able eyewitnesses to the gravamen of the crime. Such evidence would be, in
the famous phrase, “clear as the noonday sun.” Without such evidence, a
criminal court could not convict an accused who contested the charges
against him. Only if the accused voluntarily confessed the offense could the
court convict him without eyewitness testimony. A corollary of the rule
that conviction required two eyewitnesses or voluntary confession was that
conviction could not be based on circumstantial evidence. Circumstantial
evidence depends for its efficacy on the subjective persuasion of the court,
which must decide whether to draw the inference of guilt from the evi-

TORTURE AS PRACTICED

dence of circumstance. Thus, for example, it would not have mattered in
this system that a murder suspect had been seen departing the scene of the
crime, and that the bloody dagger and the stolen loot were found in his
possession. Since no eyewitness saw him actually slay the victim, the court
could not convict him of the crime.

By insisting on certainty as the standard of proof, the European jurists
solved one problem by creating another. They made the judgment of mor-
tals acceptable in place of the judgment of God, but they bound themselves
to a law of proof that as a practical matter could be effective only in cases
involving overt crime or repentant criminals. Something had to be done
to extend the system to unrepentant persons who committed clandestine
crimes. The two-eyewitness rule was hard to compromise or evade, but the
confession rule seemed to invite “the cruel and stupid subterfuge.”® To go
from accepting a voluntary confession to coercing a confession from some-
one against whom there was already strong suspicion was a step increas-
ingly taken in the thirteenth century. The law of torture grew up to regu-
late this process of generating confessions.

Safeguards for Torture

The spirit of safeguard that inspired the unworkable formal law of proof
also permeated the subterfuge. The largest chapter of the European law of
torture concerned the prerequisites for examination under torture. Euro-
pean jurists devised what modern American lawyers would call a standard
of probable cause, designed to ensure that only persons highly likely to be
guilty would be examined under torture. Torture was permitted only when
a so-called half proof had been established against the suspect. That meant
either one eyewitness, or circumstantial evidence that satisfied elaborate
requirements of gravity. In the example in which a suspect was caught with
the dagger and the loot, each of those indicia would have been reckoned as
a quarter proof, which, cumulated to a half proof, would have been suffi-
cient to permit the authorities to examine the suspect under torture.

In this way the law of torture overcame the prohibition against using cir-
cumstantial evidence. Circumstantial evidence was not consulted directly
on the ultimate question of guilt or innocence but on a question of pre-
liminary procedure: whether or not to examine the accused under torture.
Even there the law attempted to limit judicial discretion by promulgating
ostensibly objective criteria for evaluating the indicia and assigning nu-

THE LEGAL HISTORY OF TORTURE


merical values to them (eighth proofs, quarter proofs, half proofs). Vast legal
treatises were compiled to guide investigating magistrates in computing
whether there was sufficient cause to examine the suspect under torture.

In addition to the probable cause rules, further safeguards were devised
to govern the application of torture. These rules were meant to enhance the
reliability of a tortured confession. Torture was not supposed to be used to
wring out an abject, unsubstantiated confession of guilt. Rather, the exam-
ining magistrate was supposed to use torture to elicit from the accused the
factual detail of the crime—information that, in the words of a celebrated
German statute of 1532, “no innocent person can know.”’ The examiner was
forbidden to engage in so-called suggestive questioning, that is, supplying
the accused with the detail that the examiner wanted to hear from him.
Moreover, the information that the suspect admitted under torture was
supposed to be verified to the extent feasible. Thus, for example, if the ac-
cused confessed to the crime, he was supposed to be asked what he had
done with the loot and the weapon or whatever, in order that these objects,
when fetched, could corroborate the confession.

Defects of Safeguard

Alas, because torture tests endurance rather than veracity, innocent per-
sons might (as one sixteenth-century handbook on criminal procedure
warned) yield to “the pain and torment and confess things that they never
did” For a variety of reasons, the safeguards never proved adequate. If the
examining magistrate engaged in suggestive questioning, even accidentally,
his lapse could not always be detected or prevented. If the accused knew
something about the crime but was still innocent, what he did know might
be enough to give his confession verisimilitude. In some jurisdictions the
requirement of verification was not enforced or was enforced indifferently.

In order to achieve a verbal or technical reconciliation with the require-
ment of the formal law of proof that the confession be voluntary, the law
treated a confession extracted under torture as involuntary, hence ineffec-
tive, unless the accused repeated it free from torture at a hearing held a day
or so later. Sometimes the accused who had confessed under torture did re-
cant when asked to confirm his confession. But seldom to avail: The exam-
ination under torture could thereupon be repeated. When an accused con-
fessed under torture, recanted, and was then tortured anew, he learned
quickly enough that only a “voluntary” confession at the ratification hear-

TORTURE AS PRACTICED

ing would save him from further agony in the torture chamber. Thus, Jo-
hannes Julius, the seventeenth-century burgomaster of Bamburg, Ger-
many, writing from his dungeon cell where he was awaiting execution, told
his daughter why he had confessed to witchcraft “for which I must die. It is
all falsehood and invention, so help me God. ... They never cease to tor-
ture until one says something.”® Against the coercive force of the engines of
torture, no safeguards were ever found that could protect the innocent and
guarantee the truth, The agony of torture created an incentive to speak, but
not necessarily to speak the truth.

These shortcomings in the law of torture were identified even in the
Middle Ages and were the subject of emphatic complaint in Renaissance
and early modern times. Cases arose recurrently in which the real culprit
was detected after an innocent accused had confessed under torture and
been convicted and executed. In the eighteenth century, as the law of tor-
ture was finally about to be abolished, along with the system of proof that
had required it, Beccaria'® and Voltaire!! became famous as critics of judi-
cial torture by pointing to such cases, but they were latecomers to a critical
legal literature nearly as old as the law of torture itself. Judicial torture sur-
vived the centuries not because its defects had been concealed but in spite
of their having been long revealed. The two-eyewitness rule, the corner-
stone of the European law of proof, had left the criminal procedure inex-
tricably dependent on the tortured confession.

Abolition

The European states abolished the system of judicial torture within about
two generations. Frederick the Great all but abolished torture within a month
of his accession to the Prussian throne in 1740; torture was used for the last
time in Prussia in 1752 and was definitely abolished in 1754. In 1770, Saxony
and Denmark abolished torture; in 1776, Poland and Austria-Bohemia; in
1780, France; in 1786, Tuscany; in 1787, the Austrian Netherlands (Belgium);
and in 1789, Sicily. Early in the nineteenth century, abolition reached the
last corners of the Continent.'?

The conventional historical account of this abolition movement placed
great weight on the influence of the publicists of the Enlightenment. By
denouncing the dangers of torture, Beccaria and Voltaire and the other
writers were thought to have inspired the absolutist monarchs (in particu-
lar, Frederick the Great in Prussia, Maria Theresa and Joseph II in Aus-

THE LEGAL HISTORY OF TORTURE


tria and other Habsburg possessions, and Louis XVI in France) to issue
their respective abolition decrees. Thereafter, it was said, the European
states revised their laws of criminal procedure in the nineteenth century to
permit the criminal courts to condemn accused criminals on the basis of
what is now the modern standard of proof, known as free (in the sense of
unrestricted) judicial evaluation of the evidence (conviction intime, freie
Beweiswiirdigung).

This account of the abolition movement is improbable for two reasons.
First, it treats the moral outrage awakened by the Enlightenment writers as
decisive, even though they were not advancing any arguments against tor-
ture that had not been known for centuries. Second, the conventional ac-
count presupposes that the abolition of torture in the eighteenth century
preceded the abolition of the European law of proof, which occurred in the
nineteenth century—an unlikely sequence when we recall that the old law
of proof made criminal procedure unworkable without torture.

Modern scholarship"? has put forth a different account of the history of
the abolition of judicial torture. It has come to be understood that the Eu-
ropean law of proof underwent changes in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, which were linked to a great change in penology, namely, the de-
velopment of the sanction of penal servitude (the forerunner of imprison-
ment) as an alternative to the blood sanctions of medieval law.'4 The me-
dieval law of proof formed at a time when serious crime was punished by
death or maiming. These blood sanctions and the law of proof had been
defined in terms of each other. When, however, the systems of incarceral
punishment developed in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the
courts were able to treat that relationship as a restriction. The old law of
proof, requiring two eyewitnesses or voluntary confession, was said to per-
tain only to the old blood sanctions. The courts deemed themselves able to
impose the new and less severe punishments according to a less strict stan-
dard of proof, one of persuasion (conviction intime) rather than certainty.
This development, by making it possible to convict an accused without
confession or the testimony of two eyewitnesses, is what finally allowed Eu-
ropean criminal procedure to escape its dependence on torture.

The courts did not have to invent the lesser standard of proof but only
to extend it from the sphere of petty crime. When the new modes of pun-
ishment appeared, there were already two distinct systems of proof in si-
multaneous operation. For serious crimes punishable with the blood sanc-
tions, the two-eyewitness rule and its subsidiary system of judicial torture

TORTURE AS PRACTICED

governed. For petty crimes, however, where the sanctions were fines, minor
corporal punishments, or short-term imprisonment, the standard of proof
had not been certainty, but merely subjective persuasion of the court. Tor-
ture had been unnecessary, indeed forbidden, in such cases.

In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the courts analogized the ap-
plication of the new sanction of penal servitude, even in cases of serious
crime, to the ancient procedure for petty crime, which had also employed
noncapital sanctions. In a case in which a noncapital punishment was being
imposed, for whatever offense, courts began to treat the old law of proof as
inapplicable, because it never had applied to noncapital cases. Thereafter,
the old law of proof survived, but it had lost its grip. The standards of the
old law continued to be obeyed in easy cases, where the prosecution en-
tailed a voluntary confession or two eyewitnesses. But in the cases in which
there was neither, compliance with the old law of proof was no longer es-
sential. In precisely those cases in which it had previously been necessary to
use torture, it now became possible to punish the culprit without meeting
the standard of proof that had required torture. With the two-eyewitness
rule effectively bypassed in this way, the European courts could base con-
victions wholly or partially on circumstantial evidence.'> Torture there-
upon fell into such steep disuse that the eighteenth-century abolition move-
ment was largely symbolic.

England’s Escape

The system of judicial torture was never known in England. English courts
did not investigate under torture. The English were not possessed of “any
unusual degree of humanity or enlightenment.”!* Rather, they were the
beneficiaries of a criminal procedure so crude that torture was unneces-
sary. Whereas the Europeans had turned to the Roman-canon law of proof
in order to legitimate a system of adjudication by professional judges, in
England the replacement for the ordeals was the trial jury. The medieval
English jury was assembled from men living near the scene of the crime,
a body of neighbors who gave their verdict based on what they already
knew or had heard rather than what they learned at trial.!” “Our criminal
procedure,” wrote the historian Frederic William Maitland, “had hardly
any place for a law of evidence.” The English accepted “the rough verdict of

THE LEGAL HISTORY OF TORTURE


the coyntryside, without caring to investigate the logical processes, if logi-
cal they were, of which that verdict was the outcome.” !®

On the Continent, as Maitland observed, torture “came to the relief of
a law of evidence which made conviction well-nigh impossible.” In En-
gland, by contrast, “neither the stringent rules of legal proof nor the
cruel and stupid subterfuge [of torture] became endemic.”!® Even after the
rise of the common law of evidence in the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
turies, an Anglo-American jury was and remains able to convict an accused
on circumstantial evidence alone, less evidence than the European law
of proof stipulated as a mere precondition for further investigation under
torture.

In Renaissance times the English produced a celebratory literature de-
nouncing the use of torture in Continental legal systems and extolling its
absence in England.” In truth, however, the English did experiment with
using torture to investigate crime, primarily treason, in the Tudor-Stuart
period. In at least eighty-one cases during the century 1540 from 1640, the
Privy Council issued warrants authorizing investigation under torture. (The
archives are imperfect, and there may have been some further cases that are
no longer traceable.) Most of the known cases of occurred under Elizabeth
I (1558-1603), when the English Reformation and the growth of Spanish
power induced a sense of extreme national peril about domestic plots and
foreign intrigue. The use of torture subsided early in the seventeenth cen-
tury and appears to have lapsed after 1640.7!

Torture was used in England only when authorized by the Privy Coun-
cil (or, exceptionally, by the monarch). Because the English never lodged
the power to investigate under torture with ordinary law enforcement
officers” or courts, this century of experiment with torture left hardly a
trace in Anglo-American criminal procedure. Blackstone, who knew of some
of the cases, dismissed the use of torture as having been extralegal. He said
of the rack, the principal device used to torture suspects in England, that it
was “an engine of state, not of law: Sir Edward Coke, who served as an
examiner under several Elizabethan torture warrants, wrote in his Third
Institute (composed around 1630) that “there is no law to warrant tortures
in this land, nor can they be justified by any prescription, being so lately
brought in.””* The legal basis, such as it was, for the use of torture in the
eighty-one known cases appears to have been the notion of sovereign im-
munity,?> a defensive doctrine that spared the authorities from having to
supply affirmative justification for what they were doing. :

TORTURE AS PRACTICED

History’s Lessons

The European law of torture was suffused with the spirit of safeguard, yet
it was never able to correct for the fundamental unreliability of coerced evi-
dence. The attempted safeguards regulated both who could be tortured and
how. The rules of probable cause meant to restrict investigation under tor-
ture to persons highly likely to be guilty. It is, however, in the nature of a
difficult criminal investigation that a person may be near to the events yet
nonetheless be innocent of the crime. Thus, despite the rules of probable
cause, many an innocent suspect went to the torture chamber. Once there,
he commonly found that the rules that were meant to protect him did not.
The prohibition on suggestive questioning was hard to enforce, and the
verification requirement was intrinsically equivocal.

I see little reason to think that modern circumstances would make in-
vestigation under torture more reliable. Modern technology would proba-
bly allow us to do a better job of winnowing suspects and of monitoring
and hence deterring suggestive questioning. There is, however, no escape
from the reality that not every suspect is guilty, and that, for many reasons,
information extracted under torture comes with no guarantee of reliabil-
ity. Terrorists willing to die for their cause would also be willing to plant
false tales under torture.

Another insight from history is the danger that, once legitimated, tor-
ture could develop a constituency with a vested interest in perpetuating it.
We have seen in recent years how the enterprise of enforcing the drug laws
in the United States has made law enforcement agencies as dependent on
the resulting forfeitures as the junkies are on the dope.” In a similar vein,
Sir James Fitzjames Stephen recorded an observation made to him in India
in 1872 about the proclivity of the native police for torturing suspects. “It is
far pleasanter to sit comfortably in the shade rubbing red pepper into some
poor devil’s eyes than to go about in the sun hunting up evidence.”””

History’s most important lesson is that it has not been possible to make
coercion compatible with truth.

Notes
1. This section follows John H. Langbein, Torture and the Law of Proof: Europe and

England in the Ancien Régime (1977), 3-17, which contains citations to the historical
sources and scholarly literature.

THE LEGAL HISTORY OF TORTURE


2. For example, in the leading study of the juristic literature, Piero Fiorelli, La tor-
tura giudiziaria nel diritto comune, 2 vols. (1953-54).

3. For an English-language account of the reception in the German states, see John
P. Dawson, A History of Lay Judges (1960), 102-112, and The Oracles of the Law (1968),
176-242.

4. For a succinct account, see T.ET. Plucknett, A Concise History of the Com-
mon Law, sth ed. (1956), 113-115; see also Paul R. Hyams, “Trial by Ordeal: The Key
to Proof in the Early Common Law,’ in On the Laws and Customs of England: Essays
in Honor of Samuel E. Thorne (1981), 90. Regarding the worldview of the ordeal,
see Peter Brown, “Society and the Supernatural: A Medieval Change,” Daedalus
104 (1975): 133, reprinted in Peter Brown, Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity
(1982), 302.

5. See Disciplinary Decrees of the General Councils, ed. H. J. Schroeder (1937)
(reprinting and translating canon 18 of the Fourth Lateran Council), 258. Regarding
the background to abolition, see Robert Bartlett, Trial by Fire and Water: The Me-
dieval Judicial Ordeal (1986), 70-90; R. C. van Caenegem, “The Law of Evidence in
the Twelfth Century,” in Proceedings of the Second International Congress of Medieval
Canon Law, ed. S. Kuttner and Joseph Ryan (1965); J. W. Baldwin, “The Intellectual
Preparation for the Canon of 1215 against Ordeals,” Speculum 36 (1961): 613.

6. Maitland’s term. Frederick Pollock and Frederic W. Maitland, The History of En-
glish Law before the Time of Edward I, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: 1898) (hereafter Maitland,
HEL), 660.

7. Constitutio Criminalis Carolina, sec. 54 (1532), translated in John H. Langbein,
Prosecuting Crime in the Renaissance: England, Germany, France (1974), 282.

8. Joost Damhouder, Practique iudiciaire es causes criminelles [Praxis Rerum Crimi-
nalium] (Antwerp, 1564), 44.

9. Quoted in Hugh R. Trevor-Roper, The European Witch-Craze of the Sixteenth and
Seventeenth Centuries (1969), 84.

10. Cesare Beccaria, Of Crimes and Punishments, trans J. Grigson (1964), chap. 12,
pp. 31-37 (ist ed. 1764).

u. Oeuvres completes de Voltaire (Paris: 1835), 411, 441-442. See generally Peter Gay,
Voltaire’s Politics (1959), 273-308; Marcello Maestro, Voltaire and Beccaria as Reform-
ers of Criminal Law (1942).

12. For the details on the legislation, see Langbein, Torture, 61-64, 177-179.

13. Bernard Schnapper, “Les Peines arbitraires du XIIle au XVIIle siécle: Doctrines
savantes et usages francais,” Tijdschrift voor Rechtsgeschiedenis 41 (1973): 237; 42 (1974):
81; Langbein, Torture, 45-69.

14. See John H. Langbein, “The Historical Origins of the Sanction of Imprisonment
for Serious Crime,” Journal of Legal Studies 5 (1976: 5); Thorsten Sellin, Pioneering in
Penology: The Amsterdam Houses of Correction in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Cen-

turies (1944).

TORTURE AS PRACTICED

15. Regarding the development in the German states, see Langbein, Torture, 47-50,
and sources cited there; for France, see 50-60.

16. Maitland, HEL, 660.

17. See Daniel Klerman, “Was the Jury Ever Self-Informing?” in The Trial in History:
Judicial Tribunals in England and Europe, 1200-1700, ed. Maureen Mulholland and
Brian Pullan (2003), 58.

18. Maitland, HEL, 660-661.

19. Ibid., 659-660.

20. E.g., John Fortescue, De Laudibus Legem Anglie, ed. S. B. Chrimes (1942) (writ-
ten c. 1470), 46-47. Thomas Smith, De Republica Anglorum, ed. Mary Dewar (1982)
(written c. 1585), 17-18.

21. I have catalogued and analyzed eighty-one torture warrants in Langbein, Tor-
ture, 81-128; see also James Heath, Torture and English Law: An Administrative History
from the Plantagenets to the Stuarts (1982), identifying these eighty-one cases. The first
scholarly account was David Jardine, A Reading on the Use of Torture in the Criminal
Law of England Previously to the Commonwealth (London, 1837).

22. English criminal procedure functioned without a professional police and pros-
ecutorial corps until the nineteenth century. Local justices of the peace (JPs) conducted
investigatorial and charging functions, supported by local constables. Both the JPs
and the constables were unpaid amateurs engaged in civic service. I have emphasized
in Langbein, Torture, 137-138, that “it would have been unthinkable to allow them to
operate torture chambers of their own. ... They were prone to faction and notori-
ously difficult for the central authorities to control.”

23. William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Law of England, 4 vols. (Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 1765-69), 4: 321.

24. Edward Coke, The Third Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England: Concerning
High Treason, and Other Pleas of the Crown, and Criminal Causes (London, 1644)
(posthumous publication, written c. 1620s—16308), 35.

25. I have explained why the historical evidence points in this direction; see Lang-
bein, Torture, 129-31.

26. Our plea bargaining system supplies another example of the way vested interests
coalesce around coercive criminal procedures. On the coercive nature of plea bar-
gaining, see John H. Langbein, “Torture and Plea Bargaining,” University of Chicago
Law Review 46 (1978): 1. The theme of the vested interests of judges, defense counsel,
and especially prosecutors in plea bargaining was developed in Alschuler’s trilogy of
articles: Albert W. Alschuler, “The Trial Judge’s Role in Plea Bargaining,” Columbia
Law Review 76 (1976): 1059; “The Defense Attorney’s Role in Plea Bargaining,” Yale
Law Journal (1975) 84: 1179. “The Prosecutor’s Role in Plea Bargaining,” University of
Chicago Law Review 36 (1968): 50.

27. James Fitzjames Stephen, A History of the Criminal Law of England, 3 vols. (Lon-
don, 1883), 1: 442 n.1.

THE LEGAL HISTORY OF TORTURE
