Dear class,
Please note that all the readings for next week are in Course Packet #2, now available at the
bookstore. Because it seems the strikeouts (like this) did not show up in this round of printing, I
will try to be more precise in detailing what (not) to read.
On Monday, we will begin our next major section of the course: What does it mean, in tort law,
to “cause harm”? We will begin with the concept of “causation-in-fact” (or “factual causation”),
which is a set of analytical tools for figuring out which parties can be said to have caused
harm. This section will seem pretty logical to you, even as it raises some intriguing
puzzles. These puzzles include tricky practical problems at the frontiers of tort law, involving
cases where multiple actions could be seen as factual causes of the same harm.
Also, for this coming week, please note that Goldfinches are up first, then Bluebirds.
Enjoy,
BH
* * *
Monday 2/9
Panel: Goldfinch
“But-for” causation will be our main analytical tool for determining causation-in-fact, a
requirement for tort liability. In the Matsuyama medical malpractice case, you may notice how
our topics are starting to fit together, as this case shows how a few familiar ideas from
negligence relate directly to causation-in-fact.
For practice, we will then apply this but-for logic to negligence liability based on failures to
warn: Think about whether (and which kinds of) warnings would have made any difference in
the stories of little Leo with the wire in Adams, the swimmer in Parks & Rec, the hospital
in Cuyler, or the flying saw blade in Ryobi.
Finally, we will explore the puzzle of “multiple sufficient causes” by thinking through the
variations addressed in the Restatement Third and by working with hypotheticals in class. One
interesting question we will discuss is: What if one of the multiple sufficient causes is a non-
tortious cause (e.g., not due to negligence)?

“But-For” Causation
Cause-in-Fact, “But For” Test, pp. 125-128 KA (stop before section A)
Matsuyama v. Birnbaum, pp *3-11, *15-20 (star pages are also shown in left margin)
Multiple Sufficient Causes
Theories Underlying the Causation Requirement, pp. 131-134 KA
Multiple Sufficient Causes, pp. 134-137 KA (stop before section C)
Restatement Third §§26-27 vs. Restatement Second
Restatement Third § 27, comment d
Restatement Third § 36
* * *
Wednesday 2/11
Panel: Bluebird
We will explore further puzzles which relate to the problem of proving causation-in-fact. What
happens when you know that one member of a group caused the harm, but you don’t know
which one exactly? (Ask yourself: How is this new puzzle different from the one about multiple
sufficient causes?) We will consider two answers that the courts have created, one old and one
relatively new, for addressing variations on this problem. (Ask yourself: How are
the Summers and the Hymowitz cases similar? How are they different?) Again, we will consider
the question: What if one of the possible causes is non-tortious?
Finally, we will revisit the idea of comparative negligence, and discuss whether making the
parties pay based on relative causation rather than relative negligence might be more useful (or
not) in serving the competing aims of tort law.
“Alternative Liability”
Indeterminate Causes, Alternative Liability, pp. 139-140 KA

Summers v. Tice, pp. *82, *84-86 (start at [4] and stop after [6])
Market Share Liability
Market Share Liability, pp. 143-146 KA (stop before section 5)
Hymowitz v. Lilly, pp. *491-513 (stop before III)
Comparative Negligence or Comparative Causation?
The Basis for Comparison, Assessment, pp. 182-184 KA