Dear class,
For next week, here are our readings.
Please recall that Monday’s readings are the ones intended for today. We will be turning to
questions about how courts should implement the concept of negligence. This includes the
questions of “rules or standards?” and “who decides?” as well as how external sources be useful.
Throughout the course, we will often consider such questions of legal design—“how should tort
law work?”
On Wednesday, we will discuss Carroll Towing, the classic case with the “Learned Hand
Formula.” You can think of this case as a famous example of judicial attempts to structure how
facts should be analyzed under the negligence standard.
On Friday, we will turn to a category of situations where tort law has been reluctant to recognize
the usual duty-not-to-be-negligent—so reluctant that a special phrase, “affirmative duty,” is then
used to describe the exceptional scenarios (within this category) where negligence liability is
possible.
Also, please remember that my weekly office hours will start this coming Tuesday, from 8:30-
9:30 am in JG 908.
Best wishes,
BH
* * *
Monday, 2/2
Panel: Bluebird
We will begin by considering these fundamental design questions: Should the test for negligence
work as a set of rigid rules, or as a flexible standard? And should judges or juries decide the
issue? We will use the Goodman and Pokora cases—a classic pairing—to explore how these
questions intersect. And we will glance back at Parks & Recreation to see a recent illustration of
a “rules versus standards” argument.
Then our second set of readings will show how common-law courts, over time, have tried to find
ways to add more structure to the mushy negligence standard—here, by looking to external
sources, such as industry custom, professional standards, or statutes. We will look at the
Sabatino case as a recent illustration of how “statutory negligence” (or “negligence per se”)
might work in practice.

Rules or Standards? Judges or Juries?
Roles of Judge and Jury, pp. 103-108 KA
Baltimore & Ohio RR v. Goodman
Pokora v. Wabash Railway
Core v. N.C. Parks & Recreation, pp. 19-23 only (contrasting the Davies case)
Optional: current Virginia jury instructions on railroad crossings
External Sources? Custom, Malpractice, and Statutes
Custom, pp. 85-89 KA
The T.J. Hooper opinions (read both, for contrast)
Malpractice, pp. 89-93, KA (sections A and B only)
Illinois jury instructions: on malpractice (contrast 105.01 with 105.03.01)
Violation of statutes (“negligence per se”), pp. 99-103 KA
White v. Sabatino, pp. 6-11 (for the facts), pp. 42-48 (on negligence per se)
* * *
Wednesday, 2/4
Panel: Goldfinch
I would strongly recommend reading the Gilles article excerpt before reading the Carroll Towing
case itself. The excerpt is long but worth reading closely, as it tells you the backstory to the
case; the factual details on pp. 12-18 and the critical analysis on pp. 25-31 will be especially
useful for our discussion in class. Please pay detailed attention to the facts about the accident
itself, which are more complicated than in our prior cases.
In class, after working through those facts, we will discuss the following: How is the Learned
Hand Formula supposed to work, if we take it seriously? Where does foreseeability fit in? Does

it serve one or more of the (competing) aims of tort law? Along the way, we will practice
making arguments based on the formula, and using the facts of Carroll Towing or other cases we
have seen so far. Then we will discuss several major critiques of using the formula as a test for
negligence.
A Formula for Negligence?
The Negligence Calculus, pp. 78-85 KA
Gilles article on Carroll Towing, pp. 11-31
U.S. v. Carroll Towing
What has become of the Learned Hand formula?
* * *
Friday 2/6
Panel: Bluebird
We then turn to some contexts where the default in tort law is not to assign any liability unless
courts have recognized special “affirmative duties.”
In the Moch case, notice how Judge Cardozo talks about the distinction between failing to help
versus causing harm. Based on his rhetoric, does the outcome of the case make sense? In the
Cuyler case, think about Judge Posner’s flowerpot illustration, and ask whether it fits your own
intuitions.
Then we will look at where affirmative duties have been recognized, focusing on the concepts of
a “special relationship” and of “undertaking” to protect someone. In the Cuyler case, as you sort
out the relationships among the various parties involved, ask yourself, what’s the critical
difference between this case and the classic Tarasoff case (as described in KA)?
Next, as an illustration of a court struggling with what counts as a relevant “undertaking,” we
will look at a specific legal question raised in Sabatino (the drunk-driving case): Can there be
liability for someone who offers to be a designated driver?
Finally, we will look at a products liability case where there is a recognized duty to warn, Hood
v. Ryobi, and discuss how good a warning has to be.

Please note: Some of the injuries and deaths in these materials are more disturbing than we have
encountered so far.
“Affirmative Duties”
Affirmative Duty, Rescue, pp. 261-265 KA
Undertakings and Policy-Based Limits, 266-268 KA
Moch v. Rensselaer Water Co.
Duty to Rescue: Special Relationships
Special Relationships, pp. 265-266 KA
Cuyler v. U.S.
NPR story about implications of the Tarasoff case:
https://www.npr.org/2012/08/13/158703291/the-line-between-confidentiality-and-public-
safety (listen to first 10 minutes)
White v. Sabatino (again), pp. 21-30 (through the Prosser quote only)
Duty to Warn: How Much Warning?
Warning Defects, pp. 230-233 KA (start at section C, stop before section 2)
Hood v. Ryobi