Michel Foucault
D I S C I P L I N E A N D P U N I S H
The Birth of the Prison
Translatedf rom the French
b, Alan Sheridan
VINTAGE BOOKS
A DIVISION OF RANDOM I{OUSE. INC. NEW YORK

10 N Andry,L' otthopddrco u I'art de prdvenr et de conger dans
lese nfants Iesd rfformft6s du corps (Onhopaedtcs or the art
of preventrnga nd correctrngd eformrtreso f the body rn
chrldren).1749.

r. The bodv of the condemned
'to
On z March 1757D amienst he regicidew as condemned make
the amn& hotnrableb eforet he main door of the Church of Paris',
'aken
whereh e nas to be and conveyedi n a cart, wearing nothing
but a shirt, holding a torch of burning wax weighingt wo pounds';
'in
then, the said cart, to the Placed e Grdve, where, on a scaffold
that will be erectedt here, the flesh will be torn from his breasts,
arms,t highs and calvesw ith red-hot pincers,h is right hand,h olding
the knife with which he committed the said parricide, burnt with
sulphur, and, on those placesw here the fesh will be torn away,
poured molten lead, boiling oil, burning resin, wax and sulphur
melted together and then his body drawn and quarteredb y four
horsesa nd his limbs and body consumedb y fire, reducedt o ashes
and his ashesth rown to the winds' (Pilceso riginales.. ., 1;72-4).
'Finalln
he was quarteredr'r lecountst he GaTetted 'Amsterdamo f
'This
r April r7;7. last operationw asv ery long, becauseth e horses
used were not accustomedt o drawing; consequently,i nstead of
four, six were needed;a nd when that did not suffice, they were
forced, in order to cut off the wretch's thighs, to sever the sinews
andh acka t the ioins. ..
'It
is said that, though he was always a great swearer,n o blas-
phemy escapedh is lips; but the excessivep ain made him utter
honible cries,a nd he often repeated":M y God, havep ity on me!
Jesus,h elp me!" The spectatorsw ere all edifiedb y the solicitude
of the parishp riest of St Paul'sw ho despiteh is greata ged id not
spareh imselfi n offeringc onsolationto the patient.'
'The
Bouton,a n oficer of the watch,l eft us his accoune sulphur
wasl it, but the flamewass o poor that only the top skin of the hand
wasb urnt, and that only slighdy.T hen the executionerh, is sleeves
rolled up, took the steelp incers,w hich had beene speciallym ade

Torture
for the occasion,a nd which were about a foot and a half long, and
pulled first at the calf of the right leg, then at the thigh, and from
there at the two feshy parts of the right arm; then at the breasts.
Though a strong, sturdy fellow, this executionerf ound it so difficult
to tear av/ay the pieceso f flesh that he set about the sames pot two or
three times, twisting the pincers as he did so, and what he took away
formed at each part a wound about the size of a six-pound crown
piece.
'After
these tearings with the pincers, Damiens, who cried out
profusely, though without swearing, raised his head and looked at
himself; the samee xecutioner dipped an iron spoon in the pot con-
taining the boiling potion, which he poured liberally over each
wound. Then the ropes that were to be harnessedt o the horses were
attached with cords to the patient's body; the horses were then
harnesseda nd placed alongside the arms and legs, one at each
limb.
'Monsieur
Le Breton, the clerk of the court, went up to the
patient several times and asked him if he had anything to say. He
said he had not; at each torrnent, he cried out, as the damned in hell
are supposed to cry out, "Pardon, my God! Pardon, Lord."
Despite all this pain, he raisedh is head from time to time and looked
at himself boldly. The cords had been tied so tightly by the men
who pulled the ends that they caused him indescribable pain.
Monsieur le Breton went up to him again and asked him if he had
anything to say; he said no. Severalc onfessorsw ent up to him and
spoke to him at length; he willingly kissed the crucifix that was held
out to him; he opened his lips and repeated:" Pardon, Lord."
'The
horses tugged hard, each pulling straight on a limb, each
horse held by an executioner.A fter a quarter of an hour, the same
ceremony was repeated and finally, after several attempts, the
direction of the horses had to be changed, thus: those at the arms
were made to pull towards the head, those at the thighs towards the
arms, which broke the arms at the ioints. This was repeateds everal
times without success.H e raised his head and looked at himself.
Two more horsesh ad to be added to those harnessedt o the thighs,
which made six horses in all. Without success.
'Finally,
the executioner, Samson, said to Monsieur Le Breton
that there was no way or hope of succeeding,a nd told him to ask
4

The body of the condemned
their Lordshipsi f they wishedh im to have the prisonerc ut into
piecesM. onsieurL e Breton,w ho had comed own from the town,
ordered that renewede fforts be made,a nd this was done; but the
horsesg aveu p and one of thoseh arnessetdo the thighs fell to the
ground. The confessorrse turneda nd spoket o him again.H e said
to them (I heardh im): "Kiss me, gentlemen."T he parishp riesto f
St Paul'sd id not daret o, so Monsieurd e Marsillys lippedu ndert he
rope holding the left arm and kissedh im on the forehead.T he
executionergsa theredr ound and Damienst old them not to swear,
to carry out their task and that he did not think ill of them; he
bugg"dt hem to pray to God for him, and askedt he parishp riest
of St Paul'st o pray for him at the first mass.
'After
two or threea ttemptst,h e executioneSr amsona ndh e who
hadu sedt he pincerse achd rew out a knife from his pocketa nd cut
the body at the thighsi nsteado fseveringt he legsa t the ioints; the
four horsesg ave a tug and carried off the two thighs after them,
namely,t hat of the right side firstot he other following; then the
samew asd onet o the arms,t he shoulderst,h e arm-pitsa nd the four
limbs; the fleshh adt o be cut almostt o the bone,t he horsesp ulling
hardc arriedo ffthe right arm first and the other afterwards.
'When
the four limbs hadb eenp ulleda way,t he confessorcca me
to speakt o him; but his executionetro ld them that he was dead,
though the truth wast hat I sawt he manm ove, his lower jaw moving
from sidet o sidea si f he weret alking. One of the executioneresv en
saids hortly afterwardst hat when they had lifted the trunk to throw
it on the stake,h e wass till alive.T he four limbs wereu ntied from
the ropesa nd thrown on the stakes et up in the enclosurein line
with the scaffold,t hen the trunk and the rest werec overedw ith logs
and faggots, and fire was put to the sraw mixed with this wood.
'.
.. In accordancew ith the decree,t he whole was reducedt o
ashesT. he last piecet o be found in the embersw ass till burning at
half-pastt en in the evening.T he pieceso f flesha nd the trunk had
takena bout four hours to burn. The officerso f whom I was one,
as alsow as my son, and a detachmenot f archersr emainedin the
squareu ntil nearlye leveno 'clock.
'There
were thosew ho mades omethingo f the fact that a dog
had lain the day before on the grassw here the 6re had been,h ad
beenc haseda way severalt imes, and had alwaysr etumed. But it is

Torture
not difficult to understand that an animal found this place warmer
than elsewhere' (quoted in Zevaes, zor-r4).
Eighry years later, L!on Faucher drew up his rules'for the House
of young prisoners in Paris':
'Art.
17. The prisoners' day will begin at six in the morning in
winter and at five in summer. They will work for nine hours a day
throughout the year. Two hours a day will be devoted to instruc-
tion. Work and the day will end at nine o'clock in winter and at
eight in summer.
Art. r8. Nskg At the first drum-roll, the prisoners must rise and
dressi n silence,a s the supervisor,openst he cell doors. At the second
drum-roll, they must be dresseda nd make their beds. At the third,
they must line up and proceed to the chapel for morning prayer.
There is a five-minute interval between each drum-roll.
Art. 19. The prayers are conducted by the chaplain and followed
by a moral or religious reading. This exercisem ust not last more
than halfan hour.
Art. zo. Work. At a quarter to six in the summer, a quarter to
seven in winter, the prisoners go down into the courtyard where
they must wash their hands and faces,a nd receive their first ration
of bread. Immediately afterwards, they form into work-teams and
go off to work, which must begin at six in summer and seven in
winter.
Art. zr. Meal. ltt ten o'clock the prisoners leave their work and
go to the refectory; they wash their hands in their courtyards and
assemblei n divisions. After the dinner, there is recreation until
twenty minutes to eleven.
Art. ze. School.A t twenty minutes to eleven, at the drum-roll,
the prisoners form into ranks, and proceed in divisions to the
school. The classl astst wo hours and consistsa lternately of reading,
writing, drawing and arithmetic.
Art. 23. At twenty minutes to one, the prisoners leave the
school, in divisions, and return to their courtyards for recreation.
At five minutes to one, at the drum-roll, they form into work-
teatns.
Art. 24.A t one o'clock they must be back in the workshops: they
work until four o'clock.
6

The body of the condemned
Art. z;. At four o'clock the prisoners leave their workshops and
go into the courtyards where they wash their hands and form into
divisions for the refectory.
Art. 26.'supper and the recreation that follows it last until five
o'clock: the prisoners then return to the workshops.
Art 27. At seven o'clock.in the summer, at eight in winter,
work stops; bread is distributed for the last time in the workshops.
For a quarter of an hour one of the prisoners or supervisorsr eads a
passagef rom some instructive or uplifting work. This is followed
by evening prayer.
Art. i8. At half-past seven in summer, half-past eight in winger,
the prisoners must be back in their cells after the washing of hands
and the inspection of clothes in the courtyard; at the first drum-roll,
they must undress, and at the second get into bed. The cell doors
are closed and the supervisors go the rounds in the corridors, to
ensure order and silence' (Faucher, 274-82).
We have, then, a public execution and a time-table. They do not
punish the same crimes or'the same type of delinquent. But they
each define a certain penal style. Less than a century separatest hem.
It was a time when, in Europe and in the United States,t he entire
economy of punishment was redistributed. It was a time of great
'scandals'
for traditional justice, a time of innumerable projects for
reform. It saw a new theory of law and crime, a new rnoral or politi-
cal justification of the right to punish; old laws were abolished, old
'Modern'
customs died out. codes were planned or drawn up:
Russia, 1769; Prussia, r78o1 Pennsylvania and Tuscany, ry86;
Austria, 1788;F rancet r79rt Year IV, r8o8 and r8ro. It was a new
age for penal iustice.
Among so many changes,I shall consider one: the disappearance
of torture as a public spectacle.T oday we are rather inclined to ig,
nore itl perhaps,i n its time, it gave rise to too much inflated rhetoric;
perhapsi t has been attributed too readily and too emphatically to a
'humanization',
processo f thus dispensingw ith the need for further
analysis.A nd, in any case,h ow important is such a change, when
compared with the great institutional transformations, the formula-
tion of explicit, general codes and unified rules of procedure; with
the almost universal adoption of the jury system, the definition of

Torture
the essentiallyc orrective charactero fthe penalty and the tendency,
which has become increasingly marked since the nineteenth century,
to adapt punishment to the individual offenderl Punishment of a
less immediately physical kind, a certain discretion in the art of
inflicting pain, a iombination of more subtle, more subdued suffer-
ings, deprived of their visible display, should not all this be treated
as a specialc ase,a n incidental effect ofdeeper changesl And yet the
fact remains that a few decades saw the disappearance of the tor-
tured, dismembered,a mputated body, symbolically branded on face
or shoulder, exposeda live or dead to public view. The body as the
maior target ofpenal repressiond isappeared.
By the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth
cenrury, the gloomy festival of punishment was dying out, though
here and there it fickered momentarily into life. In this transforma-
tion, two processesw ere at work. They did not have quite the same
chronology or the samer aisond '6te. The first was the disappearance
of punishment as a spectacle.T he ceremonial of punishment tended
to decline; it survived only as a new legal or administrative practice.
The attuttde honorablew as first abolished in France in r79r, then
again in r83o after a brief revival; the pillory was abolished in
France in ry8g and in England in 1837. The use of prisoners in
public works, cleaning city streets or repairing the highways,,was
practised in Austria, Switzerland and certain of the United States,
such as Pennsylvania. These convicts, distinguished by their
'infamous 'were
dress' and shavenh eads, brought before the public.
The sport of the idle and the vicious, they often become incensed,
and naturally took violent revenge upon the aggressors.T o prevent
them from returning iniuries which might be inflicted on them,
they were encumberedw ith iron collars and chains to which bomb-
shellsw ere attached,t o be dragged along while they performed their
degrading service, under the eyes of keepers armed with swords,
blunderbussesa nd other weapons of destruction' (Roberts Vaux,
Notices,z r, guoted in Teeters, gJ7r 24).T his practicew as abolished
practically everywhere at the end of the eighteenth or the beginning
of the nineteenth cen1ury. The public exhibition of prisoners was
maintained in France in r83rr,despite violent criticism - 'a disgust-
ing scene', said R6al (cf. Bibliography); it was finally abolished in
April rSaS. While the chain-gang, which had dragged convicts
8

The body of the condemned
across the whole of France, as far as Brest and Toulon, was replaced
in 1837 by inconspicuous black-painted cell-carts. Punishment had
gradually ceasedt o be a spectacle.A nd whatever theatrical elements
it still retained were now downgraded, as if the functions of the
penal ceremony were gradually ceasingt o be understood, as if this
'concluded
rite that the crime' was suspected of being in some
undesirable way linked with it. It was as if the punishment was
thought to equal, if not to exceed, in savagery the crime itself, to
accustom the spectators to a ferocity from which one wished to
divert them, to show them the frequency of crime, to make the
executioner resemblea criminal, judges murderers, to reverse roles
at the last moment, to makb the tortured criminal an object of piry
'The
or admiration. As early as 1764, Beccaria remarked: murder
that is depicted as a horrible crime is repeated in cold blood,
remorselessly'( Beccaria, ror). The public execution is now seena s
a hearth in which violence bursts again into fame.
Punishment, then, will tend to become the most hidden part of
the penal process. This has several cons!quences:i t leaves the
domain of more or less everyday perception and enters that of
abstract consciousnessi;t s effectivenessis seena s resulting from its
inevitability, not from its visible intensity; it is the certainty of being
punished and not the horrifying spectacleo f public punishment that
must discourage crime; the exemplary mechanics of punishment
changesi ts mechanisms.A s a result, justice no longer takes public
responsibility for the violence that is bound up with its practice.
Ifit too strikes, if it too kills, it is not asa glorification of its strength,
but as an element of itself that it is obliged to rolerate, that it finds
difficult to account for. The apportioning of blame is redistributed:
in punishment-as-spectaclea confused horror spread from the
scaffold; it enveloped both executioner and condemned; and, al-
though it was always ready to invert the shame inflicted on the
victim into pity or glory, it often turned the legal violence of the
executioner into shame. Now the scandal and the light are to be
distributed differently; it is the conviction itself that marks the
offender with the unequivocally negative sign: the publicity has
shifted to the trial, and to the sentence;t he execution itselfis like an
additional shame that iustice is ashamed to impose on the con-
demned man; so it keepsi ts distancef rom the act, tending always to

Torture
entrust it to others, under the sealo f secrecy.I t is ugly to be punish-
able, but there is no glory in punishing. Hence that double system
of protection that justice has set up between itself and the punish-
ment it imposes. Those who carry out the penalty tend to
become an autonomous sector; justice is relieved of responsibility
for it by a bureaucratic concealment of the penalty itself. It is
typical that in France the administration of the prisons should for so
long have been the responsibility of the Minisry of the Interior,
while responsibility for the bagnesf,o r penal servitude in the convict
ships and penal settlements,I ay with the Ministry of the Navy or
the Ministry of the Colonies. And beyond this distribution of roles
operatesa theoretical disavowal: do not imagine that the sentences
that we iudges pass iue activated by a desire to punish; they are
'cure';
intended to corect, reclaim, a technique of improvement
represses,i n the penalty, the strict expiation of evil-doing, and
relieves the magistrates of the demeaning task of punishing. In
modern iustice and on the part of those who dispensei t there is a
shame in punishing, which does not always preclude zeal. This
senseo f shame is constantly growing: the psychologists and the
minor civil servantso f moral orthopaedicsp roliferate on the wound
it leaves.
The disappearanceo f public executionsm arks thereforet he decline
of the spectacle;b ut it also marks a slackening of the hold on the
body. In ry87, in an addresst o the Society for Promoting Political
'I
Enquiries, Benjamin Rush remarked: can only hope that the time
is not far away when gallows, pillory, scaffold, flogging and wheel
will, in the history of punishment, be regarded as the marks of the
barbariry of centuries and of countries and as proofs of the feeble
influence of reason and religion over the human mind' (Teeters,
r9l!, 3o). Indeed, sixty years later, Van Meenen,o pening the second
penitentiary congress,i n Brussels,r ecalledt he time of his childhood
'I
as of a past age: have seen the ground strewn with wheels,
gibbets, gallows, pillories; I have seenh ideously stretcheds keletons
on wheels' (Annales de la Charitd, 12g-1'o). Branding had been
abolishedi n England (r834) and in France( I832); in r8zo, England
no longer dared to apply the full punishment reserved for traitors
(Thistlewood was not quartered). Only flogging still remained in a
number of penal systems( Russia, England, Prussia).B ut, generally
IO

The body of the condemned
speaking, punitive practices had become more reticent. One no
longer touched the body, or at least as little as possible, and then
only to reach something other than the body itself. It might be
objected that imprisonment, confinement, forced labour, penal
servitude, prohibition from entering certain areas, deportation -
which have occupieds o important a placei n modern penal systems-
'physical'
are penalties: unlike fines, for example, they directly
affect the body. But the punishment-body relation is not the same
as it was in the torture during public executions. The body now
serves as an instrument or intermediary: if one intervenes upon it
to imprison it, or to make it work, it is in order to deprive the
individual ofa liberty that is regardedb oth asa right and asp roperty.
The body, according to this penality, is caught up in a system of
constraints and privations, obligations and prohibitions. Physical
pain, the pain of the body itself, is no longer the constituent element
ofthe penalty. From being an art ofunbearable sensationsp unish-
ment has become an economy of suspended rights. If it is still
necessaryf or the law to reach and manipulate the body of the con-
vict, it will be at a distance, in the proper way, according to strict
'higher'aim.
rules, and with a much As a result of this new restraint,
a whole army of technicians took over from the executioner, the
immediate anatomist of pain: warders, doctors, chaplains, psychia-
trists, psychologists, educationalists;b y their very presencen ear the
prisoner, they sing the praises that the law needs: they reassurei t
that the body and pain are not the ultimate objects of its punitive
action. Today a doctor must watch over those condemned to death,
right up to the last moment - thus iuxtaposing himself as the agent
of welfare, as the alleviator of pain, with the official whose task it is
to end life. This is worth thinking about. When the moment of
execution approaches,t he patients are in1'ectedw ith tranquillizers.
A utopia of judicial reticence:t ake away life, but prevent the patient
from feeling it; deprive the prisoner of all rights, but do not inflict
pain; impose penaltiesf ree of all pain. Recourse to psycho-pharma-
'disconnectors',
cology and to various physiological even if it is
'non-corporal'
temporary, is a logical consequenceo f this penality.
The modern rituals of execution attest to this double process:t he
disappearanceo f the spectaclea nd the elimination of pain. The same
movement has affected the various European legal systems,e ach at
II

, Torture
its own rate: the iame death for all - the execution no longer bears
the specific mark of the crime or the social status of the criminal; a
death that lasts only a moment - no torture must'be added to it in
advance,n o further actions performed upon the corpse;a n execution
that affects life rather than the body. There are no longer any of
those long processesin which death was both retarded by calculated
interruptions and multiplied by a serieso f successivea ttacks. There
are no longer any of those combinations of tortures that were
organized for the killing of regicides, or of the kind advocated, at
the beginning of the eighteenth century, by the anonymous author
of Hanging not PunishmentE nough (r7or), by which the condemned
man would be broken on the wheel, then fogged until he fainted,
then hung up with chains, then finally left to die slowly of hunger.
There are no longer any of those executionsi n which the condemned
man was dragged along on a hurdle (to prevent his head smashing
against the cobble-stones), in which his belly was opened up, his
entrails quickly ripped out, so that he had time to seet hem, vzith his
own eyes,b eing thrown on the fire; in which he was finally decapi-
'thousand
tated and his body quartered.r The reduction of these
deaths' to strict capital punishment defines a whole new morality
concerning the act of punishing.
As early as 176o, a hanging machine had been tried out in
England (for the execution of Lord Ferrer). It madeu se of a support,
which opened under the feet of the condemned man, thus avoiding
slow deaths and the altercations that occurred between victim and
executioner. It was improved and finally adopted in 1783, the same
year in which the traditional procession from Newgate to Tyburn
was abolished,a nd in which the opportunity offered by the rebuild-
ing of the prison, after the Gordon Riots, was used to set up the
scaffolds in Newgate itself (see Hibbert, 8y-6). The celebrated
article 3 of the French Code of ry9t - 'Every man condemned to
death will have his head cut off'- bears this triple signification: an
equal death for all ('Crimes of the samek ind will be punished by the
samek ind of punishment, whatever the rank and state of the guilty
man may be,'in the words of the motion proposed by Guillotin and
passed on r December 1789); one death per condemned man,
'long
obtained by a single blow, without recourse to those and
conseguently cruel' methods of execution, such as the gallows,
tz

The body of the condemned
denounced by Le Peletier; lastly, punishment for the condemned
man alone, sinced ecapitation,t he capital punishment of the nobility,
was the least shaming for the criminal's family (Le Peletier, 7zo).
The guillotine, first used in March r7g2,was the perfect vehicle for
these principles. Death was reduced to a visible, but instantaneous
event. Contact between the law, or those who carry it out, and the
body of the criminal, is reduced to a split second. There is no
physical confrontation; the executioner need be no more than a
'Experience
medculous watchmaker. and reason demonstrate that
the method used in the past to cut off the head of a criminal exposed
him to a torture more frightful than the loss of life alone, which is
the expressi ntention of the law; the execution should therefore be
carried out in a single moment and with a single blow; examples
show how difficult it is to achieve this. For the method to work
perfectly, it must necessarily depend on invariable mechanical
means whose force and effect may also be determined. . . It is an
easye nough matter to have such an unfailing machine built; decapi-
tation will be performed in a moment according to the intention of
the new law. If this apparatus seems necessary,i t will cause no
sensation and will be scarcely noticed' (Saint-Edme, 16r). The
guillotine takes life almost without touching the body, iust as prison
deprives of liberty or a fine reducesw ealth. It is intended to apply
the law not so much to a real body capable of feeling pain as to a
juridical subject, the possessor,a mong other rights, of the right to
exist. It had to have the abstraction of the law itself.
No doubt something of the old public execution was, for a time,
superimposedi n France on the sobriety of the new method. Parri-
cides - and the regicides who were regarded as such - were led to
th6 scaffold wearing a black veill there, until 1832, one of their
hands was cut off. Thereafter, nothing remained but the ornamental
cr!pe. Thus it was in the caseo f Fieschi, the would-be assassino f
'He
Louis-Philippe, in November 1836: will be taken to the place
of execution wearing a shirt, barefoot, his head covered with a black
veil; he will be exhibited upon a scaffold while an usher reads the
sentencet o the people, and he will be immediately executed.' We
should remember Damiens - and note that the last addition to penal
death was a mourning veil. The condemned man was no longer to
be seen.O nly the reading of the sentenceo n the scaffold announced
rt

Torture
the crime - and that crime must be faceless.( The more monstrous a
criminal was, the more he must be deprived of lighr he must not see,
or be seen.T his was a common enough notion at the time. For the
'construct
parricideo ne should an iron cageo r dig an impenetrable
dungeon that would serve him as an eternal retreat' - De Moldne,
27t-7.) The last vestigeo f the great public executionw as its annul-
ment: a drapery to hide a body. Benoit, triply infamous (his
mother's murderer, a homosexual, an assassin)w, as the first of the
'As
parricides not to have a hand cut off: the sentencew as being
read, he stood on the scaffold supported by the executioners.I t was
a horrible sight; wrapped in a large white shroud, his face covered
with black cr!pe, the parricide escapedt he gazeo f the silent crowd,
and beneath these mysterious and gloomy clothes, life was mani-
fested only by frightful cries, which soon expired under the knife'
(Gagetted est ibunaux, 3o August r83z).
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, then, the great
spectacleo f physical punishment disappeared;t he tortured body
was avoided; the theatrical representationo f pain was excludedf rom
punishment. The age of sobriety in punishment had begun. By
r83o-48, public executionsp, recededb y torture, had almoste ntirely
disappeared.O f course, this generalization requires some qualifica-
tion. To begin with, the changesd id not come about at once or as
part of a single process.T here were delays. Paradoxically, England
was one of the countries most loath to seet he disappearanceo f the
public execution: perhaps becauseo f the role of model that the
institution ofthe jury, public hearingsa nd respecto fhabeasc orpus
had given to her criminal law; above all, no doubt, becauses he did
not wish to diminish the rigour of her penal laws during the great
sociald isturbanceso f the yearsr 78o-r8zo. For a long time Romilly,
Mackintosh and Fowell Buxton failed in their attempts to attenuate
the multiplicity and severity of the penalties laid down by English
law - that 'horrible butchery', as Rossi describedi t Its severity (in
fact, the juries regarded the penalties laid down as excessivea nd
were consequently more lenient in their application) had even
increased: in ry6o, Blackstone had listed 16o capital crimes in
English legislation,w hile by r8r9 there were zzj. One should also
take into account the advancesa nd retreats that the process as a
whole underwent between ry6o and r84o; the rapidity of reform
r4

The body of the condemned
in certain countries such as Austria, Russia, the United States,
France under the Constituent Assembly, then the rerear at'the
time of the counter-revolutions in Europe and the great social fear
ofthe years r8zo-48; more or lesst emporary changesi ntroduced by
emergency courts or laws; the gap between the laws and the real
practice of the courts (which was by no meansa faithful reflection
of the state of legislation). All these factors account for the irregu-
larity of the transformation that occurred at the turn of the century.
It should be added that, although most of the changesh ad been
achievedb y r84o, although the mechanismso f punishment had by
then assumedt heir new way of functioning, the process was far
from complete. The reduction in the use of torture was a tendency
that was rooted in the great transformation of the years r76o-184o,
but it did not end there; it can be said that the practice ofthe public
execurion haunted our penal system for a long time and still haunts
it today. In France, the guillotine, that machine for the production
ofrapid and discreet deaths,r epiesenteda new ethic oflegal death.
But the Revolution had immediately endowed it with a grear theatri-
cal ritual. For years it provided a spectacle.I t had to be removed to
the Barridre Saint-Jacques;t he open cart was replaced by a closed
carriagel the condemned man was hustled from the vehicle straight
to the scaffold;h asry executionsw ere organized at unexpectedt imes.
In the end, the guillotine had to be placed inside prison walls and
made inaccessiblet o the public (after the execution of Weidmann
in 1939),b y blocking the streets leading to the prison in which the
scaffoldw as hidden, and in which the execution would take place in
secret( the execution of Buffet and Bontemps at rhe Sant! in r97z).
Witnessesw ho describedt he scenec ould even be prosecuted,t here-
by ensuring that the execution should ceaset o be a spectaclea nd
remain a stranges ecretb etween the law and those it condemns.O ne
has only to point out so many precautions to realize that capital
punishment remains fundamentally, even today, a spectacle that
must actually be forbidden.
Similarly, the hold on the body did not entirely disappeari n the
mid-nineteenth century. Punishment had no doubt ceased to be
centred on torture as a technique of pain; it assumeda s its principal
object loss of wealth or rights. But a punishment like forced labour
or even imprisonment * mere loss of liberty - has never functioned
rt

Torture
without a certain additional element of punishment that certainly
concerns the body itselfi rationing of food, sexual deprivation,
corporal punishment, solitary confinement. Are these the uninten-
tional, but inevitable, consequenceo f imprisonmentl In fact, in its
most explicit practices,i mprisonment has always involved a certain
degree of physical pain. The criticism that was often levelled at the
penitentiary system in the early nineteenth century (imprisonment
is not a sufficient punishment prisoners are less hungry, less cold,
less deprived in general than many poor people or even workers)
suggestsa postulate that was never explicitly denied: it is just that a
condemnedm an should suffer physically more than other men. It is
difficult to dissociate punishment from additional physical pain.
What would a non-corporal punishment bel
'torture'
There remains, therefore, a trace of in the modern
mechanismso f criminal justice - a trace that has not been entirely
overcome,b ut which isenveloped,i ncreasingly, by the non-corporal
nature of the penal system.
The reduction in penal severity in the last 2oo years is a pheno-
menon with which legal historians are well acquainted. But, for a
long time, it has been regarded in an overall way as a quantitative
phenomenon: less cruelty, less pain, more kindness, more respect,
'humanity'.
more In fact, these changesa re accompaniedb y a dis-
placement in the very object of the punitive operation. Is there a
diminution of intensityi Perhaps. There is certainly a change of
obiective.
If the penality in its most severef orms no longer addressesit self
to the body, on what does it lay holdl The answer of the theoreti-
cians - those who, about 176o,o pened up a new period that is not
yet at an end - is simple, almost obvious. It seemst o be contained
in the question itself: since it is no longer the body, it must be the
soul. The expiation that once rained down upon the body must be
replaced by a punishment that acts in depth on the heart, the
thoughts, the will, the inclinations. Mably formulated the principle
'Punishment,
once and for all: if I may so put it, should strike the
soul rather than the body'(Mably, )26).
It was an important moment. The old partners of the spectacle
of punishment, the body and the blood, gave way. A new character
r6

The body of the condemned
came on the scene, masked. It was the end of a certain kind of
tragedy; comedy began, with shadow play, facelessv oices, impalp-
able entities. The apparatuso f punitive justice must now bite into
this bodiless reality.
Is this any more than a mere theoretical assertion, contradicted
by penal practicel Such a conclusion would be over-hasty. It is true
that, today, to punish is not simply a matter of converting a soull
but Mably's principle has not remained a pious wish. Its effects can
be felt throughout modern penality.
To begin with, there is a substitution of objects. By this I do not
mean that one has suddenly set about punishing other crimes. No
doubt the defnition of offences,t he hierarchy of their seriousness,
the margins of indulgence, what was tolerated in fact and what was
legally permitted - all this has considerably changed over the lasr
2oo years; many crimes have ceasedt o be so becauset hey were
bound up with a certain exercise of religious authority or a par-
ticular type of economic activiry; blasphemy has lost its status as a
crime; smuggling and domestic larceny some of their seriousness.
But these displacementsa re perhaps not the most important facr:
the division between the permitted and the forbidden has preserved
a certain constancy from one century to another. On the other
'crime',
hand, the object with which penal practice is concerned,h as
profoundly altered: the quality, the nature, in a senset he substance
of which the punishable element is made, rather than its formal
definition. Undercover of the relative stability of the law, a masso f
'crimes'
subtle and rapid changes has occurred. Certainly the and
'offences'
on which judgement is passeda re juridical objects defined
by the code, but judgement is also passedo n the passions,i nsrincts,
anomalies, infirmities, maladjustments, effects of environment or
heredity; acts of aggressiona re punished, so also, through them, is
aggressivity; rape, but at the same time perversionsl murders, but
also drives and desires. But, it will be objected, judgement is not
actually being passedo n them; if they are referred to at all it is to
explain the actions in question, and to determine to what extent the
the subject's will was involved in the crime. This is no answer. For
it r'st heses hadowsl urking behind the casei tself that are judged and
'attenuating
punished. They are judged indirectly as circumstances'
'circumsuntial'
that introduce into the verdict not only evidence,
r7

Torture
but something quite different, which is not juridically codifiable:
the knowledge of the criminal, one's estimation of him, what is
known about the relations between him, his past and his crime, and
what might be expectedo f him in the future. They are also judged
by the interplay of all those notions that have circulated between
'mon-
medicine and jurisprudence since the nineteenth century (the
'psychical
sters' of Georget's times, Chaumi!'s anomalies', the
'perverts'and'maladjusted'of
our own experts)a nd which, behind
the pretext of explaining an action, are ways of defining an indivi-
dual. They are punished by means of a punishment that has the
function of making the offender'not only desirous,b ut also capable,
of living within the law and of providing for his own needs'; they
are punished by the internal economy of a penalty which, while
intended to punish the crime, may be altered (shortened or, in
certain cases, extended) according to changes in the prisoner's
behaviour; and they are punished by the'security measurest' hat
accompany the penalry (prohibition ofentering certain areas,p ro-
bation, obligatory medical treatment), and which are intended not
to punish the offence, but to supervise the individual, to neutralize
his dangerouss tate of mind, to alter his criminal tendencies,a nd to
continue even when this change has been achieved. The criminal's
soul is not referred to in the trial merely to explain his crime and
as a factor in the juridical apportioning of responsibility; if it is
brought before the court, with such pomp and circumstance,s uch
'scienti6c'
concern to understand and such application, it is because
it too, as well as the crime itself, is to be judged and to share in the
punishment. Throughout the penal ritual, from the preliminary
investigation to the sentencea nd the final effects of the penalty, a
domain has been penetratedb y objects that not only duplicate, but
also dissociatet he juridically defined and coded objects. Psychiatric
expertise,b ut also in a more generalw ay criminal anthropology and
the repetitive discourse of criminology, find one of their precise
functions here: by solemnly inscribing offencesi n the field of objects
susceptible of scientific knowledge, they provide the mechanisms
of legal punishment with a justifiable hold not only on offences,b ut
on individuals;n ot only on what they do, but alsoo n what they are,
will be, may be. The additional factor of the offender's soul, which
the legal systercihas laid hold of, is only apparently explanatory
r8

The body of the condemned
and limitative, and is in fact expansionist. During the r5o or 2oo
years that Europe has been setting up its new penal systems, the
judges have gradually, by meanso fa processt hat goes back very far
indeed, taken to judging something other than crimes, namely, the
'soul'
of the criminal.
And, by that very fact, they have begun to do something other
than passj udgement. Or, to be more precise,w ithin the very iudicial
modality of judgement, other types of assessmenht ave slipped in,
profoundly altering its rules of elaboration. Ever since the Middle
Ages slowly and painfully built up the great procedure of investiga-
tion, to judge was to establisht he truth of a crime, it was to deter-
mine its author and to apply a legal punishment. Knowledge of the
offence, knowledge of the offender, knowledge of the law: these
three conditions made it possible to ground a judgement in truth.
But now a quite different question of truth is inscribed in the course
'Has
of the penal judgement. The question is no longer simply: the
'What
act been establisheda nd is it punishablel' But also: ri this act,
what rs this act of violence or this murderl To what level or to what
field ofreality doesi t belongl Is it a phantasy,a psychotic reaction, a
'Who
delusional episode,a perversea ctionl'It is no longer simply:
'How
committed itl' Bue can we assign the causal process that
produced itl Where did it originate in the author himselfl Instinct,
'What
unconscious,e nvironment, heredityl' It is no longer simply:
'What
law punishest his offencel' But: would be the most appropriate
measurest o takel How do we see the future development of the
'What
offenderl would be the best way of rehabilitating himi' A
whole set of assessing,d iagnostic, prognostic, normative judge-
ments concerning the criminal have become lodged in the frame-
work of penal iudgement. Another truth has penetrated the truth
that was required by the legal machinery; a truth which, entangled
with the first, has turned the assertion of guilt into a strange
scientifico-iuridical complex. A significant fact is the way in which
the question of madnessh as evolved in penal practice. According
to the t8to code, madnessw as dealt with only in terms of article 64.
Now this article statest hat there is neither crime nor offence if the
offender was of unsound mind at the time of the act. The possibility
of ascertainingm adnessw as, therefore, a quite separatem atter from
the definition of an act as a crimel the gravity of the act was not
r9

Torture
altered by the fact that its author was insane, nor the punishment
reduced as a consequencegth e crime itself disappeared.I t was im-
possible, therefore, to declare that someone was both guilty and
madl once the diagnosis of madnessh ad been accepted,i t could not
be included in the judgementl it interrupted the procedure and
loosenedt he hold of the law on the author of the act. Not only the
examination of the criminal suspected of insaniry, but the very
effects of this examination had to be external and anterior to the
sentence.B ut, very soon, the courts ofthe nineteenth century began
to misunderstandt he meaning of article 64. Despite severald ecisions
of the supreme court of appeal confirming that insanity could not
result either in a light penalty, or even in an acquittal, but required
that the caseb e dismissed,t he ordinary courts continued to bring
the question of insanity to bear on their verdicts. They accepted
that one could be both guilty and mad; less guilty the madder one
was; guilty certainly, but someonet o be put away and treated rather
than punished; not only a guilty man, but also dangerous, since
quite obviously sick, etc. From the point ofview ofthe penal code,
the result was a masso f iuridical absurdities.B ut this was the starting
point of an evolution that jurisprudence and legislation itself was to
precipitate in the course of the next rto years: already the reform
of r83,2,i ntroducing attenuating circumstances,m ade it possible to
modify the sentencea ccording to the supposedd egreeso f an illness
or the forms of a semi-insanity. And the practice of calling on
psychiatric expertise,w hich is widespread in the assizec ourts and
sometimese xtended to courts of summary jurisdiction, means that
the sentence,e ven if it is always formulated in terms of legal punish-
ment, implies, more or less obscurely, judgements of normality,
attributions of causality, assessmentos f possible changes,a nticipa-
tions as to the offender's future. It would be wrong to say that all
these operations give substancet o a judgement from the outside;
they are directly integrated in the processo f forming the sentence.
Instead of insaniry eliminating the crime according to the original
meaning of article 64, every crime and even every offence now
carriesw ithin it, as a legitimate suspicion,b ut also as a right that may
be claimed, the hypothesis of insanity, in any caseo f anomaly. And
the sentencet hat condemnso r acquits is not simply a iudgement of
guilt, a legal decision that lays down punishment; it bears within it
20

The body of the condemned
ana ssessmeonft normalitya nda technicapl rescriptionfo r a possible
normalizationT. oday thej udge- magistrateo r iuror - certainlyd oes
moret han'judge'.
And he is not alonei n iudging. Throughout the penalp rocedure
and the implementationo f the sentenceth ere swarms a whole
series of subsidiary authorities. Small-scalele gal systemsa nd
paralleli udges have multiplied around the principal judgement:
psychiatrico r psychologicael xperts,m agistratesc oncernedw ith
the implementationo f sentencese,d ucationalistsm, emberso f the
prison service,a ll fragmentt he legal power to punish;i t might be
obiectedth atn oneo f themr eallys haresth er ight to iudge;t hats ome,
after sentenceis passedh, aven o other right than to implementt he
punishmenlta id down by the court and,a bovea ll, that others- the
experts- interveneb eforet he sentencen ot to passj udgement,b ut
to assistth e iudgesi n their decisionB. ut ass oona st he penaltiesa nd
the securitym easuredse finedb y the court aren ot absolutelyd eter-
mined, from the moment they may be modified along the way,
from the momento nel eavesto otherst hant he iudgeso f the offence
'deserves'
the task of decidingw hethert he condemnedm an to be
placedi n semi-liberryo r conditional liberty, whether they may
bring his penal tutelaget o an end, one is handingo ver to them
mechanismso f legal punishmentt o be used at their discretion:
subsidiaryj udgest hey may be, but they are judgesa ll the same.
The whole machineryt hat has beend evelopingf or yearsa round
thei mplementationo f sentenceas,n dt heira djustmentto individuals,
createsa proliferationo f the authoritieso f judiciald ecision-making
and extendsit s powerso f decisionw ell beyondt he sentenceT. he
psychiatrice xperts,f or their part, may well refrain from judging.
Let us examineth e threeq uestionsto which, sincet he 1958r uling,
they havet o addressth emselvesD: oes the convictedp ersonr epre-
senta dangert o societylI s he susceptiblteo penalp unishmentIls he
curableo r readjustableTl heseq uestionsh aven othing to do with
article6 4, nor with the possiblein sanityo f the convictedp ersona t
'responsibility'.
the momento f the act. They do not concern They
concernn othing but the administrationo f the penalty,i ts necessity,
its usefulnessi,t s possiblee ffectivenessth; ey make it possiblet o
show,i n an almostt ransparenvto cabularyw, hethert he mentalh os-
pital would be a mores uitablep laceo f confinementth ant he prison,
2l

Torture
whether this confinement should be short or long, whether medical
treatment or security measuresa re called for. What, then, is the role
of the psychiatrist in penal mattersl He is not an expert in responsi-
bility, but an adviser on punishment; it is up to him to say whether
'dangerous',
the subject is in what way one should be protected
from him, how one should intervene to alter him, whether it would
be better to try to force him into submission or to treat him. At the
very beginning of its history, psychiatric expertisew as called upon
'true'
to formulate propositions as to the part that the liberty of the
offender had played in the act he had committed; it is now called
'medico-
upon to suggesta prescription for what might be called his
judicial treatment'.
To sum up, ever since the new penal system- that defined by the
great codes ofthe eighteenth and nineteenth centuries- has been in
operation, a general process has led judges to judge something
other than crimesl they have been led in their sentencesto do some-
thing other than judge; and the power of judging has been trans-
ferred, in part, to other authorities than the judges of the offence.
The q/hole penal operation has taken on extra-juridical elementsa nd
personnel. It will be said that there is nothing extraordinary in this,
that it is part of the destiny of the law to absorb little by little
elementst hat are alien to it. But what is odd about modern criminal
justice is that, although it has taken on so many extra-iuridical
el!ments, it has done so not in order to be able to define them
juridically and gradually to integrate them into the actual power to
punish: on the contrary, it has done so in order to make them func-
tion within the penal operation as non-juridical elements; in order
to stop this operation being simply a legal punishment; in order to
exculpate the judge from being purely and simply he who punishes,
'Of
course, we pass sentence, but this sentence is not in direct
relation to the crime. It is quite clear that for us it functions as a way
of treating a criminal. We punish, but this is a way of saying that
we wish to obtain a cure.' Today, criminal justice functions and
justifies itself only by this perpetual reference to something other
than itself, by this unceasingr einscription in non-juridical systems.
Its fate is to be redefined by knowledge.
Beneath the increasing leniency of punishment, then, one may
map a displacemento f its point of application;a nd through this
22

The body of the condemned
displacement,a whole field of recent objects, a whole new system of
truth and a masso f roles hitherto unknown in the exerciseo fcriminal
'scienti6c'
justice. A corpus of knowledge, techniques, discoursesi s
formed and becomese ntangled with the practice of the power to
punish.
This book is intended as a correlative history of the modern soul
and ofa new power to iudge; a genealogy ofthe presents cientifico-
legal complex from which the power to punish derives its bases,
justifications and rules, from which it extendsi ts effectsa nd by which
it masks its exorbitant singularity.
But from what point can such a history of the modern soul on
trial be writtenl If one confined oneself to the evolution of legisla-
tion or of penal procedures, one would run the risk of allowing a
change in the collective sensibility, an increasei n humanization or
the development of the human sciencest o emerge as a massive,
external, inert and primary fact. By studying only the general social
forms, as Durkheim did (cf. Bibliography), one runs the risk of
positing as the principle of greater leniency in punishment pro-
cesseso f individualization that are rather one of the effects of the
new tacdcso f power, among which are to be included the new penal
mechanisms.T his study obeys four general rules:
r. Do not concentrate the study of the punitive mechanismso n
their'repressivere ffectsa lone,o n their'punishment' aspectsa lone,
but situate them in a whole serieso f their possible positive effecs,
even ifthese seem marginal at first sight. As a consequence,r egard
punishment as a complex social function.
z. Analyse punitive methods not simply as consequenceso f
legislation or as indicators of social stmctures, but as techniques
possessingt heir own specificity in the more general field of other
ways of exercising power. Regard punishment as a political tactic.
3. Instead oftreating the history ofpenal law and the history of
the human sciencesa st wo separates eriesw hose overlapping appears
to have had on one or the other, or perhips on both, a disturbing
or useful effect, according to one's point of view, seew hether there
is not some common matrix or'whether they do not both derive
'episremologico-juridical'
from a single process of formation; in
short, make the technology.o f power the very principle both of the
humanization of the penal system and of the knowledge of man.
2'

Torture
4. Try to discover vihether this entry ofthe soul on to the scene
of penal justice, and with it the insertion in legal practice of a whole
'scientific'knowledge,
corpus of is not the eflect of a transformation
of the way in which the body itself is invested by power relafions.
In short, try to study the metamorphosiso f punitive methods on
the basis of a political technology of the body in which might be
read a common history of power relations and object relations.
Thus, by an analysis of penal leniency as a technique of power,
one might understand both how man, the soul, the normal or
abnormal individual have come to duplicate crime as objects of
penal intervention; and in what way a specific mode of subjection
was able to give birth to man as an object of knowledge for a dis-
'scientific'
course with a status.
But I am not claiming to be the first to have worked in this
direction.2
Rusche and Kirchheimer's great work, Punishment and Social
Stuctures, provides a number of essentialr eferencep oints. We must
6rst rid ourselveso f the illusion that penality is above all (if not
exclusively) a meanso f reducing crime and that, in this role, accord-
ing to the social forms, the political systems or beliefs, it may be
severeo r lenient, tend towards expiation of obtaining redress,t o-
wards the pursuit of individuals or the attribution of collective
'concrete
responsibility. We must analyse rather the systems of
punishment', study them as social phenomena that cannot be
accountedf or by the juridical structureo f societya lone,n or by its
fundamental ethical choices; we must situate them in their field of
operation,i n which the punishmento f crime is not the solee lement;
'negative'
we must show that punitive measuresa re not simply
mechanismst hat make it possible to repress,t o prevent, to exclude,
to eliminate; but that they are linked to a whole series of positive
and usefule ffectsw hich it is their task to support (and, in this sense,
although legal punishment is carried out in order to punish offences,
one might say that the definition of offencesa nd their prosecution
are carriedo ut in turn in order to maintaint he punitive mechanisms
and their functions). From this point of view, Ruschea nd Kirch-
heimer relate the different systemso f punishment with the systems
of production within which they operate:t hus, in a slavee conomy,
24

The body of the condemned
punitive mechanisms serve to provide an additional labour force -
'civil'slaves
and to constitute a body of in addition to those provided
by war or trading; with feudalism, at a time when money and pro-
duction were still at an eSrly stage of development, we find a sudden
increase in corporal punishments - the body being in most casest he
only property accessiblet;h e penitentiary (the H6pital Gdn6ral, the
Spinhuis or the Rasphuis), forced labour and the prison factory
appear with the development of the mercantile economy. But the
industrial system requires a free market in labour and; in the nine-
teenth century, the role of forced labour in the mechanisms of
'corrective'
punishment diminishes accordingly and detention takes
its place. There are no doubt a number of observations to be made
about such a strict correlation.
But we can surely accept the general proposition that, in our
societies,t he systems of punishment are to be situated in a certain
'political
economy' of the body: even if they do not make use of
violent or bloody punishment, even when they use'lenient' methods
involving confinement or correction, it is always the body that is at
issue- the body and its forces, their utility and their dociliry, their
distribution 3nd their submission. It is certainly legitimate to write
a history of punishment against the background of moral ideas or
legal structures. But can one write such a history against the back-
ground of a history of bodies, when such systems of punishment
claim to have only the secret souls of criminals as their objectivel
Historians long ago began to write the history of the body. They
have studied the body in the field of historical demography or
pathology; they have consideredi t as the seato fneeds and appetites,
as the locus of physiological processesa nd metabolisms,a s a target
for the attacks of germs or virusesl they have shown to what extent
historical processesw ere involved in what might seem to be the
purely biologieal baseo f existencela nd what place should be given
'events'
in the history of society to biological such as the circulation
of bacilli, or the extension of the life-span (cf. Le Roy-Ladurie).
But the body is also directly involved in a political field; power
relations have an immediate hold upon it; they invest ir, mark it,
train it, torture it, force it to carry out tasks,t o perform ceremonies,
to emit signs. This political investment of the body is bound up,
in accordancew ith complex reciprocal relations, with its economic
2t

Torture
use; it is largely as a force of production that the body is invested
with relations of power and dominationl but, on the other hand, its
constitution as labour power is possible only if it is caught up in a
system of subjection (in which need is also a political instmment
meticulously prepared, calculated and used); the body becomes a
useful force only ifit is both a productive body and a subjectedb ody.
This subjection is not only obtained by the instruments of violence
or ideology; it can also be direct, physical, pitting force against
force, bearing on material elements, and yet without involving
violencel it may be calculated, organized, technically thought out;
it may be subtle, make use neither of weapons nor of terror and yet
remain of a physical order. That is to say, there may be a'knowledge'
of the body that is not exactly the scienceo f its functioning, and a
mastery of its forces that is more than the ability to conquer them:
this knowledge and this mastery constinrte what might be called the
political technology of the body. Of course, this technology is
diffuse, rarely formulated in continuous, systematicd iscourse; it is
often made up of bits and pieces; it implements a disparate set of
tools or methods. In spite of the coherence of its results, it is
generally no more than a multiform instrumentation. Moreover, it
cannot be localized in a particular type of institution or state
apparatus.F or they have recourse to it; they use, select or impose
certain of its methods. But, in its mechanismsa nd its effects, it is
situated at a quite different level. What the apparatusesa nd institu-
tions operate is, in a sense,a micro-physics of power, whose field
of validiry is situated in a senseb etween these great functionings
and the bodies themselvesw ith their materiality and their forces.
Now, the study of this micro-physics presupposest hat the power
exercised on the body is conceived not as a property, but as a
'appro-
strategy, that its effectso f domination are attributed not to
priation', but to dispositions, manoeuvres, tactics, techniques,
functionings; that one should decipher in it a network of relations,
constantly in tension, in activiry, rather than a privilege that one
might possesslt hat one should take as its model a perpetual battle
rather than a contract regulating a transaction or the conquest ofa
territory. In short this power is exercised rather than possessed;
'privilege',
it is not the acquired or preserveil, of the dominant
class,b ut the overall effect of its strategic positions - an effect that
z6

The body of the condemned
is manifesteda nd sometimese xtendedb y the position of those who
are dominated. Furthermore, this power is not exercised simply as
'do
an obligation or a prohibition on those who not have it'; it
invests them, is transmitted by them and through them; it exerts
pressureu pon them, just as they themsilves, in their struggle against
it, resist the grip it has on them. This means that these relations go
right down into the depths of society, that they are not localized in
the relations between the state and its citizens or on the frontier
between classesa nd that they do not merely reproduce, at the tevel
ofindividuals, bodies, gesturesa nd behaviour, the general form of
the law or government; that, although there is continuity (they are
indeed articulated on this form through a whole series of complex
mechanisms),t here is neither analory nor homology, but a specific-
ity of mechanisma nd modality. Lastly, they are not univocal; they
define innumerable poins of ionfrontation, focuses of instability,
each of which has its own risks of conflict, of struggles, and of an
at leastt emporary inversion of the power relations. The overthrow
'micro-powers'
of these does not, then, obey the law of all or
nothing; it is not acquired once and for all by a new control ofthe
apparatusesn or by a new functioning or a destruction of the in-
stitutions; on the other hand, none of its localized episodesm ay be
inscribed in history except by the effectst hat it induceso n the entire
network in which it is caught up.
Perhaps, too, we should abandon a whole tradition that allows
us to imagine that knowledge can exist only where the power rela-
tions are suspendeda nd that knowledge can develop only outside its
injunctions, its demandsa nd its interests. Perhapsw e should aban-
don the belief that power makes mad and that, by the same token,
the renunciation of power is one of the conditions of knowledge.
We should admit rather that power produces knowledge (and not
simply by encouraging it becausei t servesp ower or by applying it
becausei t is useful); that power and knowledge directly imply one
another; that there is no power relation without the correlative
constitution of a field of knowledge, nor any knowledge that does
not presupposea nd constitute at the same time pow-r relations.
'power-knowledge
These relations' are to be analysed, therefore,
not on the basis of a subject of knowledge who is or is not free in
relation to the power system, but, on the contrary, the subject who

Torture
knows, the objects to be known and the modalities of knowledge
must be regarded as so many effects of these fundamental implica-
tions of power-knowledge and their historical transformations. In
short, it is not the activity of the subject of knowledge that pro-
duces a corpus of knowledge, useful or resistant to power, but
power-knowledge, the processesa nd struggles that traverse it and
of which it is made up, that determines the forms and possible
domains of knowledge.
To analyset he political investment of the body and the micro-
physics ofpower presupposest,h erefore, that one abandons- where
power is concerned- the violence-ideology opposition, the meta-
phor of property, the model of the contract or of conquestl that -
where knowledge is concerned - one abandons the opposition
'disinterested',
betweenw hat is'interested' and what is the model of
knowledge and the primacy of the subject. Borrowing a word from
Petty and his contemporaries,b ut giving it a different meaning from
the one current in the seventeenthc entury, one might imagine a
'anatomy'.
political This would not be the study of a statei n terms of
'body'
a (with its elements,i ts resourcesa nd its forces), nor would
it be the study of the body and its surroundings in terms of a small
'body
state. One would be concerned with the politic', as a set of
material elements and techniques that serve as weapons, relays,
communication routes and supports fior the power and knowledge
relations that invest human bodies and subjugate them by turning
them into objects of knowledge.
It is a question of situating the techniques of punishment -
whether they seize the body in the ritual of public torture and
execution or whether they are addressedt o the soul - in the history
of this body politic; of considering penal practices less as a conse-
quence of legal theories than as a chapter of political anatomy.
'The
Kantorowitz gives a remarkable analysis of King's Body':
a double body according to the juridical theology of the Middle
Ages, since it involves not only the transitory element that is born
and dies, but another that remains unchanged by time and is main-
tained as the physical yet intangible support of the kingdom;
around this duality, which was originally close to the Christological
model, are organizeda n iconography, a political theory ofmonarchy,
legal mechanismst hat distinguish between as well as link the person
z8

The body of the condemned
of the king and the demandso f the Crown, and a whole ritual that
reachesi ts height in the coronation, the funeral and the ceremonies
of submission. At the opposite pole one might imagine placing the
body of the condemned manl he, too, has his legal status; he gives
rise to his own ceremonial and he calls forth a whole theoretical
'surplus
discourse,n ot in order to ground the power' possessedb y
'lack
the person ofthe sovereign, but in order to code the ofpower'
with which those subjectedt o punishment are marked. In the darkest
region of the political field the condemnedm an representst he sym-
metrical, inverted figure of the king. We should analysew hat might
be called, in homage to Kantorowitzr'the least body of the con-
demned man'.
If the surplus power possessedb y the king gives rise to the
duplication of his body, has not the surplus power exercisedo n the
subjectedb ody of the condemnedm an given rise to another type of
'non-corporal', 'soul',
duplicationl That of a a as Mably called it.
The history of this'micro-physics'of the punitive power would then
'soul'.
be a genealogy or an element in a genealogy of the modern
Rather than seeing this soul as the reactivated remnants of an ideo-
logy, one would see it as the present correlative of a certain tech-
nology of power over the body. It would be wrong to say that the
soul is an illusion, or an ideological effect. On the contrary, it exists,
it has a reality, it is produced permanently around, on, within the
body by the functioning of a power that is exercised on those
punished - and, in a more general v/ay, on those one supervises,
trains and corrects, over madmen, children at home and at school,
the colonized, over those who are stuck at a machine and supervised
for the rest of their lives. This is the historical reality of this soul,
which, unlike the soul represented by Christian theology, is not
born in sin and subject to punishment, but is born rather out of
methods of punishment, supervision and constraint. This real, non-
corporal soul is not a substance;i t is the element in which are
articulated the effects of a certain type of power and the reference
of a certain type of knowledge, the machinery by which the power
relations give rise to a possiblec orpus of knowledge, and knowledge
extends and reinforces the effects of this power. On this reality-
reference,v arious concepts have been constructed and domains of
analysisc arved ouu psyche,s ubjectivity, personality, consciousness,
29

Torture
!tc.; on it have been built scientific techniques and discourses,
and the moral claims of humanism. But let there be no misunder-
standing: it is not that a real man, the object of knowledge, philo-
sophical reflection or technical intervention, has been substituted
for the sout, the illusion of the theologians. The man described for
us, whom we are invited to free, is already in himself the effect of a
'soul'inhabits
subjection much more profound than himself. A him
and brings him to existence,w hich is itself a factor in the mastery
that power exercises over the body. The soul is the effect and
instrument of a political anatomy; the soul is the prison of the body.
That punishment in general and the prison in particular belong
to a political technology of the body is a lesson that I have learnt
not so much from history as from the present. In recent years,
prison revolts have occurred throughout the world. There was cer-
tainly something paradoxicala bout their aims, their slogansa nd the
way they took place. They were revolts against an entire state of
physical misery that is over a century old: against cold, suffocation
and overcrowding, against decrepit walls, hunger, physical mal-
treatment. But they were also revolts against model prisons, tran-
quillizers, isolation, the medical or educational services.W ere they
revolts whose aims were merely material?O r contradictory revolts:
against the obsolete, but also against comfort; against the warders,
but also againstt he psychiatristsi In fact, all thesem ovements - and
the innumerable discoursest hat the prison has given rise to since
the early nineteenth century - have been about the body and
material things. What has sustained these discourses,t hese mem-
ories and invectives are indeed those minute material details. One
may, if one is so disposed,s eet hem as no more than blind demands
or suspectt he existenceb ehind them ofalien strategies.I n fact, they
were revolts, at the level of the body, against the very body of the
prison. What was at issuew as not whether the prison environment
was too harsh or too aseptic, too primitive or too efficient, but its
very materiality as an instrument and vector of poweq it is this
whole technology of power over the body that the technology of
the 'soul' - that of the educationalists,p sychologists and psychia-
trists - fails either to concealo r to compensate,f or the simple reason
that it is one of its tools. I would like to write the historv of this
30

The body of the condemned
prison, with all the political investments 6f the body that it gathers
together in its closed architecture. Whyt Simply because I am
interestedi n the pastl No, if one meansb y that writing a history of
the past in terms of the present. Yes, if one means writing the
history of the present.3
tr

Medacl ommemoratrnLgo ursX IV'sf rrstm rlrtary
revuern 1 6 68( B .N.C abrnedte sm 6darlles).
Cf.p .18 8.
Handwrrtrnmg odel( Collectronhsr stonquedse
l'l.N.R.D.PC.)f..p .1 52.

J. Bentham. Pfan otth! Panopticon ( fra Works of Jercmy Bentham, ed. Bowring,
vol. lV. 18 43. 17 2-3). Cf. o. 201.

:
lii:
N Harou-RomarnP. lanf ora penttenttary1,8 40 A pnsonerr, n hrscell,k neehnga t
prayerb eforel he centralI n spectront ower. Cf. p 250.

5 TheM arsonc entralea t Rennesn 1877.C f.p . 250.
6 lnterioro fthe penitentrarayt StatevrlleU, nitedS talest,w entiethc entuty.C f. p. 250.

Bedtrmea t the reformatoryo f Mettray. Ct. p.294.

Lectureo n the evrlso f alcohohsmIn t he audttonumo f Fresnesp rrson

9 Steammachrneforthe'celenferous'correcilonofyoungboysandgrrls'Fathers
and Mothers.U nclesa nd Aunts, GuardtanM astersa nd Mrstresseso f boardrng
schoolsanda llthosewhoh avel azy,g reedyd, rsobedrenrt,e belhousr nsolent.
quarrelsometa, le-bearrngc,h atterrngr,r rehgroucsh rldreno, r chrldrenh avrnga ny
other defect,a re herebyr nformedt hat Mr Bogeymana nd Mrs Bncabrach ave,usts et
up n evetym ane of the clty of Parrsa machrnes rmrlart o the one representedI n thts
engravrnga nda rer eadyt o accepta lln aughtyc hrldrenr n needo f correclronrn
therfe stabhshrnentseacdha y,f romm rddaytot wo o'clock MrWerewolf,C oalman
ScarecrowE, at-wrthoutH- ungera nd MrsW rldcat.S prtetuSl laga nd Dnnk-wtthout-
Thrrstf,r rendsa nd relatronos f Mr Eogeymana nd Mrs Brrcabracw, rll,f or a smalls um,
set up slmrlarm achrnesto be sentI nto provrncratlo wns and wtll themselvess upervtse
therro peratlonT hec heapnesso f correctrong rvenb y the steamm achrnea ndt he
surpnsrnge ffectst hat rt producesw rll persuadep arenlst o avarlt hemselveso f rt as
oftena st he badb ehavrouor f therrc hrldrenw rll requrrert We alsot aker ncorrrgrble
'
chrldrena s boarders, they aref ed on breada nd water Engravtngo f the late
erghteenthc enlury( Collectronshrstonquesdel'l.RN. D P.).