Professor Harcourt Criminal Law Course Chalk Reading
The Criminal Trial Process in New York State
[Imagine] you were arrested because a police officer had reason to believe that you had committed a
felony, misdemeanor, or violation. If you are charged with a felony, the officer must file a felony
complaint in the Criminal Court. If you are charged with a misdemeanor, the officer must file a
misdemeanor complaint in the Criminal Court. If you are charged with a violation, you may not have
been arrested, but a police officer may have brought you to a police station to give you a desk
appearance ticket (D.A.T.). A D.A.T. requires you to appear in court at the date, time, and courthouse
written on it.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CENTRAL BOOKING
If you were not given a D.A.T, you are held in jail and brought before a judge in Criminal Court, usually
within twenty-four hours of your arrest. Before seeing a judge, you are brought to Central Booking
where your fingerprints and photograph are taken. During this period, a fingerprint report (rap sheet) is
prepared which shows your criminal history, if you have one.
Meanwhile, the prosecutor consults with the police officer who arrested you. If the prosecutor decides
that there is enough evidence, he or she will prepare the charge(s) against you. If the prosecutor decides
that there is not enough evidence to prove that you committed the crime, you will be released from jail.
You will also be interviewed by a representative of the Criminal Justice Agency (C.J.A.). The purpose of
this interview is to assist the judge in deciding whether to: 1) set bail, 2) release you from jail without
bail (released on your own recognizance, or R.O.R.'d), or 3) hold you in jail without bail (remanded). If
bail is set, it may be paid (posted) at any courthouse during business hours and at the jail where you are
being held at any time.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CRIMINAL COURT ARRAIGNMENT
Once these procedures are completed, you are brought to court for arraignment, where you will learn
what charges have been brought against you. At the arraignment, your lawyer and the prosecutor may
discuss the possibility of settling your case without the need of having a trial. They may negotiate a plea
bargain which you may either accept and plead guilty, or reject and plead not guilty.
You have the right to a lawyer at the arraignment. You may hire your own lawyer or, if you do not have
enough money to hire your own lawyer, the court will appoint a lawyer from The Legal Aid Society, the
1

Professor Harcourt Criminal Law Course Chalk Reading
Assigned Counsel Plan for the City of New York (18-B lawyer), Bronx Defenders, Brooklyn Defender
Services, New York County Defender Services, Queens Law Associates, P.C., or the Office of Paul Battiste,
Esq. (Staten Island). In the most serious homicide cases, a lawyer from the Capital Defender's Office, or a
lawyer specially trained to handle such cases, will be appointed. All such lawyers are paid by the State. If
you intend to hire your own lawyer, but cannot do so in time for your arraignment, the judge will
appoint one to represent you, at the State's expense, for the arraignment only. After that time, the
lawyer you hire will represent you.
If you are in jail, the prosecutor will have a chance at the arraignment to ask the judge to keep you in jail
(remand) or order bail. Your lawyer will be given a chance to reply to the prosecutor's arguments. The
judge will then decide your bail conditions. Your bail conditions may change as your case continues.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PLEA BARGAINING
Once you, your lawyer, and the prosecutor become more familiar with your case, an attempt to settle
(resolve or dispose of) your case without a trial may be made through plea bargaining with the
prosecutor. A plea bargain can take a variety of forms. In one instance, the prosecutor may ask that you
plead guilty in exchange for his or her promise to recommend to the judge that a particular sentence be
imposed. In certain cases, the prosecutor may offer to allow you to plead guilty to a less serious offense
than the one with which you are charged. Such a plea reduces the range of sentences the judge may
impose. The judge is the only one who can decide what your sentence will be (subject to limits set by
law) and all bargains must be approved by the judge. Plea bargaining may continue up to or even during
trial. If you do not want a trial, you may always plead guilty to all the charges brought against you
whether or not the prosecutor agrees. The judge will then decide your sentence.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
AFTER YOUR CRIMINAL COURT ARRAIGNMENT
If you are charged with a felony and have already been arraigned in Criminal Court, your case will be
sent to a court part where felony cases await the action of the grand jury. In rare instances, a hearing
upon the felony complaint (preliminary hearing) may be held to determine whether the prosecutor has
enough evidence to hold you in jail while waiting for the grand jury to hear your case.
If you are charged with a felony and are in jail because you were remanded or are unable to post bail,
the prosecutor must present evidence in your case to the grand jury no later than 144 hours (six days)
after your arrest. If the prosecutor does not present the evidence to the grand jury within this time, you
will be released from jail on your own recognizance (R.O.R.'d) unless the prosecutor can show a judge
why the case could not be presented sooner to the grand jury. If you are released from jail, this does not
mean that your case has been dismissed. You must still return to court on any date set by the judge.
2

Professor Harcourt Criminal Law Course Chalk Reading
If the grand jury finds that there is enough evidence that you committed a crime, it may file an
indictment. If the grand jury finds that there is not enough evidence that you committed a crime, you
will be released from jail. If you give up your right to have your case presented to the grand jury, the
prosecutor will file a Superior Court Information (S.C.I.).
If you are charged with a misdemeanor and cannot post bail, you will remain in jail for approximately
five days. If the prosecutor fails to provide the court with certain legal documents in support of the
misdemeanor complaint which was filed by the police officer who arrested you, a judge will release you
on your own recognizance (R.O.R.'d). Again, this does not mean that your case is dismissed. You must
still return to court on the date set by the judge.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GRAND JURY
Grand jury proceedings are secret and are not open to the public. The grand jury is made up of sixteen
to twenty-three people who listen to the evidence and decide whether there is enough evidence to put
you on trial for a felony. If the grand jurors decide that there is enough evidence, they vote an
indictment.
You have the right to testify before the grand jury. Although your lawyer may go with you to the
proceeding, he or she must remain silent during your testimony. Your lawyer may not address the grand
jury or object to the prosecutor's questions. If you want to speak with your lawyer before testifying, you
may do so outside the grand jury room. If you decide to testify before the grand jury, you will probably
be cross-examined by the prosecutor. Any questions the grand jurors may have for you will be asked by
the prosecutor. You may also ask that the grand jury hear witnesses willing to testify for you, although
you are not allowed to be present in the grand jury room while they testify.
If the grand jury does not vote an indictment, you will be released from jail. If the grand jury votes an
indictment, your case will be transferred from Criminal Court to Supreme Court for another arraignment
within a few weeks. This arraignment is similar to the arraignment in Criminal Court. You will be formally
charged with the crime(s) voted by the grand jury and contained in the indictment, and you will plead
either guilty or not guilty. The conditions of your bail may also be reviewed and plea bargaining may
take place. If you do not plead guilty, your case will be adjourned to a calendar part.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRE-TRIAL MOTIONS
In the calendar part, plea bargaining may take place. In addition, your lawyer will have the chance to
obtain more information (discovery) about the prosecution's case against you, and to inspect any
physical evidence in the prosecutor's possession. Your lawyer may also ask the judge if there was
enough evidence presented by the prosecutor to the grand jury to allow for the filing of the indictment.
In order to decide whether there was enough evidence, the judge will read the transcript of the grand
3

Professor Harcourt Criminal Law Course Chalk Reading
jury proceeding. If the judge finds that there was not enough evidence showing that you committed the
crime(s) charged, the judge will dismiss the charges in the indictment or reduce the indictment to charge
less serious offenses if the evidence shows that only lesser offenses were committed. In rare cases, an
indictment may be dismissed in the interest of justice, but only where the judge decides that the
prosecution of your case would be unjust.
If police officers took property from you, or if you made a statement to them, or if they had a witness
identify you, your lawyer may file a motion asking that such evidence be suppressed. The judge may
order that a suppression hearing be held. You have a right to be present at the hearing.
There are different kinds of hearings that may be held, depending on the kind of motion you make to
the judge. At a Mapp hearing, for example, the judge hears evidence on the issue of whether the police
legally seized property from you. At a Huntley hearing, the judge hears evidence on the issue of whether
police officers acted legally when and if you made a statement to them and whether the statement was
voluntarily made. At a Wade hearing, the judge hears evidence on the issue of whether police officers
used fair methods when they had witnesses identify you as having committed the crime. At a Dunaway
hearing, the judge hears evidence on the issue of whether police officers acted legally in arresting you.
During the suppression hearing, testimony is taken from police officers and witnesses. Your lawyer will
have a chance to cross-examine the prosecution witnesses, and you will also be given a chance to testify
and call witnesses. If the prosecutor does not prove that the officers acted legally, or if you, through the
evidence you present, prove that the police acted illegally, the judge will suppress the evidence. If the
judge suppresses the evidence, the prosecutor will not be able to introduce the evidence against you at
your trial. If the prosecutor has no other evidence against you and does not intend to appeal the judge's
decision, he or she will most likely file a motion asking the judge to dismiss your case.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE TRIAL
Once any pre-trial hearings are finished and you have chosen not to plead guilty, your case will go to a
jury part for trial, where a judge or a jury will decide whether or not the prosecutor has proven your
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. You may waive a jury and be tried before the judge.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
POST-TRIAL MOTIONS
[If you are found guilty] prior to sentencing, you may make a motion to set aside the verdict. If the judge
grants the motion, the judge may then set aside the verdict or modify it. If the judge sets aside the
verdict, you will be entitled to a dismissal, a reduction of the charges, or a new trial. These motions are
rarely granted.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4

Professor Harcourt Criminal Law Course Chalk Reading
SENTENCING
If you are convicted, whether after trial, or after pleading guilty, you will be sentenced by the judge. You,
your lawyer, the prosecutor and, in some cases, the victim of your crime, if any, will all have a chance to
be heard by the judge as to your sentence.
Before sentencing in a case where death is not a possible sentence, the Department of Probation will
prepare a report for the judge (pre-sentence report) containing information about your background and
the circumstances of the crime. You may be interviewed by the probation officer preparing the report.
Your cooperation with the Department of Probation may be a factor in the probation officer's evaluation
of you. Your lawyer and the prosecutor may also prepare pre-sentence memoranda for the judge.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
APPEALS
After you are sentenced, you have a right to appeal your conviction or sentence. You may appeal your
case no matter what sentence you receive. Your appeal will be decided by a panel of appellate judges
(appeals court) who review the proceedings of the court where you were convicted and sentenced.
If your appeal results in an affirmance, meaning the appellate court found that you received a fair trial
and there was enough evidence to prove your guilt a beyond reasonable doubt, or that your guilty plea
was properly taken, you have a limited right to seek further appeal to the highest court in New York
State, the Court of Appeals.
If the Court of Appeals decides not to review your case, or if that court affirms your conviction, you will
have reached the end of the New York State appellate process. Further proceedings, such as
applications to appeal to the United States Supreme Court, are available.
In certain circumstances, even though the charges against you have been dismissed, the prosecutor may
be permitted to appeal your case. This is called a People's appeal. If the People's appeal is successful,
the charges against you may be revived and the case against you may continue. The prosecutor is
absolutely prohibited from appealing a jury acquittal.
Source : Criminal Justice System Handbook, New York State Unified Court System (available at
http://www.nycourts.gov/litigants/crimjusticesyshandbk.shtml )
5

Professor Harcourt Criminal Law Course Chalk Reading
Source : Manhattan District Attorney’s Office
6

Professor Harcourt Criminal Law Course Chalk Reading
Note on the Illinois Courts
About the Courts in Illinois
The Supreme Court, highest tribunal in Illinois, has seven justices, elected from judicial districts for a
term of 10 years. Three justices are elected from the First District (Cook County), and one from each
of the other four districts. The Supreme Court has general administrative and supervisory authority
over all courts in the state. This authority is exercised by the Chief Justice with the assistance of the
Administrative Director and staff appointed by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court hears appeals
from lower courts and may exercise original jurisdiction in cases relating to revenue, mandamus,
prohibition or habeas corpus.
The Appellate Court hears appeals from the Circuit Courts. There are five districts of the Appellate
Court, and Judges are elected for 10-year terms. Cook County, which comprises the 1st District, has
18 Appellate Judges. The remaining 101 counties are divided into four districts that elect six Judges
each. Additional Judges are assigned by the Supreme Court to the Appellate Court, temporarily, on a
showing of need. Elgin is the seat of the 2nd District; Ottawa, the 3rd; Springfield, the 4th, and Mount
Vernon, the 5th.
The Unified Trial Court in Illinois is the Circuit Court comprised of Circuit and Associate Judges. The
state is divided in 23 judicial circuits, each having one Chief Judge elected by the Circuit Judges. The
Chief Judge has general administrative authority in his or her circuit, subject to the overall
administrative authority of the Supreme Court. Circuit Judges may hear any case assigned to them by
the Chief Judge. Associate Judges may not preside over criminal cases in which the defendant is
charged with an offense punishable by imprisonment for one year or more (felonies), unless approval
is received from the Supreme Court. Circuit Judges are elected for a term of six years; Associate
Judges are appointed by the Circuit Judges in accordance with Supreme Court rules for a four-year
term.
When a Supreme, Appellate or Circuit Court Judgeship is vacant or newly created, candidates are
nominated at Primary Elections and elected at the General Election. However, any Judge previously
elected may, at the expiration of his or her term, have his or her name submitted to the voters on a
special judicial ballot without party designation and without an opposing candidate, on the sole
question of whether he or she shall be retained in office for another term.
The Illinois Courts Commission, composed of one Supreme Court Justice, two Appellate Court Judges,
two Circuit Judges and two citizens, has the authority after notice and public hearing (1) to remove
from office, suspend without pay, censure or reprimand any member of the judiciary for willful
misconduct in office, persistent failure to perform his or her duties or other conduct that is prejudicial
to the administration of justice or that brings the judicial office into disrepute; or (2) to suspend, with
or without pay, or retire any member of the judiciary who is physically or mentally unable to perform
his or her duties.
A Judicial Inquiry Board created by the 1970 Constitution has the authority to conduct investigations,
receive or initiate complaints concerning any member of the judiciary and file complaints with the
Courts Commission.
Judges must devote full time to their judicial duties. They may not practice law, hold a position of
profit, hold any other office under the United States, this state, unit of local government, or school
district, or hold office in any political party.
Source: Illinois Court System website
7