Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
A Reporter at Large
Sentenced to Life
for an Accident
Miles Away
A draconian legal doctrine called felony murder has put
thousands of Americans—disproportionately young and Black
—in prison.
By Sarah Stillman
December 11, 2023
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 1 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Sadik Baxter is serving a life sentence without parole for a killing he didn’t commit.
Illustration by Hokyoung Kim
Listen to this story
00:00 01:01:38
1x 15 15
In 1982, when Ian Marcus was nine days old, his father left work and
headed home to his family on Long Island on a new moped, only to be
killed by a driver who’d run a red light. “Here I was, this twenty-!ve-year-
old widow with a baby,” Ian’s mother, Donna, told me. About a year and a
half after the accident, when a bearded guy who ran a Brooklyn meat
locker asked her out, “it took ten friends to convince me to go.” Her date,
Dean Amelkin, arrived with a plastic train set for Ian. Before long, her son
had a second dad, a second last name, and two younger sisters.
The family relocated to South Florida, where Dean helped his own father
run a graphics shop. Eager for Ian and his sisters to achieve more
economic stability than he’d known, Dean pushed them academically,
weeping with pride when Ian won a national debating championship in
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 2 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
high school. Eventually, Ian went on to law school, landing a job at an
élite Manhattan law !rm; as a kid, he had watched “My Cousin Vinny”
with his dad, and they’d agreed that lawyering looked fun.
One Sunday morning in August, 2012, Ian, now thirty, was in bed in
Brooklyn when his mother called, distraught. Every Sunday for more than
a decade, Dean had met some buddies at a shopping center, biked thirty
miles to a beach and back, and then lingered over breakfast. But on that
morning Dean hadn’t made it home. For the second time in his life, Ian
had lost his father to a reckless driver.
Get The New Yorker’s daily newsletter
Keep up with everything we offer, plus exclusives available only to newsletter readers, directly in your
in-box.
Sign up
By signing up, you agree to our User Agreement and Privacy Policy & Cookie Statement. This site is
protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.
More information can be found at the Felony Murder Reporting Project.
This shock was swiftly followed by another. As a result of the crash, which
all parties agreed was unintentional, two men stood accused of murdering
his father and a friend who was cycling with him. One of those charged,
twenty-!ve-year-old Sadik Baxter, had never laid eyes on the victims. At
the moment of impact, he had been miles away, in handcuffs.
When Donna heard the charges, she asked, How is this even possible? Ian
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 3 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
had learned the answer in law school: a sweeping and uniquely American
legal doctrine, often couched in terms of justice for victims’ families, called
felony murder. To engage in certain unlawful activities, the theory goes, is
to assume full responsibility if a death occurs—regardless of intent.
The precipitating offenses in this case: Sadik Baxter had searched !ve cars
for stray cash before surrendering when cops appeared, and O’Brian
Oakley, his twenty-six-year-old friend, had #ed the scene, lost control of
his car in a police chase, and killed the bicyclists. The prosecution charged
both men with two counts of felony murder in the !rst degree.
Recently, Ian spoke with me about the case while caring for his newborn
daughter in Brooklyn; as we talked, he sometimes ran his hand down a
thick beard he’d grown in homage to his dad. “It’s truly one of the
cruellest ideas in the American legal system,” he said of felony murder.
“And most people don’t even know it exists.”
When Sadik Baxter was nine years old, he felt he’d discovered God
after tasting the fruits of his parents’ birthplace, Jamaica. He
devoured the soursop, the star fruit, and the jackfruit; his father, a former
cop in Kingston, took note. Sadik’s mother, who’d been raising him just
outside Miami, soon asked her ex to keep their son on the island for a
spell and instill in him some discipline and focus. One way to do that, the
father decided, would be to teach him to nurture plants and fruit trees of
his own—a project to which Sadik became devoted.
A month before Sadik was arrested for killing the men he’d never seen,
his father phoned him to relay a disturbing dream. “Something very bad is
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 4 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
going to happen,” he warned, but this catastrophe might be prevented if
Sadik returned to his love of horticulture. At the time, Sadik felt that
something very bad had already happened—a string of bad things, in fact.
In a 2009 Miami night-club shooting, he’d taken a stray bullet in his
tailbone, and the long recovery had cost him his job at the reception desk
of a hotel. “Can you believe I’m changing your Pampers again?” his mom
teased as she took care of him. Just as his gunshot injury began to heal,
she had a stroke, then died at the age of !fty-nine. In his grief and
physical distress, Sadik became addicted to painkillers.
His father, on the phone, put forward another way to live: Couldn’t he
import Jamaican plants and sell them in Florida grocery stores for a hefty
markup? Think Scotch-bonnet peppers! And doesn’t everyone love a
poinsettia at Christmas? His son could do something he liked and make a
living.
“Good idea,” Sadik replied, before returning to doing precious little. One
Saturday night soon afterward, he and O’Brian Oakley played blackjack
and downed free drinks at a suburban Miami casino. Long after midnight,
having lost a lot of money and popped a Percocet, Sadik left the casino
with O’Brian and ended up in Cooper City, a nearby community of back-
yard pools and luxe landscaping. It occurred to Sadik, cruising the
winding streets, that he could steal from cars to offset his losses. O’Brian,
a singer-songwriter, told me that he resisted the proposal at !rst. But just
before dawn he found himself sitting in his parked silver sedan on a
corner, as Sadik got out and looked around.
Sadik was hardly inconspicuous; at six feet nine, he was so lanky that his
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 5 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
mom had called him Coconut Tree. Still, he had the bene!t of the dark.
Like a kid up too early on Christmas morning, he discovered a drum set
in one unlocked car and an embroidered bag of baseball equipment in
another. Then he turned his attention to a black S.U.V. sitting outside a
home edged with palm trees. Inside the car, he grabbed a handful of
change and a pair of sunglasses, only to look up and see a man striding
toward him across the grass.
Bradley Kantor, a health-care entrepreneur, and his wife had just returned
from taking their son to the airport when they spotted a stranger in their
driveway. Sadik tried to saunter calmly away, but Kantor ran back to his
car and began driving slowly behind him, his wife !lming on her phone as
he called 911. The !rst of several Broward County Sheriff’s Office
vehicles pulled up in two minutes.
“Get on the ground!” a deputy ordered. Sadik was handcuffed on the grass
while having a panic attack—not least because he was supposed to pick
up his four-year-old daughter, Danasia, that morning.
Moments later, O’Brian drove past. He had #ed the scene when Kantor
arrived, but had gotten lost exiting the neighborhood and accidentally
circled back around. “That’s the car!” Kantor cried out. O’Brian hit the
accelerator, and multiple officers gave chase. They trailed him at high
speed through a residential neighborhood. Eighteen minutes later,
O’Brian ran a light and was struck by another vehicle; his car crashed into
Dean Amelkin and his friend Christopher McConnell.
Sadik learned of the accident shortly before he arrived at the sheriff’s
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 6 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
office, where he confessed to stealing from !ve unlocked cars. Wearing a
blue hospital gown, his voice thick from medications he’d been
administered after his panic attack, he asked a detective what would
happen next. He’d be charged with burglary, the detective replied. Three
weeks later, Sadik received a written copy of his indictment at a Broward
County jail.
According to a grand jury, both he and O’Brian did “unlawfully and
feloniously kill and murder” two people. The prosecution had decided not
to pursue the death penalty, but the !rst-degree-murder charges were
punishable by life in prison without parole. Later, Sadik told me, “That’s
when I went crazy.”
What makes a murderer? Intent is often assumed to be a factor. But,
for hundreds of years, the felony-murder doctrine has muddled
this conceit.
In 1716, the legal theorist William Hawkins argued that a crime like
robbery “necessarily tends to raise Tumults and Quarrels . . . and cannot
but be attended with the Danger of personal Hurt.” Any resulting death,
he posited, was tantamount to murder. Such notions began being applied
in British courts later in the eighteenth century, and, almost from the
beginning, Britons were questioning whether the felony-murder doctrine
was just.
The question came to a head in 1953, when, despite widespread pleas for
clemency, a nineteen-year-old Londoner named Derek Bentley was
executed because his sixteen-year-old accomplice in a burglary killed a
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 7 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
policeman during the crime. Four years later, the U.K. abolished the
doctrine, and other Commonwealth nations followed suit. The United
States, meanwhile, went in the opposite direction.
According to Guyora Binder, of the University at Buffalo School of Law,
the modern felony-murder doctrine is best understood as “a distinctly
American innovation.” Although it was !rst applied early in the
nineteenth century, use of the charge surged in the nineteen-seventies,
when the era of mass incarceration began. Fifty years later, Binder
contends, no country relies on the doctrine more.
In Tulsa, two men attempted to steal some
copper wire from a radio tower and
accidentally electrocuted themselves. One
of them died and the other was charged
with !rst-degree murder while recovering
from his burns in the hospital; the
girlfriend of the deceased was also
charged with murder, for having driven
them to the tower. In Topeka, a twenty-
two-year-old made the mistake of hiding
his gun atop his girlfriend’s refrigerator;
Baxter’s daughter, Danasia, was four he was charged with !rst-degree murder
years old when he was arrested.
Photograph courtesy Tracy Grant several days later, when a child
inadvertently !red it at a thirteen-year-old girl. In Minneapolis, a sixteen-
year-old girl who sat in the car while two older men killed someone in a
robbery was charged with felony murder. Deemed too young to enter the
adult prison population after her conviction, she was placed in solitary
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 8 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
con!nement for months, purportedly for her own safety. In Somerville,
Tennessee, last May, three teen-age girls overdosed on fentanyl in their
high school’s parking lot before a graduation ceremony. Two of them died,
and the surviving girl was charged with murder.
For prosecutors, the felony-murder rule offers an efficient path to
conviction: winning a case is much easier if you don’t need to prove a
person’s mens rea—“guilty mind”—or even, in some cases, to establish
that the accused was at the scene of the crime. Forty-eight states now
have some version of the statute. Charlie Smith, the president of the
National District Attorneys Association, told me that the tool is
particularly useful in cases with vulnerable victims, such as an elderly
woman in a wheelchair who gets assaulted in a purse-snatching incident
and dies. “The community would feel it’s not reasonable if the old lady’s
death was just a simple misdemeanor assault,” he said. Prosecutors often
employ felony murder when a death results from an armed robbery—a
category of crime that Smith contends, in the spirit of Hawkins, carries
death as a foreseeable outcome.
Another bene!t to prosecutors is that the steep penalties often attached to
felony murder—including life sentences—compel defendants to plead
guilty to a lesser charge. “We shouldn’t underestimate how many plea
bargains occur in the shadow of felony-murder charges across the
country,” Ekow Yankah, a law professor at the University of Michigan,
told me. “It is one of those quiet drivers of mass incarceration we never
acknowledge.”
Remarkably, no one knows how many people in the United States have
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 9 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
been imprisoned for the crime. So in 2022, working with students and
colleagues at the Yale Investigative Reporting Lab, I decided to try to get
a sense of the scale. We started by !ling public-records requests to state
corrections departments and other agencies across the country; to our
surprise, most told us that they weren’t keeping track. “The records do not
exist,” an official at the Virginia Department of Corrections wrote, in a
typical response. In most states, a felony-murder conviction gets lumped
in with other types of murder, clouding the data. It was as if the extent of
felony murder in America were hidden by design.
“If your facial expression would normally convey sarcasm, blink
twice.”
Cartoon by Tom Toro
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 10 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Cartoon by Tom Toro
Open cartoon gallery
When we eventually secured robust data from eleven states, our lab’s
analysts discovered that racial disparities for felony-murder convictions
were higher—sometimes far higher—than the already disproportionate
rates of Black incarceration over all. In Wisconsin, where Black
individuals account for less than seven per cent of the population, the data
show that they make up seventy-six per cent of those incarcerated for
felony murder. In St. Louis, every felony-murder conviction between 2010
and 2022—a total of forty-seven people, according to the State of
Missouri—was of a Black person.
To identify cases in other states, we worked with analysts at the nonpro!t
organization Measures for Justice, and with several law-school clinics, to
obtain previously unpublished data. Thus far, we’ve documented more
than ten thousand felony-murder convictions nationwide. We’ve also
scoured trial records, appeals, and news clips, !nding and scrutinizing
more than two hundred cases, like Baxter’s, in which the defendant
neither killed nor intended to kill the victim. Women were sometimes
charged for driving getaway cars for abusive partners, or performing other
tasks under duress; some of the women served longer jail terms than their
partners who’d committed the killing. And, time and again, young people
were prosecuted for what an acquaintance, to their shock, had decided to
do. In the past two years, I travelled from Alabama to California to
Michigan to meet some of the individuals who have served time on the
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 11 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
charge—along with crime victims’ families, prosecutors, public defenders,
and others—to consider how a doctrine so widely critiqued, and rejected
elsewhere in the world, has proved stubbornly resilient in the United
States.
In the days after his arrest, Sadik Baxter !gured he’d be released on bail
in time for his daughter’s !rst day of kindergarten. He’d already bought
Danasia’s uniform, a blue skirt and a bright-white shirt. But, shortly after
he learned that he was facing life in prison, a nurse in the jail’s mental-
health in!rmary was wrapping him in a “turtle suit,” a heavy anti-suicide
smock, and a doctor was prescribing a cocktail of drugs.
Once off suicide watch, Sadik remained in a spiritual hole. “I slept
through breakfast, lunch, and dinner,” he told me. The depression lasted
for most of his !rst year in jail, as he awaited trial. He had originally been
appointed a lawyer who struck him as attentive and hardworking, but that
attorney was soon replaced by another. The new guy, Sadik thought,
treated him like a nuisance. To soothe his panic, he took to playing spades
or dominoes with other men in the in!rmary’s dayroom. One afternoon,
an older man named Erik came in and asked for a word.
“Look, I can tell you’re !ghting time, because I see you’ve got stripes,”
Erik said. Indeed, in the jail, inmates’ color-coded out!ts told a story,
indicating the severity of charges. Men in black and white stripes—
including Erik—were staring down violent charges that could carry a
sentence of life. Sadik explained to Erik that he was facing !rst-degree
felony-murder charges for killing two people he’d never encountered. “So
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 12 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
why are you sitting around playing spades,” Erik asked, “when you need to
focus on learning the law?”
Erik, a Detroit native, sat down with Sadik in his six-man cell and pulled
a manila envelope from beneath his bed. “Read this,” he said, handing
over a few pages of a lawsuit he had !led. Sadik had never completed high
school but considered himself a good reader—he’d !nished a dozen James
Patterson novels in jail. He found the language of Erik’s complaint
baffling, though. The older man assured him that he’d learn.
The jail had a law library, and Erik taught Sadik how to !le a request
form that would grant him copies of a few cases at a time, precedents that
might prove relevant to his defense. Early each morning, he’d head to
Erik’s cell to read and annotate the cases, turning one of the cots into his
desk. Some of his spades partners from the dayroom eventually joined
him. “I’m all about freeing myself,” Erik told them, “and you should be,
too.”
The cell became a classroom, with Uncle E., as the men called their new
professor, using one wall as a chalkboard. Sadik told me that, in addition
to lessons on case research, “Erik taught us how to !le a lawsuit, how to
write a grievance, and how to assert our constitutional rights.”
Over the next two months, as Sadik burned through case !les on felony
murder, a thirty-year-old opinion caught his attention. In State v. Amaro,
several men arranged to sell more than thirteen thousand dollars’ worth of
marijuana to a buyer, who, it turned out, was an undercover cop. When
other cops descended on the group, just after the deal, to make arrests,
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 13 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Juan Amaro tried to escape by climbing a fence; a detective grabbed him,
pulled him to the ground, and hit him. Moments later, one of his
accomplices shot and killed an officer. Could Amaro, who had been
apprehended and struck just moments before the officer was murdered, be
prosecuted for the killing? “When I read the case, my heart beat so fast,”
Sadik told me.
On the !fth page of the opinion, the judge said that being arrested didn’t
relieve others of liability for the murder. But, in a footnote, he quali!ed
that his decision “might have been different” had a defendant been
“securely in custody, either in a jail cell, in a squad car, or perhaps even in
handcuffs.” The judge went on, “This is not the situation here, and, thus,
is left for another day.”
Sadik was ecstatic. He had been, indisputably, in handcuffs when the
deaths occurred. The judge’s phrase became a mantra of sorts, one he
often repeated in his cell when he felt hopeless: “Left for another day!”
In the spring of 2014, as Sadik’s double-murder trial approached, he
and his attorney discussed the possibility of a plea deal. Should Sadik
agree to testify against O’Brian Oakley, his felony-murder charges might
be dropped, leaving only the thefts from !ve cars. Each of those thefts
carried a !ve-year maximum sentence, and his attorney hinted that he
might be able to negotiate that potential twenty-!ve-year term down to
less than !ve years.
One of Sadik’s cousins, Brian Kirlew, had been a public defender in a
nearby county, and wrote to urge him to take a deal: “I have tried 7
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 14 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
murder cases and nearly 50 jury trials. I am as experienced and competent
as a trial lawyer gets. So listen to me carefully: You need to take a plea
deal, if you want to get out of prison alive.”
Sadik didn’t want to snitch on a friend, though. And, while he would
readily acknowledge the burglaries, he felt that he was innocent of murder,
and couldn’t imagine that a jury of his peers would disagree. Even the
judge, Jeffrey Levenson, had said at a pretrial hearing, “I think you have a
very defensible case, in terms of whether you’re responsible for the
homicide.” So in May, 2014, Sadik shuffled into a Broward County
courthouse in waist chains, changed into the black suit that he’d worn to
his mother’s funeral, and girded himself for a trial.
Before swearing in the jury, the judge offered Sadik a !nal chance to take
a plea, and underlined the risk. “Jury instructions in this are pretty tough
for a defendant,” he explained, and if Sadik were to be convicted he’d be
forced to sentence him, under mandatory sentencing rules, to life in
prison.
Florida—where our investigation discovered nearly a thousand people
serving life or life without parole for felony murder—is one of more than
twenty states in which the law routinely strips judges of their discretion in
sentencing those convicted on the charge. In many cases, a judge’s only
option is mandatory life.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 15 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
“Thanks for watering the plants and Sean.”
Cartoon by Liza Donnelly
Open cartoon gallery
Sadik’s lawyer and the prosecutor scrambled unsuccessfully to settle on a
plea deal, and Sadik duly took his seat at the front of the courtroom, his
brother and sister !ling in behind him. Friends and relatives of the victims
had !led in, too, and, in a trial that lasted just two days, several witnesses
took the stand to recall the last moments in the lives of Christopher
McConnell and Dean Amelkin.
James Bolger had biked with the two men every Sunday morning for
years. On that !nal morning, Bolger told the courtroom, he’d been
approaching a green light, trying to catch up with McConnell and
Amelkin, who were riding ahead of him. Suddenly, Bolger testi!ed, “there
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 16 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
was a silver blur of a car going through, and they were gone.” Bolger, a
trained paramedic, raced over. “And what did you see?” the prosecutor
asked. “There wasn’t anything to be done,” Bolger replied. The men’s
severed limbs were strewn in multiple directions.
Although the testimony was devastating to McConnell’s wife, Denise, she
told me that, at the time, she had found comfort in the felony-murder
doctrine, sensing its moral solidity. She had married her husband when
she was twenty-one, and he’d been her stabilizing force. They’d raised a
family and run an air-conditioning company together, and his death, she
said, had put her “through hell.” Listening to the evidence, she had
concluded that the defendant had decided to steal and dragged his friend
into it, so why shouldn’t he be held accountable for the rami!cations? No
one mentioned that, if convicted, Sadik Baxter would get life in prison—a
prospect that later disturbed her.
After the prosecutor called more than a dozen witnesses, including
Bradley Kantor, the man from whom Sadik had stolen the sunglasses and
loose change, Sadik’s attorney called just one: Sadik himself, who was
nervous and struggled to speak clearly. He confessed to the thefts, hoping
that the jury would value his willingness to take responsibility. When
Sadik !nished and returned to his seat, O’Brian Oakley’s attorney shook
his head and said, “You dumbshit! You just convicted yourself.” It took the
jury thirty-seven minutes to reach a verdict. On both counts, Sadik was
guilty of !rst-degree murder.
Ian Marcus Amelkin, back in Brooklyn, was shocked to get a call from the
state’s attorney’s office telling him the trial was over less than forty-eight
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 17 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
hours after it had begun. Hanging up, he felt his grief compounding. He’d
spent two years consumed by postmortem logistics—reminding his mom
to eat, settling Dean’s debts—while also wrecked by his own memories:
Dean’s “Wayne’s World” impressions; his turning the volume up high for
everything Jimi Hendrix, whom he’d seen in concert on New Year’s Day
in 1969; his lessons, as a meat man, on how to grill the perfect steak. And
now Dean’s death was being used by the state to separate someone else’s
father from his child.
“Another life is ruined,” Ian wrote #atly to his family in an e-mail. He’d
recently forsaken corporate law to become a public defender (“Would you
really leave all that money on the table?” his dad had wondered shortly
before he died), and the brevity of Sadik Baxter’s trial made him wonder if
a real defense had even been mounted. He called his sisters, Brett and
Chelsey, to ask what, at this point, the three of them might do.
Ian had attended New York University School of Law, where he joined
a clinic run by the Alabama civil-rights lawyer Bryan Stevenson.
(“That was back when he was legal-nerd famous, not Oprah famous,” Ian
said.) At the time, Stevenson was preparing to litigate a groundbreaking
felony-murder case before the Supreme Court: that of a fourteen-year-old
who had been sentenced to life in prison for a killing done by one of his
companions. That case contributed to the Court’s declaring that
mandatory life-without-parole sentences for juveniles were
unconstitutional. Ian was assigned to work with one of Stevenson’s death-
row clients, a case that immersed him in his professor’s contention that
“each person is more than the worst thing they’ve ever done.”
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 18 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
From the beginning, Ian had tried to apply that same perspective to Sadik
Baxter and O’Brian Oakley, and when he and his sisters learned that the
two men would be charged with double murder in the !rst degree, they
also sensed, as Brett put it, that “Dad would think it’s bullshit.” Knowing
that the State of Florida gives special weight to crime victims’
perspectives, Ian decided to try to persuade the prosecutor to dismiss the
murder charges. “I didn’t go in with an abolitionist perspective,” he
recalled. “A reasonable sentence would have been !ne with us”—say, a
maximum of ten years for Oakley and a few years for Baxter.
In a phone call with the prosecutor, the champion debater tried to be
chummy and measured as he suggested that, after an accident, locking up
two young fathers (Oakley had a daughter, too) for lengthy terms wasn’t
his family’s idea of justice. His arguments failed to land, and, Ian told me,
the prosecutor later called to #oat the idea of Oakley’s pleading to forty
years. “Very, very harsh,” Ian exclaimed, growing frustrated. Afterward, he
swung between anger at a prosecutor who seemed to want him to be “out
for blood” and guilt that he’d let Baxter and Oakley down.
With Baxter’s verdict now in, Chelsey contacted his lawyer to ask if she
and her siblings might help at sentencing. The attorney was stunned—it
was the !rst time that a family of a crime victim had reached out in this
way to help one of his clients. Although Baxter’s sentence was pretty
much a foregone conclusion, the lawyer thought the fact that Dean’s kids
were asking for restraint couldn’t hurt. It might even help someday, the
Amelkins !gured, should Baxter appeal.
In early June, 2014, when Sadik returned to court to be sentenced, his
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 19 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
lawyer approached the bench, holding aloft the Amelkin siblings’ plea for
mercy. It argued that Sadik had been in handcuffs when the chase began
and that a life sentence without parole would be “cruel and unusual
punishment” and leave them “heartsick.” After acknowledging the missive
and calling Sadik forward to read a letter of apology, Judge Levenson
decreed the inevitable: life without parole. “The law in itself, good, bad, or
indifferent, is enacted by the legislature,” Levenson said, concluding,
“Good luck to you, Mr. Baxter.”
The man who killed Donna Amelkin’s !rst husband got nine months.
The man whose friend killed her second husband got life without
parole. As “nuts” as the discrepancy seemed to her, she told me, she hadn’t
lost much sleep over it. (Either way, she said, “I’m still the one who’s left
alone.”) She had been more preoccupied by a different injustice: that the
felony-murder rule was being used to obscure the role that the Broward
County Sheriff’s Office had played in Dean’s death.
Donna ran a high-school English department, and while sitting shivah
she’d received a letter from the husband of a former co-worker. A former
law-enforcement official in South Florida, he’d enclosed a copy of the
county sheriff’s policy on high-speed chases, with key phrases
highlighted. Deputies were barred from starting hot pursuits if the
suspects weren’t immediately endangering other people’s lives or engaged
in a “forcible felony,” such as a rape, a murder, or a home invasion. Such
policies exist for a reason: high-speed law-enforcement chases are often
lethal, causing roughly one death per day in the U.S., according to a 2017
report by the Bureau of Justice Statistics. The Amelkins began asking why
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 20 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Baxter’s thefts had necessitated such a chase, upon which the sheriff
denied that a chase had even occurred. In 2014, the family !led a
wrongful-death claim against the sheriff’s office and reached a settlement
that came with no admission of fault.
Felony murder “made it easier for the sheriff’s department not to take
responsibility,” Donna told me. Once Baxter and Oakley were charged
with murder, she said, “the question of how the deaths happened got
pushed aside.”
In our reporting lab, we identi!ed more than thirty instances of high-
speed law-enforcement chases that resulted in fatalities and were followed
by a felony-murder charge. In some of these cases, police had violated
their own pursuit policies.
Another subset of felony-murder cases we examined involved shootings
by people in law enforcement. In many states, when an officer !res a lethal
gunshot at a crime scene, individuals who were with the victim may be
charged with the killing. (The rationale is that, without the instigating
felony, police wouldn’t have been on the scene in the !rst place.) We
compiled twenty cases in which an officer pulled the trigger and someone
else assumed the charge; the best known of these cases is that of LaKeith
Smith.
In 2015, when he was !fteen, LaKeith and four friends broke into two
unoccupied homes in Millbrook, Alabama, to steal Xbox games and other
electronics. A neighbor called the police, who appeared, guns drawn.
LaKeith ran into the woods, and one of the officers shot and killed his
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 21 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
friend, sixteen-year-old A’Donte Washington, who they said had a gun.
The prosecution alleged that one of the older teen-agers had !red a shot,
and a grand jury found that the officer’s use of force was “justi!ed.”
LaKeith was charged as an adult with murder, for the killing at the
officer’s hand.
Reviewing our felony-murder data, which included more than a thousand
cases involving teens like LaKeith, my lab colleagues and I were struck by
a contradiction. The Supreme Court has acknowledged that adolescence
is marked by “a lack of maturity and an underdeveloped sense of
responsibility,” which make juveniles “less deserving of the most severe
punishments.” But when it comes to felony murder, we discovered, being
younger was not a mitigating variable. The average age of individuals
convicted of felony murder appeared to be lower than for standard murder
—in many states, more than four years lower.
Jenny Egan, the chief attorney for the
juvenile division of the public
defender’s office in Baltimore, told me,
“Because of peer pressure, young
people tend to commit crimes in
groups,” and, when a death results, “all
of the kids involved get charged with
murder, and it gets used as a cudgel to
get kids to coöperate against each
other.” Nazgol Ghandnoosh, the co-
director of research at the Sentencing
Project, notes that youth of color are
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 22 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
particularly likely to be “punished for In prison, Baxter developed a mastery
of felony-murder jurisprudence which
presence.” surpassed that of many professional
defense attorneys. Photograph
courtesy the author
LaKeith watched as, one by one, his
friends took pleas that ranged from seventeen to twenty-eight years. But
LaKeith and his family, some of whom knew !rsthand how violent the
state’s prison system could be, decided to take his case to trial. In 2018,
LaKeith, who is Black, was sentenced before an all-white jury to sixty-!ve
years in prison, later reduced to !fty-!ve years. “There’s no sugar-coating
it,” LaKeith’s mother, BronTina Smith, told me. “He was punished for
bucking the system and trying to exercise his right to a trial.”
BronTina has since become a prominent voice in a movement to
challenge the felony-murder rule—a movement led for many years by
families of incarcerated people and lately galvanized by Black Lives
Matter. BronTina works with a coalition spearheaded by Represent
Justice, a nonpro!t organization, and together they persuaded celebrities
from Erykah Badu to Kim Kardashian to direct attention to LaKeith’s
case. One of the coalition’s goals is to lobby for state reforms that would
limit how the felony-murder charge can be used against defendants who
didn’t actually kill, including those held responsible for shootings by law
enforcement.
Marshan Allen, a Represent Justice staffer who canvassed Millbrook
residents on the issue at bars and tailgates, said, “We spoke to a lot of very
conservative people, and most of them had no idea how this law works.
But, once we explained it to them, we found that they didn’t agree with
LaKeith’s sentence at all. It’s intuitive. People get it.”
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 23 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Last December, under pressure, the judge who’d originally sentenced
LaKeith to sixty-!ve years agreed to a resentencing hearing. “GOD IS
REAL!!!!!” his mother posted online. In court, the civil-rights lawyer
Leroy Maxwell would have a chance to make the case that LaKeith’s
original public defender had neglected to present mitigating evidence.
Maxwell hoped that his client might be resentenced to time served, and
walk free.
Last March, on the night before the hearing, LaKeith’s supporters held a
vigil in Montgomery. While making posters to take to court, his family
chatted about the meal they’d serve when he came home. “Greens and
chicken and mac and cheese—all the soul food,” BronTina said, smiling.
“Cereal,” countered LaKeith’s aunt Gladys, remembering how the boy
would come to her house “and suddenly all of my Cinnamon Toast
Crunch and Frosted Flakes would be gone.”
The next morning, LaKeith—now a twenty-four-year-old who’d spent a
third of his life behind bars—entered a courthouse in Wetumpka,
Alabama, in orange shower shoes and chains. His mom, in sparkly green
sneakers and a fedora, sat in the !rst row. Judge Sibley Reynolds listened
to a series of witnesses, including A’Donte Washington’s father, who
testi!ed that he hadn’t been called at the original trial. What he would
have said, he told the judge, was that LaKeith shouldn’t serve time,
because “he wasn’t the one that murdered my son.” Even the D.A.
appeared receptive to a lighter sentence, saying of the original attorney,
“Hell, I wouldn’t hire her!”
Finally, the judge looked down at LaKeith. “I’m sentencing you to thirty
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 24 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
years in custody,” he said. Many people in the gallery gasped. “Dirty bigot
judge!” a woman behind me shouted. “The cops killed A’Donte!” That
night, the homecoming feast that the Smiths had optimistically prepared
was used to feed a tearful group.
Because Florida is one of many states where what begins as a visible
!rst-degree felony-murder charge in the data gets mysteriously
truncated, after conviction, into !rst-degree murder, Sadik Baxter was
now, to the system, just another killer—a wary lifer who passed the years
performing prison jobs with antebellum-sounding names, like “houseman”
and “groundsman.” But, on his own time, Sadik had channelled his inner
Uncle E. and evolved into a jailhouse lawyer whose mastery of felony
murder surpassed that of many professional defense attorneys. Three
!ling boxes of annotated case law were among his most valued
possessions; he carted them from prison to prison over the years.
He’d come to believe that one of the most promising defenses in his case
was the “independent act” theory, which had received passing mention in
State v. Amaro. It established that a defendant wasn’t responsible for an
illegal act by his “co-felon” if that act was committed after, and apart from,
the original felony. Sadik believed that O’Brian’s fatal police chase, having
come after his own arrest, was an independent act. He just needed to
prove it to a judge.
On good days, he hunkered down with a copy of “The Jailhouse Lawyer’s
Handbook,” sixth edition, and wrote and rewrote his pro-se legal briefs,
Jamaican dancehall music blasting in his earphones. On days when the
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 25 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
!ght seemed hopeless, he turned to “Conversations with Myself,” by
Nelson Mandela. “At least, if for nothing else,” Mandela had written in a
letter from Robben Island, “the cell gives you the opportunity to look
daily into your entire conduct, to overcome the bad and develop whatever
is good in you.” Mandela turned to meditation, dream journaling, and
letter writing. Sadik took up all three.
“Just wave your watch over the screen for a while, then audibly sigh
and swipe your credit card.”
Cartoon by Lars Kenseth
Open cartoon gallery
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 26 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Open cartoon gallery
A particular obsession was imagining his way into the life of his daughter,
Danasia. If he couldn’t join her at her basketball games, he could at least
commune with her in his manifestation journal, where he would articulate
his wishes for her future as if they had already happened. One day, having
heard that she was selling lip gloss, he’d written, “Danasia’s lip gloss
company has sky rocketed in sales and is the most popular lip gloss
company in the world. It is currently net worth 7 million dollars between
the 7 stores she owns and is climbing by the day.”
Danasia was now a teen-ager. Sadik had been !ling motions and appeals
since she was in the !rst grade. As he discovered, litigation is a waiting
game; years could pass between a petition and a ruling. He tried arguing
that he’d had ineffective representation, and that the sharing of sixty-nine
“gruesome” photographs of the victims’ body parts and a bloody crime
scene had biased the jury. He tried to get his sentence reduced, appealing
to “the mercy of this court” to convert his charge to manslaughter; in May,
2018, the court replied: “denied.” In 2019, he !led a motion for post-
conviction relief (“denied”), and in 2020 a motion for a rehearing
(“denied”). In 2021, he ventured a Motion to Correct Illegal Sentence
(“denied”).
Sadik also wrote to half a dozen journalists, and to more than twenty law-
school clinics and civil-rights attorneys around the country. In a letter to
then President Barack Obama, he explained that he’d faced discrimination
in court because of his race and his poverty, and concluded, “I humbly ask
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 27 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
you to point me in the right direction to help me with my case.” These
efforts came to nothing.
Elsewhere in Florida, in another prison cell, his co-defendant, O’Brian
Oakley, was waging a similar battle. O’Brian had been convicted on even
more grounds than Sadik, including two counts of !rst-degree felony
murder and two counts of vehicular homicide, as well as !ve counts of
burglary. (The court was evidently unmoved by another of Ian Marcus
Amelkin’s letters: “Now four lives—my dad’s, Mr. McConnell’s, Mr.
Baxter’s, and Mr. Oakley’s—are forever destroyed by the events of August
5, 2012. . . .”)
O’Brian appealed: How could he be guilty of four counts of murder when
only two deaths had occurred? In 2018, an appellate court agreed and
dropped his two vehicular-homicide convictions. But the mandatory
sentence—life without parole—remained.
When I spoke to O’Brian last spring, he wept throughout the
conversation. “People lost their lives, and I have to live with that,” he told
me, describing how often he replays the scene of the accident, and his
panicked decision to #ee. “Every day, I wake up and realize that I feel pain
even in my dreams,” he said. Before his incarceration, lyrics and musical
ideas came easily to him. “But I’ll try to write a song now and I can’t
!nish it,” he said. “I try to sing, but with the pain I can’t.”
By the fall of 2021, Sadik’s options for appeal in Florida were
dwindling and he realized that he had one real hope left: a federal
claim. He’d already argued that his life sentence was “repugnant to the
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 28 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment,” because discretion
in sentencing is a paramount function of the judicial system, and the
judge in his case had been stripped of it. Now, citing the “independent
act” doctrine and State v. Amaro, he would make a key assertion—that his
life sentence was an “unreasonable application of established federal law,”
re#ecting the kind of “grossly disproportionate” sentencing that is
prohibited by the Eighth Amendment.
Not long after Sadik !led his argument, I happened to write to him for
the !rst time, requesting an interview. His response to my letter came
almost immediately: “I must say this still feels surreal, as for years I’ve
been searching for a listening ear to hear the corruption and injustice in
my case, or even to be acknowledged as a human being.” Soon, we were
talking almost daily.
One night in April, Sadik called, anxious. He believed the federal judge
would be ruling soon, and asked, “Have there been any updates in my
case?” Not having a lawyer put him at a serious disadvantage; it often took
weeks for him to receive basic updates from the court, even on time-
sensitive matters.
I logged into pacer, a federal-records database, and there it was: a ruling
from U.S. District Judge Beth Bloom. I downloaded the !le, quickly
scrolled to the bottom to !nd the judge’s decision on his habeas petition,
and read it aloud: “denied.” Then I read more closely, and said, “Hold
on.”
The judge had rejected the appeal on thirteen grounds. Her reasoning
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 29 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
turned on a little-known but extraordinarily consequential law, the
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996. Signed by
President Bill Clinton, the law radically curtails the rights of incarcerated
people. Even if Judge Bloom agreed that Sadik was in prison
unconstitutionally, she’d have to defer to the Florida court, unless a very
narrow set of conditions could be met. The surprise in the ruling came on
the ninth page, when she took up Sadik’s Eighth Amendment claim.
“The court agrees that the life sentences in this case were harsh,” she
wrote. She later quoted a sentencing statement from Judge Levenson in
2014, acknowledging that the defendant had had little to do with the two
bicyclists’ deaths: “Notwithstanding your involvement in the case, which I
think we all agree was not a signi!cant involvement, I am mandated to
sentence you to life in prison.” On Eighth Amendment grounds, Judge
Bloom had decided to grant Sadik’s case a precious “certi!cate of
appealability,” allowing him to present his argument to a higher court.
Over the phone, he exclaimed, “I’m not fully dead!”
Although defenders of felony murder often cite its value as a
deterrent, none of those I interviewed who had been imprisoned for
the crime, including Sadik, knew of the statute before being charged with
it. In 2021, a task force commissioned by the Minnesota legislature
further explored such questions of deterrence. This inquiry was spurred
largely by two mothers, Toni Cater and Linda Martinson, whose
daughters were serving time on the charge after a man they’d met only
minutes earlier shot and killed someone.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 30 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Upon analyzing state data and reviewing empirical research, the task force
concluded that the felony-murder charge “does not deter behavior” and
“does not reduce the risk of re-offense.” What’s more, it intensi!ed
inequities. A Black person in Minnesota was !ve times more likely to be
charged with felony murder than a white person, and a Native American
person ten times more likely. Fully a third of those locked up for murder
in the state were in for felony murder, and most of them had no prior
conviction for “an offense against a person.” This spring, the legislature
decided to curtail severe sentences and limit the future use of the felony-
murder charge for defendants who did not commit a killing. Because the
reform will apply retroactively, hundreds of people, including the
daughters of Cater and Martinson, may have a chance to win relief.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 31 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
“Do you have one that smells like something interesting is
happening in our lives?”
Cartoon by E. S. Glenn and Colin Nissan
Open cartoon gallery
Minnesota legislators took their cues from California, where, after
groundbreaking reforms, more than six hundred people have had their
sentences reduced and, according to a study by California’s Office of the
State Public Defender, taxpayers have saved as much as $1.2 billion in
prison costs. Illinois and Colorado have also recently narrowed the use of
the felony-murder doctrine, and a bill now pending in New York would
permit the use of the felony-murder charge only if a defendant “directly
caused the death recklessly” or served as “an accomplice . . . in the felony,
and acted with the intent to cause death.”
But, as some states pull back from the concept, others are expanding it. In
Arkansas, legislators have considered a bill allowing district attorneys to
charge women who obtain unauthorized abortions, and anyone who aids
them, with felony murder. (In the Dobbs decision, Justice Samuel Alito
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 32 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
wrote that abortion offered America its “proto-felony-murder rule”; in the
colonies, if a doctor gave a pregnant woman a “potion” to aid in an
abortion and she died, he could be charged with murder.) In the wake of
Dobbs, other states have proposed legislation similar to the Arkansas bill.
Some legislators are also pushing felony murder’s expansion into another
fraught terrain: overdoses tied to the opioid epidemic.
“These cartel bosses, who have taken advantage of the weakness of
the Biden Administration, must be held accountable for the
millions of lives they have destroyed with this horri!c drug,” Senator Ted
Cruz said recently, in support of a bill to make the lethal distribution of
fentanyl punishable with federal felony-murder charges. A mere two
milligrams of the synthetic opioid, which is cheaper than heroin and is
often used as a !ller by underground drug producers, can be a lethal dose.
As deaths of unsuspecting users soar, red-state politicians have rallied
around this cause.
Some defenders and prosecutors argue that this hard line will lead to
more deaths, as fellow-users hesitate to dial 911 when they witness an
overdose. But proponents underline a payoff: that felony-murder
prosecutions will bring down drug kingpins and major suppliers.
When I examined more than three dozen overdose-related felony-murder
prosecutions, I didn’t !nd kingpins. What I found instead were
defendants like Jacob Sayre, of Ozark, Missouri. Last December, when he
was seventeen, he was charged with killing a sixteen-year-old girl,
Victoria Jones, whom he’d met at church.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 33 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
One night in September, 2022, Jacob, a homeschooled kid whose mom
helped run a Bible-study group, had received a Snapchat message from
Victoria, a softball whiz who was also a gifted student. (“She was
headstrong in science,” her father told me.) According to the probable-
cause statement, Victoria wanted Jacob to bring her some cocaine, but his
dealer didn’t have any. Jacob gave her a Percocet instead. “Only do a
quarter and then do the other quarter if you don’t feel it,” he messaged.
“Please be smart.”
Victoria locked the door to her bedroom, on whose wall hung a periodic
table she knew by heart. Not long afterward, she messaged Jacob, “Ok, I
took it, like a 3rd, fucking cut it wrong, holy duck, I feel it.” The next
morning, her dad forced open her door with a screwdriver. Victoria was
dead, and on the nightstand was a rolled-up twenty and the remains of a
small blue pill.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 34 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Shortly afterward, Jacob, who had never before been in trouble with the
law, was charged as an adult with felony murder and other offenses. “Her
loss affected the whole community, and we are one hundred per cent in
agreement with the state,” Victoria’s father, David Jones, told me. “We
don’t believe a felony-murder charge is overreach.”
When Jacob and I spoke this summer, he was on house arrest, trying to
keep calm as he awaits trial by practicing Van Halen covers on his guitar.
His mom, meanwhile, conducts ongoing imaginary conversations with the
district attorney: “So when you charge Jacob, and you put him in prison,
does that make our society any safer?”
Joshua Elbaz, of Gwinnett County, Georgia, is well positioned to
understand the urges for both retribution and mercy. When he was
twenty-one, his older brother, Brenden, died of a heroin overdose. In
2018, Joshua went to law school, imagining that he’d become a defender
and try to guide people who were battling addiction toward help, not
prison time. But in February, 2020, while he was in class, his dad called,
and called again. His younger brother, Alex, was just two months away
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 35 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
from earning his accounting degree when a Percocet laced with fentanyl
killed him.
This time, Joshua became obsessed with tracking down the man he called
“my brother’s murderer.” The attitude of the local police being, as he put
it, “Tough shit, get over it, there’s no case,” he investigated on his own.
Alex’s Samsung watch contained copies of his text messages, which
identi!ed a landscaper named Phillip Patterson as the person from whom
he had last bought drugs. Patterson was soon arrested in a sting.
Upon graduating from law school, Joshua joined the Gwinnett County
district attorney’s office as a prosecutor. The office helped bring four
felony-murder cases against dealers, and, while he didn’t formally work on
Patterson’s case, he said, “I was so angry. I’d say, ‘I’m going to take that
man to trial, and I hope he gets life.’ ” In early 2023, three years after his
younger brother’s death, he was in the courtroom for Patterson’s pretrial
hearing.
Like many people accused of felony murder, Patterson had taken a plea,
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 36 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
conceding to voluntary manslaughter and drug trafficking in exchange for
a forty-year sentence, with the possibility of parole after thirty. In court,
Patterson read a letter of apology to the Elbaz family as tears streamed
down his face. “He said, ‘I really didn’t know the drugs were laced,’ ”
Joshua remembered, “and I believed him.”
Joshua was struck by something else he’d learned in court: that Patterson
had suddenly stopped attending his family’s Sunday dinner, which had
later seemed like a clue that he was suffering from addiction. “When I
heard that,” Joshua said, “the most human part of me thought, That’s the
exact same thing that happened to Alex. He just stopped coming to
Sunday dinner.”
Although he still believes that dealers who intentionally sell fentanyl-
laced pills should be liable for murder, Joshua now thinks that murder
charges against those who are struggling with addiction themselves won’t
touch the root causes of the crisis. And, as much as he’d dreamed of seeing
Patterson led off in shackles, when it actually happened, he told me, “it hit
me like a train.”
Sadik is now incarcerated in the Okaloosa Correctional Institution, in
the Florida Panhandle, hours from where most of his family lives.
One recent Saturday morning, I joined a line of women holding special
transparent purses they’d bought to allow them to carry money for snacks
through the prison gates. Inside, I spotted Sadik instantly. Living up to his
mom’s nickname, Coconut Tree, he stood even taller than the two palms
painted on a prison wall—part of a beach scene where loved ones could
pay to get their photo taken. “I’m nervous,” he said. He hadn’t had a
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 37 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
visitor in !ve years, when Danasia had last come with her mom and his
sister.
Sadik remembers every detail of that encounter: how Danasia covered her
face when she arrived; how he’d coaxed her forward by singing “Gon’ Get
Better,” by the Jamaican artist Vybz Kartel; how, when he’d !nished, she’d
asked him to sing it again until, !nally, he protested, “You sing me a song!”
For the next !ve hours, they’d played Life and Connect Four at a picnic
table, and when visiting hours were up they had both cried. In the
following years, his efforts to sing his way into her affections grew less
successful. “She’s, like, ‘Daddy, I’m !fteen now, I don’t watch “Strawberry
Shortcake” anymore,’ ” he told me. Recently, she had been missing his
calls altogether.
He was telling me this as we sat in the stupefying heat of the prison yard
—a spot that afforded us some privacy from guards who called him Too
Tall and Sasquatch. Sadik was eating a box of fruit snacks from the
canteen which looked to me like processed plastic but reminded him of
the Jamaican fruits that had led him to God. He wanted to know what I’d
learned from other families !ghting for felony-murder-law reform, and
when I left he asked me to tell him something of the natural world
outside the prison walls. That evening, I went for a swim at a nearby
beach and sent him a photo of a waning moon over the water.
Once home, I would check pacer for updates on his federal case, and one
afternoon I found a startling posting: the court would toss out his petition
if he didn’t reply within fourteen days. He’d made a mundane !ling error
but had yet to receive a copy of this noti!cation himself, and had only a
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 38 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
matter of days left to sort it out. I called a lawyer who I thought might
help me !nd someone to translate the court’s almost incomprehensible
instructions. He described the case to Christine Monta, an appellate
attorney at the MacArthur Justice Center, who felt stunned when she
looked it up. This was the kind of legal challenge to felony murder, she
told me, that she had longed for years to take on.
Sadik Baxter’s case, she said, represented a chance to challenge the “triple
injustice” that many people incarcerated in state prisons have experienced.
First, prosecutors hit them with charges, like felony murder, that are
disproportionate to their crimes. Second, because of mandatory sentences,
defendants get “extreme, unconstitutional sentences.” And, third, because
of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act, they are hindered
from bringing their claims to federal court. To prevail, they typically have
to identify either a signi!cant and indisputable factual error made by a
state court or a preëxisting Supreme Court case that clearly backs up their
argument. “Congress has erected this very, very difficult standard, but we
really think he meets it,” Monta told me. As a number of Supreme Court
precedents have established, she went on, “punishment should not be
vastly disproportionate to your culpability, and everyone agrees that
culpability for murder here is really, really strained.”
With Sadik’s permission, she began to craft a habeas appeal on his behalf.
She hopes to argue in federal court that his mandatory life-without-
parole sentence is unconstitutional and that his case should be remanded
back to trial court for resentencing.
Not long ago, while assembling the case, she encountered an intriguing
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 39 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
relic: the impassioned letter by Ian, Brett, and Chelsey Amelkin arguing
that Sadik’s sentence was cruel and unusual, which had been omitted from
his official post-conviction court record. Moved by this lost document, she
sat at a desk lit by her own late father’s lamp and began to type the
outlines of an argument.
Could former President Trump be prosecuted for felony murder for
urging on the January 6th attack on the U.S. Capitol, which led to a
number of deaths? Could fossil-fuel-company executives be held liable for
murder for criminally deceiving the public about carbon emissions that
killed people? If we take the felony-murder doctrine’s core premise
seriously, it’s easy to imagine a radically different justice system. But, after
two years of closely reviewing cases, I can state with con!dence that the
doctrine is rarely levelled against people of in#uence. It is used instead to
impose some of our society’s harshest punishments on low-income
defendants, young people, and defendants of color.
I was reminded of this imbalance when I tried to reach out to Bradley
Kantor, who had called the police when Sadik stole the loose change and
sunglasses from his car. Searching online, I learned that two years ago
Kantor had been arrested in a federal raid. He pleaded guilty to
conspiracy to commit forty-two million dollars’ worth of health-care fraud
and conspiracy to commit money laundering. He was sentenced to a
decade in prison, and the government seized his multimillion-dollar
home, his two Winnebagos, and his thirty-seven-foot yacht. When I
shared this news with Ian recently, we decided we were looking at a
parable of American sentencing: Sadik Baxter stole a few dollars, a drum
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 40 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
set, some used baseball equipment, and a pair of sunglasses and got life,
while Bradley Kantor stole millions and got ten years.
Brett and Chelsey Amelkin are now, like their brother, public defenders.
When they heard the news of Sadik’s momentum in his federal case, all
three siblings felt heartened. “He deserves a shot,” Ian said, “and so does
Oakley.” If Sadik gets his second chance, Ian has already pictured the
scene. Before showing up at the hearing, he’ll play the music Dean loved
—Hendrix, Led Zeppelin, Blind Faith—and grab from his closet a
striped tie of his dad’s that he thinks brings him luck in court. “It’s all
fucked up,” he said of the tie, grinning, as he laid it out for me. “I tape it
together when I wear it.”
This fall, Sadik was placed in solitary con!nement after a dispute with
a guard. In a cell whose window was covered over by aluminum, his
mind kept turning to Lolita, an orca at the Miami Seaquarium he’d loved
to visit as a child. When young, she’d been taken from her home in the
Salish Sea, north of Seattle, and spent the next !fty years penned in the
Seaquarium. Indigenous activists, many of whom knew her as Tokitae,
had recently won a multi-year battle to bring her home. But, just before
Sadik was put in solitary, she died, still in captivity.
Less morose distraction could be found in his manifestation journal.
When the broader public learned the details of his case, he wrote one day,
“it was such a shock to everyone that they changed the Law.” When he
was !nally released from solitary, he called Danasia, eager to tell her how
real this vision had seemed. She picked up for the !rst time since May.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 41 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
“I still want to take you to all the places you asked me to take you when
you were younger—the water park, Disney World, the beach,” he said. She
grew quiet, and then had to go, but the conversation continued in his
head. “I want to take you to my daddy’s farm and show you the apple
trees, and the jackfruit trees, and the mango trees. I’ll show you how to
chop the sugarcane. And I’ll show you how to take the bamboo and use it
to make a kind of slingshot, so that you can place an apple blossom inside
it, and let it #y.” ♦
Baji Tumendemberel, Thomas Birmingham, Scott Hechinger, and Khue Tran
contributed data gathering and analysis, as part of the Felony Murder
Reporting Project.
Published in the print edition of the
December 18, 2023, issue, with the
headline “What Makes a Murder?.”
New Yorker Favorites
Searching for the cause of a
catastrophic plane crash.
The man who spent forty-two
years at the Beverly Hills Hotel
pool.
Gloria Steinem’s life on the
feminist frontier.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 42 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Where the Amish go on
vacation.
How Colonel Sanders built his
Kentucky-fried fortune.
What does procrastination tell
us about ourselves?
Fiction by Patricia Highsmith:
“The Trouble with Mrs. Blynn,
the Trouble with the World”
Sign up for our daily newsletter to
receive the best stories from The
New Yorker.
Sarah Stillman, a
staff writer, won the
2024 Pulitzer Prize
for explanatory
reporting. She also
received the 2012
National Magazine
Award for Public
Interest and the 2022
George Polk Award
for Magazine
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 43 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Reporting. She
teaches writing at
Yale, and is a
MacArthur Fellow.
Get The New
Yorker’s daily
newsletter
Keep up with everything we
offer, plus exclusives
available only to newsletter
readers, directly in your in-
box.
Sign up
Read More
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 44 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
Books The Lede Books Dispatch
The Kash Patel’s Washington’s The Motley
Frustrated Political- Hostess with Vermont
Promise of the Persecution the Mostes’ Town Trying
Rape Kit Fantasies to Tell Its
Dinner parties in
the capital have Own Story
Standardized How Donald
long been a path to
forensic exams are Trump’s
At the Civic
power, but Perle
a useful tool for presumptive F.B.I.
Standard, in
Mesta had her eye
sexual-violence head whitewashed
Hardwick,
on a different
investigations—or the J6ers’ political
community
prize.
they would be if violence.
building is a kind
police departments
By Thomas Mallon of performance art,
By Tess Owen
consistently tested
where the usual
their !ndings.
tales of a fractured
America are
By Jessica Winter
quickly upstaged.
By Chelsea Edgar
Our Columnists A Reporter at Annals of The Lede
Large Disaster
My Life on The Mystery
Britain’s Inside the
the Subway of Tulsi
Foreign Fight Against
Gabbard
How much are
Secretary a Los Angeles
recent fears a
Though the
Braces for the Inferno
matter of
former Democrat
Second Trump
perception? A reporter embeds
has aligned herself
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 45 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
By Keith Gessen Age with wildland with Trump, her
!re!ghters during true loyalties
David Lammy
one of the remain elusive as
used to be an arch-
deadliest blazes in ever.
critic of Donald
California history.
Trump. Can he By Kelefa Sanneh
deal with the new By M. R. O’Connor
Administration
and reset the
U.K.’s relationship
with the E.U. at
the same time?
By Sam Knight
The Weekend Under R!i" Annals of The Lede
Essay Medicine
The Other Behind the
The Hidden The Long
Side of Chaotic
Histories Lost Quest for
Sherman’s Attempt to
in the Los Arti!cial
March Freeze Federal
Angeles Fires Blood
Assistance
The general’s
Many great One of the most
campaign through
The potential for
modernist houses valuable substances
the South is
devastation is
were burned, but a in the world has
known for its
made plain by
monument of never been
brutality against
another order,
German culture in replicated. Are we
civilians. For the
concerning the
exile survived. close?
enslaved who
crucial work of
By Alex Ross followed his army, By Nicola Twilley U.S.A.I.D.
though, it was a
By Atul Gawande
shot at freedom.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 46 of 47

Sentenced to Life for an Accident Miles Away | The New Yorker 2/17/25, 9:10 AM
By Scott Spillman
Privacy Configurations
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2023/12/18/felony-murder-laws Page 47 of 47