BE IT RESOLVED, That we urge anyone having any
knowledge or information which might lead to the conviction
of the perpetrator or perpetrators of this heinous crime to come
forward and give this information to the district attorney, and
in an attempt to deter such deplorable conduct, concurrently
with this Resolution there is being introduced in this body
legislation authorizing a reward of up to $10,000.00 to the per-
son giving information leading to arrest and conviction in cases
of a heinous nature, including attempted assassination of mem-
bers of the judiciary.
BE IT RESOLVED FURTHER, That a copy of this Re-
solution be sent to The Honorable Arthur Gamble, Jr.
Approved September 8, 1975
Time: 3:00 P.M.
Act No. 213 H. 212-Morris, Biddle, Mitchem, Callahan,
Sandusky, White, Campbell,
Sasser
AN ACT
To provide for a sentence of death or life imprisonment without
parole in certain aggravated offenses; to prescribe the manner of charg-
ing and sentencing in such cases and to eliminate lesser included of-
fenses in such cases; to limit the maximum punishment in all other cases
to life imprisonment; to provide for an effective date of this act.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of Alabama:
Section 1. Except in cases enumerated and described in
Section 2 herein, neither a court nor a jury shall fix the punish-
ment for the commission of treason, felony, or other offenses
at death, and the death penalty or a life sentence without parole
shall be fixed as punishment only in the cases and in the manner
herein enumerated and described in Section 2 of this Act. In
all cases where no aggravated circumstances enumerated in
Section 2 are expressly averred in the indictment, the trial shall
proceed as now provided by law, except that the death penalty
or life imprisonment without parole shall not be given, and
the indictment shall include all lesser offenses.
Section 2. If the jury finds the Defendant guilty, they shall
fix the punishment at death when the Defendant is charged
by indictment with any of the following offenses and with
aggravation which must also be averred in the indictment, and
which offenses so charged with said aggravation shall not in-
clude any lesser offenses:

(a) Kidnapping for ransom or attempts thereof, when
the victim is intentionally killed by the defendant.
(b) Robbery or attempts thereof when the victim is in-
tentionally killed by the defendant.
(c) Rape when the victim is intentionally killed by the
defendant; carnal knowledge of a girl under 12 years of age,
or abuse of such girl in an attempt to have carnal knowledge,
when the victim is intentionally killed by the defendant.
(d) Nighttime burglary of an occupied dwelling when any
of the occupants is intentionally killed by the defendant.
(e) The murder of any police officer, sheriff, deputy, state
trooper, or peace officer of any kind, or prison or jail guard,
while such prison or jail guard is on duty, or because of some
official or job-related act or performance of such officer or
guard.
(f) Any murder committed while the Defendant is under
sentence of life imprisonment.
(g) Murder in the first degree when the killing was done
for a pecuniary or other valuable consideration, or pursuant
to a contract or for hire.
(h) Indecent molestation, or an attempt to indecently
molest a child under the age of 16 years, when the child victim
is intentionally killed by the defendant.
(i) Willful setting off or exploding dynamite or other
explosive under circumstances now punishable by Title 14, Sec-
tion 123 or 124, Code of Alabama 1940, when a person is inten-
tionally killed by the defendant because of said explosion.
(j) Murder in the first degree wherein two or more hu-
man beings are intentionally killed by the defendant by one or
a series of acts.
(k) Murder in the first degree where the victim is a public
official or public figure, and the murder stems from or is caused
by or related to his official position, acts, or capacity.
(1) Murder in the first degree committed while Defendant
is engaged or participating in the act of unlawfully assuming
control of any aircraft by use of threats or force with intent
to obtain any valuable consideration for the release of said
aircraft or any passenger or crewman thereon, or to direct the
route or movement of said aircraft, or otherwise exert control
over said aircraft.
(m) Any murder committed by a Defendant who has
been convicted of murder in the first or second degree in the
twenty years preceding the crime.

(n) Murder when perpetrated against any witness sub-
poened to testify at any preliminary hearing, trial or grand
jury proceeding against the defendant who kills or procures the
killing of witness, or when perpetrated against any human
being while intending to kill such witness.
Evidence of intent under this section shall not be supplied
by the felony-murder doctrine.
In such cases, if the jury finds the Defendant not guilty,
the Defendant must be discharged. The court may enter a
judgment of mistrial upon failure of the jury to agree on a
verdict of guilty or not guilty or on the fixing of the penalty
of death. After entry of a judgment of mistrial, the Defendant
may be tried again for the aggravated offense, or he may be re-
indicted for an offense wherein the indictment does not allege
an aggravated circumstance. If the Defendant is re-indicted
for an offense wherein the indictment does not allege an aggra-
vated circumstance, the punishment upon conviction shall be
as heretofore or hereafter provided by law, however the punish-
ment shall not be death or life imprisonment without parole.
Section 3. If the jury finds the Defendant guiltv of one of
the aggravated offenses listed in Section 2 hereof and fixes the
punishment at death, the court shall thereupon hold a hearing
to aid the court to determine whether or not the court will
sentence Defendant to death or to life imprisonment without
parole. In the hearing evidence may be presented as to any
matter that the court deems relevant to sentence, and shall
include any matters relating to any of the aggravating or miti-
gating circumstances enumerated in Section 6 and 7 of this Act.
Any such evidence which the court deems to have probative
value may be received, regardless of its admissibility under
the exclusionary rules of evidence, provided that the Defendant
is accorded a fair opportunity to rebut any hearsy statements;
and further provided that this section shall not be construed
to authorize the introduction of any evidence secured in viola-
tion of the Constitution of the United States or the State of
Alabama. The State and the Defendant, or his counsel, shall
be permitted to present argument for or against the sentence
of death.
Section 4. Notwithstanding the fixing of the punishment
at death by the jury, the court after weighing the aggravating
and mitigating circumstances may refuse to accept the death
penalty as fixed by the jury and sentence the Defendant to life
imprisonment without' parole, which shall be served without
parole; or the court after weighing the aggravating and miti-
gating circumstances, and the fixing of the punishment at death
by the jury, may accordingly sentence the Defendant to death.
If the court imposes a sentence of death, it shall set forth in

writing as the basis for the sentence of death, findings of fact
from the trial and the sentence hearing which shall at least
include the following:
(a) One or more of the aggravating circumstances
enumerated in Section 6, which it finds exists in the case and
which it finds sufficient to support the sentence of death, and
(b) Any of the mitigating circumstances enumerated in
Section 7 which it finds insufficient to outweigh the aggravat-
ing circumstances.
Section 5. The judgment of conviction and sentence of
death shall be subject to automatic review as now required by
law.
Section 6. Aggravating circumstances. Aggravating cir-
cumstances shall be the following:
(a) The capital felony was committed by a person under
sentence of imprisonment;
(b) The Defendant was previously convicted of another
capital felony or a felony involving the use or threat of violence
to the person;
(c) The Defendant knowingly created a great risk of death
to many persons;
(d) The capital felony was committed while the Defendant
was engaged or was an accomplice in the commission of, or an
attempt to commit, or flight after committing, or attempting
to commit, rape, robbery, burglary, or kidnapping for ransom;
(e) The capital felony was committed for the purpose of
avoiding or preventing a lawful arrest or effecting an escape
from custody;
(f) The capital felony was committed for pecuniary gain;
(g) The capital felony was committed to disrupt or hinder
the lawful exercise of any governmental function or the en-
forcement of laws;
(h) The capital felony was especially heinous, atrocious
or cruel.
Section 7. Mitigating circumstances. Mitigating circum-
stances shall be the following:
(a) The Defendant has no significant history of prior
criminal activity;
(b) The capital felony was committed while the Defend-
ant was under the influence of extreme mental or emotional
disburbance;

(c) The victim was a participant' in the Defendant's
conduct or consented to the act;
(d) The Defendant was an accomplice in the capital felony
committed by another person and his participation was re-
latively minor;
(e) The Defendant acted under extreme duress or under
the substantial domination of another person;
(f) The capacity of the Defendant to appreciate the crim-
inality of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the require-
ments of law was substantially impaired;
(g) The age of the Defendant at the time of the crime.
Section 8. Each person indicted for an offense punishable
under the provision of this act who is not able to afford legal
counsel must be provided with court appointed counsel having
no less than five years prior experience in the active practice
of criminal law.
Section 9. The provisions of this act are severable. If any
part of this act is declared invalid or unconstitutional, such
declaration shall not affect the part which remains.
Section 10. This act shall become effective one hundred
and eighty (180) days from the date which the Governor
affixes his signature thereto.
Approved September 9, 1975
Time: 2:55 P.M.
Act No. 214 S. 326-Pearson, Fine, Clemon, Gilmore,
Bank and Foshee
AN ACT
To create and establish the Alabama Board of Funeral Service;
to establish rules and regulations; to provide for the licensing of fun-
eral directors, embalmers and funeral establishments; to provide for
the examination for licenses; and to set fees therefor; to establish pro-
cedure for election and terms of members of the Board and to define
powers and duties of the Board; to provide penalties; to merge the State
Embalming Board into the Alabama Board of Funeral Service and pro-
vide that the latter Board shall perform all the functions and duties of
the State Embalming Board; and to repeal Title 46, Sections 121 through
128. Code of Alabama 1940, and all other conflicting laws.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of Alabama:
* Section 1. - Purpose of the Act.
It is declared and established that the procedures for mak-