BERNARD E. HARCOURT

Illusion of Order

The False Promise of
Broken Windows Policing

HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England

2001


58 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

theoretical discussion of order maintenance on its proper empirical
footing. The fact is that the order-maintenance approach does gener-
ate a number of significant empirical questions. Is it true that order.
maintenance policing reduces the level of serious criminal activity ina
neighborhood? If it does reduce serious crime, is it really the s0tial
meaning of order, and not some other feature of order-maintenance
policing, that causes the decline in crime? Is there any evidence that
anti-gang loitering ordinances or juvenile snitching policies reduce
criminal gang activity or juvenile gun possession? These are important
issues that raise both em pirical and methodological questions. It is fair
and appropriate to ask at this point exactly how much evidence sup-
ports the order maintenance approach. I turn first, in Chapter 3
to an empirical assessment of the social-scientific evidence cuppatt:
ing the broken windows theory. I then review, in Chapter 4, the evi-
dence concerning specific police initiatives, including New York City’s
quality-of-life initiative, Chicago's anti-gang loitering ordinance, and
Charleston’s juvenile snitching program. I also assess there the empiri-
cal evidence from a larger methodological perspective.

i
f
;

CHAPTER 3

The Broken Windows Theory

Order maintenance advocates generally refer to two social science
studies to support the broken windows theory. The first is Wesley
Skogan’s 1990 Disorder and Decline: Crime and the Spiral of Decay in Amert-
can Neighborhoods. The second is a 1988 study by Robert Sampson and
Jacqueline Cohen titled “Deterrent Effect of the Police on Crime: A
Replication and Theoretical Extension.” In this chapter I review and
assess these two studies and then turn to a more recent study on the
disorder-crime nexus, Robert Sampson and Stephen Raudenbush’s

“Systematic Social Observation of Public Spaces: A New Look at Disor-

der in Urban Neighborhoods” (1999).

Replicating Skogan’s 1990 Study

Working with Wesley Skogan’s data, which are available through the
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research at the
University of Michigan (Skogan 1988), I was able to assess his data
and replicate his analysis. The discussion of the replication is some-
what technical, and in order to facilitate the transition to statistics,
I will begin by summarizing in lay terms the thrust of my assessment
of Skogan’s study, before turning in more detail to the regression anal-
ysis.

The portion of Wesley Skogan’s study that is of particular interest to
the broken windows debate is his discussion of the relationship be-

tween neighborhood disorder and crime victimization. To get at that

59


60 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

relationship, Skogan explored whether neighborhoods that were per-
ceived as disorderly by residents also suffered from high levels of crimi-
nal activity. The idea was to see if there was a statistical connection be-
tween the level of disorder in a neighborhood and the amount of
crime in that same neighborhood. To measure disorder, Skogan relied
on surveys that asked neighborhood residents whether they thought
that certain physical and social disorders—such as litter or vandal-
ism—were a problem in their neighborhoods. To measure crime,
Skogan relied on surveys that asked neighborhood residents whether
they had been the victim of different types of crime—burglary, rob-
bery, rape, assault, and purse-snatching. Overall, Skogan found that
there was a strong connection between residents’ perceptions of
neighborhood disorder and their robbery victimization, even when he
took account of the level of poverty and stability in the neighborhood
and the race of the residents. He concluded from this finding that dis-
order played an important role in neighborhood crime and urban de-
cline.

Ihave a number of reservations about the data and about the design
of Skogan’s study. As a preliminary matter, Skogan’s data are weak.
Skogan patched together his data from five separate studies that were
not entirely consistent, and as a result the study is missing a large
amount of information. Robbery victimization is available in only
thirty neighborhoods, and the disorder information is missing on aver-
age 30 to 40 percent of the time. The first point, then, is that the data
are not reliable.

But even more troubling is the fact that Skogan failed to disclose
that there is no real connection between disorder and crime with re-
gard to the other four crime variables in his study. Skogan focused on
robbery victimization—where he found a connection with disorder—
but failed to reveal that there is no similar connection between disor-
der and burglary, rape, physical assault, or purse-snatching victimiza-
tion. In other words, in four out of five tests, there is no real connec-
tion between disorder and crime. Moreover, on close analysis, it turns
out that the one place where there is a connection—the disorder-rob-
bery nexus—is itself questionable. First, the survey question that was
posed to neighborhood residents about robbery victimization was not
neighborhood specific. In other words, the question did not specify
that the robbery victimization had to occur in the neighborhood in

question, so as a result, it may have occurred in another neighbor-

The Broken Windows Theory + 61

hood. Second, and more important, there is a set of five neighbor-
hoods in Newark that exert excessive influence on Skogan’s findings.
When we take away those Newark neighborhoods, the tenuous con-
nection to robbery disappears.

As a result, Skogan’s study does not support the broken windows hy-
pothesis. In four out of five tests, there is no real connection between
disorder and various crimes. In the only test where there is a connec-
tion, the nexus is itself highly questionable. It is fair to conclude that
Skogan’s study does not prove a connection between disorder and
crime in general. As I suggested earlier, the details of this analysis are
somewhat technical in nature. I summarize this discussion at the end
of this chapter, as well as at the beginning of Part II, for those readers
who may wish to move ahead to the discussion of New York City’s qual-

ity-of-life initiative in Chapter 4 or to social theory in Chapter 5.

Skogan’s Method and Findings

On the basis of data collected in five separate studies between 1977
and 1983, Skogan found, inter alia, that neighborhood disorder had a
statistically significant relationship with the level of robbery victimiza-
tion. This finding is only one piece of a much larger work on disorder
and urban decline. With regard to crime, Skogan discusses and verifies
several other hypotheses, for instance, that there is a link between dis-
order and fear of crime victimization,' as well as a link between disor-
der and perception of crime problems.? But I will treat exclusively the
disorder-crime nexus, since this is the finding that relates most directly
to and, according to proponents, empirically establishes the broken
windows theory. ;

Skogan’s data come from five previously existing studies, which he
aggregates and merges to produce neighborhood-level data of disor-
der, crime rates, and socioeconomic factors (Skogan 1987:8). The five
existing data sets consist of thirteen thousand personal and telephone
interviews conducted between 1977 and 1983 (1987:6, 97). The re-
spondents were residents of forty different neighborhoods in six cities:
Chicago, Newark, Houston, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and Atlanta.
Random-digit dialing was used to select respondents for the telephone
interviews, and random selection from address lists for the personal in-
terviews (1987:99 fig. 25: 1990:190). ;

Skogan performs two analyses to assess the disorder-crime nexus.


62 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

First, he regresses the rate of robbery victimization on the level of dis-
order. Second, he regresses the rate of robbery victimization on the
level of disorder taking into account the level of poverty, residential
stability, and the racial composition of the neighborhoods.

The Disorder-Robbery Regression A nalysis

With regard to the simple regression of robbery victimization on the
level of disorder, Skogan finds that “levels of crime victimization were
strongly related (+.80) to levels of disorder in the 30 areas for which
robbery victimization was measured” (1987:53; 1990:73). He does not
report his coefficients, but does include a graph showing the regres-
sion line running through the observations on a scatter plot: xaxis
level of disorder, y-axis percent victims of robbery (1990:74 fig. 4-2).
The scatter plot indicates a positive relationship between disorder and
robbery victimization.

The Other-Explanatory-Variables A nalysis

Skogan then conducts further analysis to take into account the effect
of neighborhood poverty, stability, and race. The measures of poverty
and stability are indices composed of weighted factors such as average
length of residence, percentage of rental dwellings, and percentage
of incomes over $20,000 (1987:22 fig. 4; 1990:192 table A-3-1). Race
is measured by the variable corresponding to respondents’ answers
about their race, and reflects the percentage of minorities in the com-
munity (1987:25-19; 1988:14). Skogan finds that the correlation be-
tween robbery victimization and disorder remains high (+.54) even
when these three other explanatory variables are taken into account
(1987:53; 1990:73-74).

Skogan’s Conclusion

Skogan prefaces his findings with a significant caveat. In effect, he be-
gins by saying that the data do little to illuminate the causal relation-
ship:

Ironically, the data from the 40 neighborhoods cannot shed a great
deal of light on the details of the relationship between disorder and
crime, for the measures all go together very strongly. With only 40 cases
to untangle this web, the high correlation between measures of victim-

ization, ratings of crime problems, and disorder make it difficult to tell

meet tenn ntti

The Broken Windows Theory + 63

whether they have either separate “causes” or separate “effects” at the

area level. (1990:73; see also Skogan 1987:49)

Nevertheless, in response to the broad question “Does disorder cause
crime?” Skogan ultimately concludes: “These data support the propo-
sition that disorder needs to be taken seriously in research on neigh-
borhood crime, and that both directly and through crime it plays an
important role in neighborhood decline. ‘Broken windows’ do need
to be repaired quickly” (1990:75; see also Skogan 1987:53).

Despite his initial caveat, then, Skogan asserts that there is a causal
relationship between levels of neighborhood disorder and rates of

crime, and so concludes:

The evidence suggests that poverty, instability, and the racial composi-
tion of neighborhoods are strongly linked to area crime, but a substan-
ual portion of that linkage is through disorder: their link to area crime
virtually disappears when disorder is brought into the picture. This too
is consistent with Wilson and Kelling’s original proposition, and fur-
ther evidence that direct action against disorder could have substantial
payoffs. (1990:75)

Not surprisingly, Skogan’s study has been consistently interpreted by
broken windows proponents as establishing the disorder-crime nexus.

Skogan’s Findings: A Replication

Before turning to a critique of Skogan’s study, I will first set forth his
findings in greater detail. In order to do this, it is necessary to repli-
cate the study because Skogan does not provide most of the quantities
of interest in either the more technical Final Report or in his book Dis-
order and Decline (1987:52-53; 1990:73-75).

The Disorder-Robbery Regression

Although Skogan does not share his regression coefficients or stan-
dard errors, it is possible to estimate them by replication and verify
them by comparing the scatter plot that he published in Disorder and
Decline (1990:74 fig. 4-2) with the one that I obtain using his data.
The scatter plot that I obtain is, in all pertinent respects, identical to
Skogan’s.* The replicated graph is shown in Figure 3.1.

Given that the scatter plots are identical, | am comfortable using



64 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

0.085
NN
0.065
0.0444
0.024
0.005 A
T _ T OT ——T T 7
1.00 1.20 1.40 1.60 1.80 2.00 2.20

Level of disorder

Figure 3.1 Replication of Skogan’s figure 4-2

my replication to estimate the coefficients and standard errors of
Skogan’s analysis. What the regression reveals is that, for every one-
unit increase in the level of disorder (where, as I discuss later, a unit is
one of three unit measures of the level of disorder felt by the respon-
dents), the proportion of victims of robbery in the neighborhood can
be expected to increase by 0.05 (5 percent) on average, with a stan-
dard error of plus or minus 0.007. The 95 percent confidence interval
has, as a result, a small range, with a lower bound of 0.036 and an up-
per bound of 0.066. The p-value (which is the probability of observing
a tstatistic of 6.953, assuming that the null hypothesis is ue) is ex-
tremely small in this case—less than 0.001—which means that it is ex-
tremely unlikely that there is no statistical relationship. As a result, we
can conclude that there is a near-zero probability that an estimate of
0.05 could have arisen by chance alone if there truly were no linear re-
lationship between Skogan’s variables for disorder and crime.*

The Other-Explanatory- Variables Analysis
Skogan’s second analysis takes account of the level of poverty, stability,
and racial composition of the neighborhoods. In this case, Skogan did

publish his coefficients and levels of significance, and I have been able

The Broken Windows Theory + 65

to reproduce them substantially (1990:193 table A-4-1). A compai 1
son of Skogan’s and my results is given in Table 3.1.

Skogan interprets his results as follows: “The correlation between re-
sidual values for robbery victimization and disorder, once the effects of
poverty, stability, and racial composition had been removed statistically
from each, was still high (+.54)” (1990:73). He concludes that “ignor-
ing these demographic factors, there still was quite a strong tendency
for crime and disorder to ‘go together’” (1990:74; see also 1987:53).

The replication confirms that Skogan’s disorder index remains sta-
tistically significant when multiple regression is conducted with his in-
dices for poverty, stability, and race. The replicated regression indi-
cates that, if we hold those three other variables constant, for every
one-unit increase in the level of disorder, the proportion of victims of
robbery in the neighborhood can be expected to increase by 0.038 on
average (3.8 percent), with a standard error of plus or minus 0.012.
The 95 percent confidence interval has, as a result, a small range, with
a lower bound of 0.014 and an upper bound of 0.062.

Problems with the Data and Certain Design Decisions

Certain problems with the data and some design decisions undermine
my confidence in Skogan’s findings and conclusions. I begin with the

issue of missing values.

Missing Values
A number of the underlying surveys are missing values for most of the
important variables relating to the disorder-crime nexus. For instance,

Table 3.1: Replication of Skogan’s table A-4-1

Robbery victimization

Skogan Replication
Standardized Standardized
Measure coefficient Significance Coefficient coefficient Significance
Poverty score 05 .78 .00 04 .78
Stability score —.04 82 00 —.04 AQ
Percent minority 23 .20 01 128 AQ
Disorder 58 008 OF .60 004



66 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

the 1981 study by Skogan and Michael Maxfield—which is the only
study that covers neighborhoods in Philadelphia and San Francisco—
does not have any values for noise, litter, wash, gangs, public drinking,

and insults, which are among the main variables in Skogan’s index of

physical and social disorder (Skogan 1987:18). With a few rare excep-
tions, missing values actually plague all of the studies and all of the rel-
evant variables to different degrees, as evidenced in Table 3.2. As this
table reflects, the data are missing values, on average, for between 30
and 40 percent of the variables, which is a high percentage given the
small sample size (forty neighborhoods in all).

The more traditional way of dealing with this problem of missing
values would be to disregard completely the neighborhoods for which
values are missing But that is not possible with this data set. In the
case of Skogan’s indices of physical and social disorder, it is impossible
because there is not one single neighborhood that has all the values
for the relevant variables. As a result, Skogan does not disregard any
neighborhood, but rather constructs his indices “by summing the

Table 3.2 Missing values in Skogan’s data set

Physical disorder

Abandoned buildings

Noise or vehicles Litter Trash Total
No. missing 20 0 24 16 60
% missing 50 0 60 40 37.5
Social disorder
Public
Loitering Drugs Vandalism Gangs drinking Insults Total
No. missing 8 6 24 24 24 10 96
% missing 20 15 60 60 60 25 40
Crime victimization
Purse-
snatching Assault Burglary Robbery Rape Total
No. missing 24 10 0 10 16 60
% missing 60 25 0 25 40 30

The Broken Windows Theory + 67

component items which were available for each area and then dividing

that sum by the number of available items” (1988:8: see also Skogan
1987:108). In other words, Skogan simply averages the values that are
available—which raises another problem discussed later. Aggregation,
however, does not resolve the problem of missing values.

It is equally difficult to disregard the observations where crime vic-
timization data are missing because to do so would leave us with only
sixteen neighborhoods—just 40 percent of our original smal] sample.
This, however, is essentially what Skogan does with regard to victimiza-
tion, using only the robbery victimization variable and therefore nar-
rowing his study to only thirty available observations (Skogan 1990:73—
75: see also Skogan 1987:50-53). The result is that, at least with regard
to the disorder-crime nexus, Skogan’s is a study of a small sample of
neighborhoods with many missing values of disorder.

Selecting the Independent Variable

The independent variable that Skogan employs is also problematic
and may include, in my opinion, elements of the dependent variable.
Skogan’s independent variable is called “disorder,” and he constructs
it by averaging two multiitem scales, “social disorder” and “physical
disorder” (Skogan 1988:7-8). These are both constructed by averag-
ing the values of a number of variables, each of which corresponds to
respondents’ answers (on a scale of 1 to 3) to a question assessing the
extent to which a certain type of disorder is perceived by them as a
problem in their neighborhood (Skogan 1988:6-8). The variables in-
cluded in the two multi-item scales? are the following:

Social disorder Physical disorder

Loitering Noise

Drug use and sale Abandoned buildings or vehicles
Vandalism Litter

Gang activity Trash in vacant lots

Public drinking

Insulting language

So, for instance, in the case of the litter variable. respondents would
have been asked to assess the extent to which “garbage or litter on the
streets and sidewalks” is a problem in the neighborhood (Skogan
1988:7). For all of these variables, the possible values range from |


68 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

(“no problem”) to 2 (“some problem”) to 3 (“a big problem”)
(1988:6). The two multi-item scales were constructed “by summing the
component items which were available for each area and then dividing
that sum by the number of available items” (1988:8).

Using respondents’ assessment of drug trafficking or gang activity,
however, presents a significant problem given that the dependent vari-
able is supposed to be the level of seriows criminal activity. In this re-
spect the analysis would be tautological, because some of these disor-
derly activities—such as drug trafficking or certain gang activities—
would be considered by

respondents to be major crimes in themselves
and are thus likely to trigger responses that assess the level of crime in
the neighborhood.

To be precise, the broken windows theory suggests that minor dis-
order, both physical (in the sense of litter and broken windows) and
social (in the sense of minor misdemeanor offenses) is causally re-
lated to serious crime. Therefore, the independent variable (disorder)
should not include—or should exclude as much as possible—serious
criminal activity. Some degree of overlap is inevitable, given that the
respondents may be thinking about criminal activity when they assess,
for instance, the problem of abandoned buildings, which have be-
come a symbol of the crack house. It is crucial, however, to reduce the
overlap as thoroughly as possible. Accordingly, it would probably be
best to eliminate drug trafficking and gang activity from the indepen-
dent variable.

A second problem with Skogan’s independent variable results from
missing values. Creating the index by simply averaging the existing val-
ues for the set of variables may produce bias. For instance, the mean
for the noise variable is 1.3, while the mean for the public drinking
variable is 1.8. As a result, neighborhoods for which there is no value
for noise may end up having higher values for the disorder index than
they would otherwise, whereas neighborhoods for which there is no
value for public drinking may end up having lower values for the disor-
der index than they would otherwise. This potential for bias could be
resolved by standardizing the variables on their means.

Third, Skogan excluded from his indices four measures of disorder
that were available from the data. These were the variables “smut”

(adult movies and bookstores); “prostitution”: “dogs” (“barking loudly

or relieving themselves near your home”); and “garbage” (“[p]eople

The Broken Windows Theory + 69

not disposing of garbage properly or leaving litter around the area”)
(Skogan 1988:6-7). He compiled these four variables under the head-
ing “Measures of Disorder,” but did not include them in his index fox
two reasons. With regard to the commercial sex variables, Skogan dis-
covered that they were independent measures of disorder. He writes:

At the individual level. reactions to these problems [prostitution and
smut] formed a separate factor in every area in which they were in-
cluded. A separate index of the extent of commercial sex problems was
formed, but—as the status of the items as a separate factor hints—it was
correlated only +.18 with the summary disorder measure and was not
related to other neighborhood factors in the same fashion as either so-
cial or physical disorder. ... As a result, this cluster of (very interesting)
problems will not be considered in any detail in this report. (1987:19)

In addition, Skogan suggests that the questions were asked in too few
cases.
Yet neither of these reasons for excluding the commercial sex vari-
ables from the index of disorder is compelling. The fact that the com-
mercial sex variables are independent of the other indices of disorder
is not a reason to ignore those variables. The broken windows theory
includes prostitution in its conception of disorder. In fact, the “Broken
Windows” essay repeatedly refers to prostitutes and street prostitution.
As we saw in Chapter 2, they are an integral part of the disorderly and
of disorder. The fact that these “very interesting”—I would say fascinat-
ing—findings about commercial sex are at odds with the broken win-
dows theory is not a reason to discard the variables, particularly when
one is testing the theory’s validity.© Moreover, the smut and prostitu-
tion variables contain sixteen observations each, the same number as,
for instance, litter, public drinking, or vandalism. The dogs and gar
bage variables are missing only two more observations. I therefore

would not exclude those variables.

Selecting the Dependent Variable
The biggest problem with Skogan’s design, however, concerns thE sé
lection of the dependent variable. Skogan is interested in measuring
the impact of disorder on crime, and throughout his book he claims
to be studying the relationship between disorder and crime. The pas-
sage in his book is. after all, titled “Disorder, Crime, and Fear,” and



70 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

the principal paragraph is captioned “Disorder and Common Crime”
(1990:73). The repeated reference to the statistical findings are to
the “crime-disorder connection” or the “relationship between disor-
der and crime” (199(
Cause Crime?” (1990:75). It would appear from all this that Skogan’s
study relates to general crime levels.

73-74). Another caption reads “Does Disorder

Skogan, however, selects as the dependent variable only one crime,
namely robbery, even though the data include a number of other
crimes, such as purse-snatching, physical assault, burglary, and sexual
assault. This is especially troubling because robbery victimization, it
turns out, is one of the crime victimization variables with the highest re-
lationship to neighborhood disorder, and, even more important, is the
only crime victimization variable that remains statistically significantly
related to disorder when neighborhood poverty, stability, and race are
held constant.

With regard to the crime-disorder regression, robbery, burglary, and
physical assault have extremely low p-values, which suggests that they
are statistically significantly related to disorder. Sexual assault has a
very high p-value (0.66), which signifies that in all likelihood it is
not related to disorder; purse-snatching/pocket-picking appears to be
only marginally related to disorder, but in an inverse relationship,
which suggests that, if anything, it might be inversely related to disor-
der. This is demonstrated in Table 3.3.

What is even more troubling, however, is that the statistical relation-
ships regarding physical assault and burglary vanish if neighborhood
poverty, stability, and race are held constant. Robbery victimization is
the only variable that remains related to disorder if we take socioeco-

Table 3.3 Coefficients for Skogan’s index of disorder and individual crimes

Skogan’s index of disorder

Crime Coefficient Standard error P-value 95% Conf. interval
Purse snatching 0.017 0.160 —0.061 0.011
Physical assault 0.014 0.000 0.027 0.083
Burglary 0.02 0.004 0.026 0.126
Robbery 0.007 0.000 0.036 0.066
Sexual assault 0.001 0.003 0.659 —0.005 0.008

The Broken Windows Theory + 71

nomic factors into account. The coefficients are reproduced in Table
3.4. As this table demonstrates, it would be improper to conclude from
the data that, as a statistical matter. general levels of crime—or com-
mon crime—and disorder are related. Even if we put aside all the prob-
Jems with the data set, the data suggest that only one particular crime,
namely robbery, may be statistically related to disorder.

Skogan justifies using robbery victimization exclusively as an index
of local levels of crime for the following reasons: “Methodological
research suggests it is reliably measured; it tends to correspond better
than many other victimization measures with comparable official
crime statistic aggregate city-level studies indicate it is linked to fear
of crime; and comparable measures of robbery victimization were in-
cluded in 30 of the areas surveyed” (1990:195 n.1, chap. 4). On close
scrutiny, however, these arguments are not entirely persuasive.

First, robbery victimization is not the only measure that corresponds
well with comparable official crime statistics. Burglary does, too. This
is generally explained by the fact that the most powerful predictor of
whether a crime is reported to the police appears to be the seriousness
of the offense (Gove, Hughes, and Geerken 1985:479, 468). Second,
with regard to rape and physical assault, victimization surveys substan-
tially underreport incidences among acquaintances, friends, and rela-
tives, and they therefore measure very different things than do the
Uniform Crime Reports (Gove, Hughes, and Geerken 1985:464-465).
But this fact does not address the crossjurisdictional reliability of victim-
ization surveys for rape or physical assault. The same biases might
affect crossjurisdictional comparisons of victimization surveys and of

Table 3.4 Coefficients for Skogan’s index of disorder and individual crimes holding
constant neighborhood poveryy, stability and race

Skogan’s index of disorder

Crime Coefficient Standard error P-value 95% Conf. interval
Purse snatching —0.013 0.027 0.639 —0.072 0.036
Physical assault 0.014 0.019 0.459 —0.025 0.054
Burglary —0.006 0.035 0.875 —0.078 0.066
Robbery 0.038 0.012 0.004 0.014 0.062
Sexual assault 0.006 0.006 0.341 —0.007 0.019



72 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

66). The is-
sue presented here is not the comparability of victimization surveys

official crime statistics (Gove, Hughes, and Geerken 1985:

and official crime statistics, which is what Skogan discusses. The issue

is the comparabili

y of victimization surveys across neighborhoods. It is

the crossjurisdictional reliability of victimization surveys.’ Third, as a
technical matter, there are no missing values for burglary victimization
in the data, whereas there are ten missing values for robbery—and as

many for physical assault. This fact would militate in favor of using bur-
glary as the dependent variable.

Fourth, and most important, it appears from the Finaé Report and
the Codebook (Skogan 1987 and 1988) that the measure of robbery vic-
umization is not neighborhood specific. Whereas the typical purse-
snatching questions and assault question" explicitly referred the inter-
viewee to acts committed “in the neighborhood where you live now,”
and whereas the typical burglary question was by definition neighbor
hood specific, the robbery question!’ and the rape question" appar-
ently did not specify the location of the attack. In other words, it is pos-
sible that the robbery and rape questions could have been interpreted
by the interviewee as referring to incidents that happened outside their
neighborhood. This militates even more in favor of using the burglary
variable.

Skogan’s arguments do not fully address these concerns. In my
opinion, if we are going to draw conclusions about the effect of disor-
der on common crime or general levels of crime, it may be more conserva-
uve to look at each substantive crime for which we have data and make
a more nuanced assessment of the disorder-crime relationship.

The Newark Effect
As noted ez

ier, all of Skogan’s statistically significant relationships
between disorder and the individual substantive crimes vanish when
neighborhood poverty, stability, and race are held constant, except for

robbery. The only reason robbery remains statistically significant, it

turns out, is Newark. If you look at Skogan’s figure 4-2, or my replica-
tion in Figure 3.1, you will notice that the five Newark neighborhoods.
in contrast to the other city neighborhoods, are clustered together
(Skogan 1990:74 fig. 4-2). If vou disregard those five Newark observa-
uons and look at the other twenty-five neighborhoods, the relationship
between disorder and robbery victimization seems much less obvious.

The Broken Windows Theory + 73

And, in fact, it is. If the same three explanatory variables (poverty, sta-
bility, and race) are held constant, there is no significant relationship
between disorder and robbery victimization when the five Newark
neighborhoods are excluded. | call this the Newark Effect. and it is
summarized in Table 3.5. In fact, without the Newark neighborhoods.
the relationship between robbery victimization and disorder vanishes
if race alone is held constant: see Table 3.6.

As Tables 3.5 and 3.6 demonstrate, the statistically
tionship between disorder and robbery in the data is principally due to

gnificant rela-

the five Newark neighborhoods that are clustered together. In con-
trast, the other neighborhoods from the three other cities for which
data are available (Adanta, Chicago, and Houston) are pretty well dis-
tributed in the remaining group of observations. What this means is
that, when the five Newark neighborhoods are included in a data set
that contains only twenty-five other neighborhoods, Newark has a sig-
nificant impact on the equation, In fact, if we take account of the city
effects on the neighborhood data, the statistical relationship between

Table 3.5 The Newark Effect: coefficients for Skogan’s index of disorder and robbery
victimization excluding Newark neighborhoods and holding constant pov-

y, stability and race

Robbery
Explanatory variables Coefficient Standard error P-value 95% Conf. Interval
Disorder O11 025 670 —.042 -063
Poverty 001 003 741 —.006 .008
Stability =.002 003 BIT =.008 004
Race — O14 008 109 =.008 031

Table 3.6 The Newark Effect: coefficients for Skogan’s index of disorder and robbery

Explanatory variables Coefficient’ Standard error Pvalue 95% Conf. interval
Disorder 021 O18 5 —.016 058
Race O15 007 056 000 030

ictimizati cludi Jewark nei SZ ing only race
victimization excluding Newark neighborhoods and holding

constant

Robbery



74 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

disorder and robbery disappears (again, holding constant poverty. sta-
bility, and race). If we hold constant the effects of the different cities
on the neighborhood data by using dummy variables for the cities, the
relationship simply vanishes: if we assign a dummy variable to each city,
the p-value rises to 0.195, and if we assign a dummy variable to Newark
alone, the p-value reaches 0.436. Clearly, there is something about the
city of Newark that is unduly influencing the relationship between dis-
order and robbery victimization at the neighborhood level.

Is it fair, then, to exclude the Newark neighborhoods, given that
there are only thirty observations in all? I think so. Given the small
number of observations, it is especially important to eliminate cases
that exert too much influence on the findings.!2 The Newark data
seem to do just that. The point here is that it is not an individual
neighborhood per se but the Newark cluster that excessively influ-
ences the results. What does it mean to have the relationship between
disorder and robbery depend entirely on whether the Newark neigh-
borhoods are in or out of the data set? It suggests that certain charac-
teristics about Newark are skewing the results.!3 It means that there is a
city effect, rather than a neighborhood effect. But that stretches the bro-
ken windows theory too far. In the end, it is more conservative to ex-
clude the Newark neighborhoods than it is to conclude from these
data that disorder and crime are causally related."

Making the Best of the Data

I attempt here to redress some of the design decisions that | disagree
with—at least those that can be corrected—in order to test the broken
windows hypothesis. With regard first to the independent variable dis-
order, I propose to create a new multi-item index of neighborhood dis-
order that incorporates only those variables that are not themselves
serious criminal activities (in other words, that are not part of the de-
pendent variable). | therefore exclude the variables related to drug
trafficking and gang activity. I follow Skogan’s lead and create a cor-

rected index for social disorder and one for physical disorder and

then average the two.! I refer to the new multi-item index as “cor-
rected disorder.” In addition, | include the four other measures of dis-
order that were available from the data but that Skogan omitted from

his indices—the first two (smut and prostitution) in the social disorder

The Broken Windows Theory + 75

index and the second two (dogs and garbage) in the physical disorder
index. The variables included in the two corrected multi-item scales

thus consist of:

Social disorder Physical disorder

Loitering Noise

Vandalism Abandoned buildings or vehicles
Public drinking Litter

Insulting language Trash in vacant lots

Smut Dogs

Prostitution Garbage

With regard to the problem of missing values, I propose to standard-
ize these twelve variables on their respective means.!° This avoids the
problem of bias resulting from missing values (discussed earlier). It is,
of course, impossible to determine what the missing values would ac-
tually have been. In this case I am not entirely comfortable imputing
valties by means of multiple imputation because of the large number
of missing values. I hesitate possibly to inject additional biases into this
already weak data set. I assume that Skogan may have felt the same way.
which may explain why he did not impute values for the missing data.
In any event, standardizing the variables on their means is amore con-
seryative approach

In effect, what standardizing the variables does is turn them into
comparable measures of relative disorder. Let’s take, for instance, two
variables in the social disorder index: public drinking and insults. At
present, the values for each observation correspond to the respon-
dents’ perception of these as problems in the neighborhood on a scale
of 1 to 3. The mean for the public drinking variable is 1.8. The mean
for the insults variable is 1.3. A neighborhood for which there are no
data on public drinking but there are data on insults is likely to have a
lower value for social disorder because of the missing data. By stan-
dardizing the two variables on their means, however, we create, instead
of an absolute value for the variable, a relative weight of disorder. So a
neighborhood for which there are no data on public drinking will
have a value for social disorder equal to the relative orderliness or dis-
orderliness of the neighborhood in terms of insults. Each variable will
e relative indicator of the level of disorder. By av-

become a comparab
eraging the available values, we will obtain a good indicator of the rela-
ging


76 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

uve level of disorder in each neighborhood. In addition, the use of
standardized values essentially substitutes for multiple imputation, in-
sofar as it does similar work as the algorithms commonly used for im-
putauon.

The Corrected Results Using Skogan’s Data

The Corrected Disorder-Crime Regression Analysis

If we look only at “corrected disorder” and the various crimes, it ap-
pears that the corrected disorder variable continues to be statistically
significantly related to three of the five crimes: physical assault. bur-
glary, and robbery. At this preliminary stage, however, we can already
conclude that purse-snatching / pocket-picking and rape are not sig-
nificantly related to disorder. This is reflected in Table 3.7.

The Other-Explanatory-Variables A nalysis

With the single exception of robbery, however, these statistically sig-
nificant relationships between individual crimes and disorder simply
disappear when the socioeconomic factors are taken into account. In
fact, with regard to purse-snatching, if stability alone is held constant,
the p-value is 0.978.

PHYSICAL ASSAULT. If we use Skogan’s indices for poverty, stability,
and race. and hold these variables constant, neighborhood disorder is

The Broken Windows Theory + 77

der tends to increase physical assault by 0.007 on average. with a stan-
dard deviation of 0.04. The 95 percent confidence interval therefore
has a lower bound of —0.08 and an upper bound of 0.09, which sug-
gests that a good portion of estimated values will be inversely related to
increases in disorder. The p-value is very high, standing at 0.873. This
is reflected in Table 3.8.

BURGLARY. The relationship between burglary victimization and
corrected disorder also disappears when neighborhood poverty, stabil-
ity, and race are taken into account. With these variables held con-
: significantly related to the

stant, neighborhood disorder is no longer s
number of residents victimized by burglary in their neighborhood.
This is reflected in Table 3.9.

Asa result, it is only robbery that remains
order, with Skogan’s other explanatory variables held constant. When
we exclude the five Newark neighborhoods and hold constant the ex-
planatory variables, even the robbery relationship vanishes. This is re-

flected in Table 3.10.

ignificantly related to dis-

Table 3.8 Regression coefficients for physical assault and the explanatory variables

Physical assault

Explanatory variables — Coefficient Standard error _ P-value 95% Conf. interval

no longer statistically significantly related to the number of residents Corrected disorder 007 042 873 —.081 094
victimized by physical assault in their neighborhood. When we hold Poverty 013 O14 003 022
these three variables constant, a one-unit increase in corrected disor- Stability —.014 009 —.024 —.004

Race | —.002 856 —.028 024

Table 3.7 Regression coefficients for corrected disorder and various crimes

Table 3.9 Regression coefficients for burglary and the explanatory variables

Corrected disorder

Burglary

Crime Coefficient Standard error P-value 95% Conf. interval 95% Conf, interval

Explanatory variables Coefficient Standard error P-value

Purse-snatching =.05 033 126 017 =

Dis si a mat ee 029 ‘ 0 Corrected disorder 059 069 401 ~ Te oe
Burglary 137 051 Ou 241 Poverty ee OF a —
Robbers 107 015 000 137 Stability 2029 e007 ou asa 031
Sexual assault 001 007 901 015 Race ALO 020 ee —



78 + EMPIRICAL CRITIQUE

Table 3.10 The Newark Effect: Coefficients for robbery and the
excluding Newark neighborhoods

explanatory variables

Robbery

Explanz . yariz e: oe: cle. S are § 5
planatory variables Coefficient Standard error P-value 95% Conf. interval

Corrected disorder 060 -039 141 — .022 141

Poverty 000 003 988 = .006 006

Stability 001 003 794 — .006 008

Race O14 .008 089 — .002 -030
Conclusion

My findings using the corrected disorder index essentially track my
earlier replication using Skogan’s index for disorder. They suggest
that, in the final analysis, there are no statistically significant celation:
ships between disorder and purse-snatching, physical assault, burglary,
or rape when other explanatory variables are held constant. and that
the relationship between robbery and disorder also disappears when
the five Newark neighborhoods are set aside. In the end, the data do
not support the broken windows hypothesis.

The Sampson and Cohen Study

Advocates of order maintenance cite one other quantitative study,
Robert Sampson and Jacqueline Cohen’s 1988 “Deterrent Effects of
the Police on Crime,” as further evidence of the broken windows ef-
fect. This study, however, is by no means conclusive. To the contrary,
the study takes a far more nuanced approach and, in the end, supports
the argument that the social-scientific evidence for the broken win-
dows theory is lacking. As Sampson and Cohen acknowledge, research
on the relationship between disorder and crime is “sparse,” as is re-
search on the relationship between proactive policing and crime, and
the results thus far have been “mixed” (1988:167, 166).

Sampson and Cohen's study makes a useful contribution to the con-
troversy

over the benefits of aggressive policing strategies on crime
prevention. The debate was triggered, in part, by James Q. Wilson's
1968 work, Varieties of Police Behavior and by his study with Barbara

|

The Broken Windows Theory + 79

Boland on the effects of aggressive police arrest practices on crime
(Wilson 1968: Wilson and Boland 1978 and 1981: see also Boydstun
1975). Wilson and Boland hypothesized that aggressive police patrols,
involving increased stops and arrests, have a deterrent effect on crime
(1978:373-374). A number of contributions ensued, both supporting
(see, e.g.. Whittaker et al. 1985) and critcizing these findings (see.
e.g.. Jacob and Rich 1981; Decker and Kohfeld 19)
was slighuy different in focus from the Skogan study and the debate

. The controversy

over the broken windows theory, since it centered more on aggressive
police behavior and heightened stops and arrests. Nevertheless, since
the control of disorder feeds into policies of aggressive arrest and or-
der-maintenance crackdowns, as I have argued, the study is relevant to
our debate.

In their study, Sampson and Cohen focus on two possible mecha-
nisms—only one of which reflects the broken windows hypothesis—
by which aggressive, proactive policing strategies might be related to
lower crime rates. The first mechanism, which they refer to as “indi-
rect,” operates by increasing the arrest/offense ratio (1988:164). Ag-
gressive, proactive policing results in an increased number of police-
civilian exchanges, which in turn increases the likelihood of solving
crimes: “By stopping, questioning, and otherwise closely observing
citizens, especially suspicious ones, the police are more likely to find
fugitives, detect contraband (such as stolen property or concealed
weapons). and apprehend persons fleeing from the scene of a crime”
(1988:164). Under the first hypothesis, aggressive policing affects
crime “by changing the actual probability that an arrest is made (e.g.,
by increasing the arrest/offense ratio)” (1988:164). The second mech-
anism, which they refer to as “direct,” operates by influencing commu-
nity perceptions regarding the certainty of punishment (1988:165).
The heightened police presence and interventions that accompany
proactive policing communicate to potential criminals that they are

more likely to be caught if they commit a crime. This second mecha-

nism—increasing certainty of arrest—is the one that is explicitly
inked to the broken windows theory. The authors make this link by us-
ing as the measure of aggressive policing “the number of arrests per
police officer for disorderly conduct and driving under the influence
(DUT)” (1988:169).

With regard to the indirect effect, Sampson and Cohen report that

