BERNARD E. HARCOURT

Illusion of Order

The False Promise of
Broken Windows Policing

HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England
2001



22 - ILLUSION OF ORDER

able insights. The fundamental problem with order maintenance is
not that it rests on discussion of the norm and social meaning of or-
derliness, but rather that it fails to be critical about these categories—
order, disorder, and the disorderly—and to consider the ways in which
they are shaped by the policing practices that surround us. Order
maintenance fails to explore how punishment techniques may shape
our very conception of thicker propensities, human nature, and social
meaning.

The alternative approach that I propose focuses not only on social
meaning and short-term behavior and perception, but also, and more
important, on the relationship between policing practices and the per-
ceptions, thoughts, feelings, understandings, and relations of the con-
temporary subject. Law enforcement policies and punitive practices
shape us—and it is here, I suggest, that we should begin to rethink and
research our criminal laws and policing. This book is a critique of the
order-maintenance approach to criminal justice, but it is also a prole-
gomenon to a new vision of punishment and criminal justice policy

analysis.

CHAPTER 2

The Order-Maintenance Approach

Broken windows policing has swept the American criminal justice sys-
tem at record speed. In the euphoria of support, it is sometimes easy to
lose sight of the subtle distinctions between the various practices and
theories. Order maintenance, broken windows, zero tolerance, com-
munity policing, social norms, social meaning, social influence: the
terms begin to bleed into one another. How is it, precisely, that the
broken windows theory relates to the legal scholarship of the New Chi-
cago School or to New York-style policing? And how is it, exactly, that
the more conservative writings of James Q. Wilson and Edward C.
Banfield relate to the contemporary writings of the New Progressives?
In this chapter I offer an interpretation of the different theories and
practices that make up the order-maintenance approach to criminal
justice. I begin with perhaps the most central doctrine of all, the bro-
ken windows theory.

Broken Windows

The broken windows theory was first articulated in James Q. Wilson
and George L. Kelling’s short, nine-page article “Broken Windows,”
which appeared in the Atlantic Monthly in 1982. The theory is premised
on the idea that “disorder and crime are usually inextricably linked, in
a kind of developmental sequence” (Wilson and Kelling 1982:31). Ac-
cording to Wilson and Kelling, minor disorders (such as littering, loi-
tering, public drinking, panhandling, and prostitution), if tolerated

23


24 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

in a neighborhood, produce an environment that is likely to attract
crime. They signal to potential-criminals that delinquent behavior will
not be reported or controlled—that no one is in charge. One broken
window, left unrepaired, invites other broken windows. These progres-
sively break down community standards and leave the community vul-
nerable to crime.

In the essay, disorder breeds crime in a highly scripted manner:

Astable neighborhood of families who care for their homes, mind each
other’s children, and confidently frown on unwanted intruders can
change, in a few years or even a few months, to an inhospitable and
frightening jungle. A piece of property is abandoned, weeds grow up,
a window is smashed. Adults stop scolding rowdy children; the chil-
dren, emboldened, become more rowdy. Families move out, unat-
tached adults move in. Teenagers gather in front of the corner store.
The merchant asks them to move; they refuse. Fights occur. Litter accu-
mulates. People start drinking in front of the grocery; in time, an ine-
briate slumps to the sidewalk and is allowed to sleep it off. Pedestrians
are approached by panhandlers.

At this point it is not inevitable that serious crime will flourish or vio-
lent attacks on strangers will occur. But many residents will think that
crime, especially violent crime, is on the rise, and they will modify their
behavior accordingly. They will use the streets less often, and when on
the streets will stay apart from their fellows, moving with averted eyes,
silent lips, and hurried steps. . . .

Such an area is vulnerable to criminal invasion. Though it is not in-
evitable, it is more likely that here . . . drugs will change hands, prosti-
tutes will solicit, and cars will be stripped. That the drunks will be
robbed by boys who do it as a lark, and the prostitutes’ customers will
be robbed by men who do it purposefully and perhaps violently.
(1982:31-32)

On the surface, the “Broken Windows” script privileges order over
disorder. Whereas disorder attracts crime, order, by contrast, decreases
criminal activity. The principal policy recommendation of the essay is
that the police resume their “order-maintenance function’—a func-
tion that was essentially displaced by the “crime fighting function”
during the 1960s (1982:33; see also Wilson 1968:16-34). The order-
maintenance function focuses on integrating police officers into the

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 25

community and teaching them to maintain the peace and order rather
than solve crimes. It is symbolized by the foot-patrol officer on his beat,
making his rounds, enforcing rules of civility, and maintaining good
order.

This hierarchy of order over disorder is refracted throughout the
essay. A typical community, for instance, is composed of citizens or
“decent folk” on the one hand, and criminals and “disorderly people”
on the other (1982:30). The disorderly people include “disreputable
or obstreperous or unpredictable people: panhandlers, drunks, ad-
dicts, rowdy teenagers, prostitutes, loiterers, the mentally disturbed”
(1982:30; see also Wilson 1968:16, 39). They are the rowdy children,
the fighting teenagers, the slumped inebriates, and the marauding
panhandlers in the script. And they are pitted against orderly citizens
in a continual struggle of good versus evil. The disorderly are closely
associated with vices such as drinking, prostitution, littering, and beg-
ging. They are the “ill-smelling drunk” or the “importuning beggar”
(1982:34). They are often associated with youth or with “unattached
adults” (1982:32).

This opposition of orderly and disorderly people cuts across a fur-
ther pervasive insider-outsider dichotomy, in effect producing two cat-
egories of troublemakers—the disorderly insiders, who need to be
controlled, and the disorderly outsiders, who need to be excluded.
The scheme of the essay can be represented as follows:

| Regulars Strangers
Ordered Decent folk Visitors
Disordered Drunks and derelicts Criminals

According to the essay, it is “outsiders” or “strangers” who commit
crimes (1982:36, 30). “Regulars,” by contrast, tend not to cause real
problems (1982:30). So, for instance, the essay recounts the views of a
patrol officer, fictitiously named Kelly, who is assigned a beat in down-
town Newark in a controlled experiment regarding community po-
licing:

The people were made up of “regulars” and “strangers.” Regulars in-
cluded both “decent folk” and some drunks and derelicts who were al-
ways there but who “knew their place.” Strangers were, well, strangers,
and viewed suspiciously, sometimes apprehensively. The officer—call


26 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

him Kelly—knew who the regulars were, and they knew him. As he saw
his job, he was to keep an eye on strangers, and make certain that the
disreputable regulars observed some informal but widely understood
rules. Drunks and addicts could sit on the stoops, but could not lie
down. People could drink on side streets, but not at the main intersec-
tion. Bottles had to be in paper bags. Talking to, bothering, or begging
from people waiting at the bus stop was strictly forbidden. If a dispute
erupted between a businessman and a customer, the businessman was
assumed to be right, especially if the customer was a stranger. If a
stranger loitered, Kelly would ask him if he had any means of support
and what his business was; if he gave unsatisfactory answers, he was sent
on his way. (1982:30)

Kelly’s task, as he saw it, was to regulate the disorderly insiders and
exclude the disorderly outsiders—a task that reflects the type of order-
maintenance policing espoused in the essay. “We look for outsiders,”
reports a leader of a community watch group in the Silver Lake area of
Belleville, New Jersey. “If a few teenagers from outside the neighbor-
hood enter it, ‘we ask them their business’” (1982:36).

The insider-outsider dichotomy is also reflected in the recurring ref-
erence to “criminal invasion” (1982:32-33). The term “invasion” rein-
forces the idea that crime comes from outside the community. The es-
say manages to sustain this fiction essentially by excluding delinquents.
The insider teenager, for instance, who lives in a housing project and
becomes a gang member simply loses his insider status. Though he
may continue to live in the projects, he is no longer a “project resi-
dent,” no longer a “citizen,” and no longer has a legitimate voice
(1982:35). In short, he no longer has a claim to membership in the
community—especially in the face of competing claims by orderly
residents who are struggling to “reassert control over [their] turf”
(1982:33). “What the police in fact do,” the essay asserts, “is chase
known gang members out of the project” (1982:35). The essay does
the same when it excludes gang members from the category of “resi-
dents.”

The “Broken Windows” essay is premised, then, on a number of
shared assumptions about the privilege of order over disorder and of
insider over outsider, about the likelihood of criminal invasion in dis-
orderly neighborhoods, and about the suspicious nature of the unat-

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 27

tached adult, the importuning beggar, the unpredictable person—in
sum, the disorderly. It is premised ona categorical distinction between
the disorderly and the decent folk. The essay intimates that reducing
crime is merely a question of details, that it requires only that we pick
up litter, paint over graffiti, hide inebriates and panhandlers, and fix
broken windows. The essay reflects an aesthetic of orderliness, cleanli-
ness, and sobriety. And on these assumptions it tells a compelling story
about crime and deterrence. The basic plot is simple: fighting minor
disorder deters serious crime.

Edward C. Banfield and the Lower Class

The “Broken Windows” essay reflects an approach to crime, urban is-
sues, and politics that was shaped by the earlier writings of Edward C.
Banfield—James Q. Wilson’s mentor, colleague, and co-author in 1963
of City Politics. In a series of writings addressing the urban crisis in
the 1960s and 1970s—especially in The Unheavenly City and the subse-
quent revision, The Unheavenly City Revisited—Banfield set forth a dis-
tinct perspective on crime and urban decay that, in many ways, made
possible the later broken windows theory. Just as the broken win-
dows theory describes an evolutionary—or devolutionary—spiral of
decay, Banfield had articulated earlier a similar developmental model
of neighborhood change that relied significantly on behavioral norms
and economic necessity to explain crime and urban blight. Banfield’s
model of urban change was similarly premised on two important fac-
tors: first, what he called the “logic of growth”; and second, the norms
and values of neighborhood residents, including, more specifically,
the pathological traits of “lower-class” individuals.

According to Banfield, urban change reflected, in part, a natural
evolutionary process—what he referred to as a “logic of growth.”
Downtown neighborhoods fall into the hands of the less well-off be-
cause the original, better-off property owners leave the central city
for larger homes and more acreage in the suburbs. The well-off move
to the suburbs not because of fear of crime or “white flight,” but
rather because they “wanted and could afford newer and more spa-
cious houses and neighborhoods” and could also afford to commute
(1974:36). They are not pushed out by urban decay, but rather are im-
pelled by their own desire for more luxurious homes. For their part,


28 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

the less well-off are glad to move into the downtown neighborhoods
because of the proximity to jobs and stores, and also because of the rel-
ative improvement of central city housing over rural poverty, older
tenements, or shanties. “The logic of growth,” Banfield emphasized,
“does require that, in general, the lowest-income people live in the old-
est, highest-density, most run-down housing, which will be nearest to
the factories, warehouses, stores, and offices of the inner city, or down-
town, part of the central city” (1974:52).

Eventually, the neighborhoods vacated by the well-off begin to de-
cay. The well-off perceive their old neighborhoods, sadly, as examples
of urban “blight’—“lawns and shrubbery trampled out, houses un-
painted, porches sagging, vacant lots filled with broken bottles and
junk” (1974:35). In what might playfully be called the “broken bottle
theory,” Banfield suggests that the poor—or in his terms the “less well-
off’—have an incentive to let their neighborhood decay:

To the people who moved from old tenements and shanties into the
housing that had been vacated by the relatively well-off people who
moved to the suburbs, what was happening to the central city neighbor-
hoods did not appear as “decay.” Many of them cared little or nothing
for lawns and had no objections to broken bottles; they knew, too, that
the more “fixed up” things were, the higher rents would be. . . . To the
least well-off, “blight” was a blessing. They were able, for the first time
in their lives, to occupy housing that was comfortable. (1974:36)

According to Banfield, the logic of growth, however, does not ex-
plain fully the existence of squalid and crime-ridden slums. What ac-
counts for these features is the second important factor, namely, be-
havioral norms and the concept of class (1974:52-53). By class,
Banfield meant certain “patterns of perception, taste, attitude, and be-
havior” (1974:53). These patterns, according to Banfield, permeate all
facets of an individual’s life, including his or her “manners, consump-
tion, child-rearing, sex, politics, or whatever” (1974:53). Banfield re-
ferred to these patterns as norms or values. He called them “ethos,”
which he defined as “the sum of the characteristic usages, ideas, stan-
dards, and codes by which a group is differentiated and individualized
in character from other groups” (Banfield 1958:10 n.3).

For Banfield, class membership turns on the individual’s psychologi-
cal orientation to time—that is, whether he or she is present- or future-

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 29

oriented. Banfield’s central hypothesis was that “the many traits that
constitute a ‘patterning’ are all consequences, indirect if not direct, of
a time horizon that is characteristic of a class” (1974:54, emphasis added).
The “lower-class” person is present-oriented to a fault. In contrast to
the future-oriented upper-class individual, the lower-class individual
lives “from moment to moment,” and his behavior is governed by im-
pulse. He is improvident and irresponsible, and, as a result, “likely also
to be unskilled, to move frequently from one dead-end job to another,
to be a poor husband and father” (1974:61, 54).

The lower-class individual resembles, in many ways, the disorderly in
Wilson and Kelling’s “Broken Windows” essay. Like the unattached
adult, the lower-class individual in Banfield’s writings “is unable to
maintain a stable relationship with a mate; commonly he does not
marry” (1974:62). Like the aggressive panhandler, the lower-class indi-
vidual is “aggressive yet dependent” (1974:62). And like the prostitute
or slut, the lower-class person has loose sexual morals. “His bodily
needs (especially for sex) and his taste for ‘action’ take precedence
over everything else—and certainly over any work routine” (1974:61).
The lower-class person is unemployed and “drifts from one unskilled
job to another, taking no interest in his work” (1974:61). He is abu-
sive and often violent. Lower-class households, Banfield contends, are
“usually female-based.” The women heads of household are “charac-
teristically impulsive,” and “once children have passed babyhood they
are likely to be neglected or abused” (1974:61).

The lower-class person has a lot in common with his environment.
“The lower-class individual lives in the slum,” Banfield notes, “which,
to a greater or lesser extent, is an expression of his tastes and style of
life” (1974:71). He develops a symbiotic relationship with the ghetto
that reinforces his own lower-class norms as well as the urban decay:

[T]he indifference (“apathy” if one prefers) of the lower-class person is
such that he seldom makes even the simplest repairs to the place that
he lives in. He is not troubled by dirt and dilapidation and he does not
mind the inadequacy of public facilities such as schools, parks, hospi-
tal, and libraries; indeed, where such things exist he may destroy them
by carelessness or even by vandalism. . . . [T]he slum is specialized as [a
site] for vice and for illicit commodities generally. Dope peddlers, pros-
titutes, and receivers of stolen goods are all readily available there,


30 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

within easy reach of each other and of their customers and victims. . . .
In the slum, one can beat one’s children, lie drunk in the gutter, or go
to jail without attracting any special notice; these are things that most
of the neighbors themselves have done and that they consider quite
normal. (1974:72)

According to Banfield, it is precisely the norm of present-
orientedness, characteristic of lower-class individuals, that gives rise
to crime and delinquency, poverty and squalor, broken families and
illegitimacy. Banfield was surprisingly blunt, at least by contempo-
rary standards. Lower-class people, he stated, “generate social prob-
lems—violent crime, for example” (1974:240). In The Unheavenly City
Revisited, Banfield explained that “since the benefits of crime tend to
be immediate and its costs (such as imprisonment or loss of reputa-
tion) in the future, the present-oriented individual is ipso facto more dis-
posed toward crime than others” (1974:183, emphasis added). Similarly, in
his later essay “Present Orientedness and Crime,” Banfield wrote that
“a cohort of present-oriented persons could as a rule be expected to
commit a good many more crimes of certain types than a matched co-
hort of persons who are not present oriented” (1991:320-321). Ban-
field did not shy away from provocation.

The norm of present-orientedness, in conjunction with the logic of
growth, operates to perpetuate urban decay and blight. In turn, these
problems of crime and poverty reinforce present-orientedness in what
Banfield described as a “feedback loop” (1991:319). It is thus the mix
of class culture and the logic of growth that determines the crime rate
and housing conditions in central city neighborhoods (1974:74). The
norm of present-orientedness, in conjunction with urban evolutionary
norms, causes crime. Banfield’s “feedback loop” can be graphically illus-
trated as shown in Figure 2.1.

In effect, Banfield explained crime on the basis of two interrelated
factors—class and situation. He summarized his view as follows:

[C]rime, like poverty, depends primarily upon two sets of variables.
One set relates mainly to class culture and personality (but also to sex
and age) and determines an individual's propensity to crime. The other
relates to situational factors (such as the number of policemen on the
scene and the size of the payroll) and determines his inducement. The
probability that he will commit crimes—his proneness to crime—de-

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 31

pends upon propensity and inducement. A city’s potential for crime may
be thought of as the average proneness of persons in various “sex-age-
culture-personality” groups times their number. (1974:180)

According to Banfield, present-orientedness contributes not only to
serious crime, such as assault, robbery, and rape, but also to antisocial
behavior more generally. It causes what Wilson and Kelling refer to as
“disorder”—in Banfield’s words, “behavior that is antisocial without
being illegal, or that is merely unsocial.” This behavior, in turn, threat-
ens “the ‘quality-of-life’ or, as it used to be called civilization” (Banfield
1991:315).

The focus on the norm of present-orientedness to explain larger so-
cial phenomena is characteristic of Banfield’s thought more gener-
ally. In his earlier work The Moral Basis of a Backward Society, Banfield
focused on the behavioral norm of “amoral familism” to explain
the extreme poverty and “backwardness” of southern Italian society
(1958:9). “Amoral familism” is the tendency to care only about the
short-term material advantages of one’s nuclear family and to disre-
gard all other, larger interests, such as the interest of one’s community,
city, or nation. The behavioral norm of amoral familism undermines
the ability of southern Italians to act together to promote the general
welfare, to create organizations to better society, or to cooperate in
such a way as to improve living conditions. Banfield argued that the
family-centered ethos explains the economic and social conditions of
southern Italy. While he conceded that other factors were also impor-
tant—such as “poverty, ignorance, and a status system which leaves the

<—_ reinforces

“Lower-class” culture Urban decay, including
and situation factors poor housing, inferior schools,
crime-ridden neighborhoods,
and blight
causes Vi
\ influences
Crime and poverty

Figure 2.1 Banfield’s feedback loop of class, crime, and urban decay


32 - ILLUSION OF ORDER

peasant almost outside the larger society” (1958:155)—he neverthe-
less maintained that “for purposes of analysis and policy the moral ba-
sis of a society may usefully be regarded as the strategic, or limiting fac-
tor. That is to say, the situation may be understood, or altered, better
from this standpoint than from any other.” This “very simple hypothe-
sis,” Banfield contended, could “make intelligible ail of the behavior
about which questions have been raised and will enable an observer to
predict how the Montegranesi [villagers] will act in concrete circum-
stances” (1958:155, 83, emphasis added).

Behavioral norms—present-orientedness in the lower classes in
American society and family-orientedness in southern Italian society—
are, for Banfield, the key to understanding social phenomena such as
crime, urban decay, bad schools, lack of associations, and so on. They
reflect what others, such as Wilson, would call “human nature” (Wil-
son and Herrnstein 1985). And, by and large, they have to be taken for
granted in policy analysis. From a policy perspective, Banfield argued,
there is no point in trying to change individuals’ propensity to commit
crime because these cultural and personality traits are practically im-
mutable.

Banfield was deeply pessimistic about the possibility of changing
class characteristics. “The fact is,” he emphasized, “that no one knows
how to change the culture of any part of the population” (1974:263).
Even if we could change psychological orientation to time, he sug-
gested, it would take several generations: class characteristics in any in-
dividual change very slowly, if at all, and can be discussed only from a
multigenerational perspective (1974:238-239). Moreover, “even if one
did know how, there is good reason to suppose that doing so would be
infeasible on other grounds; for example, it might require unconsti-
tutional methods, such as taking infants from their parents at birth,
or entail other disadvantages that more than offset its advantages”
(1974:263). As a result, the Banfieldian policy maker has to focus on
the environment and inducements rather than class and propensity.
“[T]he policy maker usually must take certain cultural and psychologi-
cal traits as given,” Banfield wrote. “If he is to change a city’s poten-
tial for crime it must be by manipulating situational factors, which is
to say inducements” (1974:180, 195-196). This could be done “either
by raising the costs of crime or by raising the benefits of noncrime”
(1974:196).

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 33

The truth is, Banfield was not very sanguine about the possibility of
doing anything about the urban problem—and in fact sounded some-
times as if he believed the problem itself was not a real issue. Banfield
emphasized, in The Unheavenly City Revisited, that “[t]he import of what
has been said in this book is that although there are many difficulties
to be coped with, dilemmas to be faced, and afflictions to be endured,
there are very few problems that can be solved; it is also that although
much is seriously wrong with the city, no disaster impends unless it be
one that results from public misconceptions that are in the nature of
self-fulfilling prophecies” (1974:285).

Banfield’s list of policy proposals was, accordingly, short and some-
what limited (1974:268). He recommended repealing the minimum
wage, reducing the school-leaving age, enacting a negative income tax
for the “competent” poor, and providing intensive birth-control guid-
ance to the “incompetent poor”—whom he defined as “the insane, the
severely retarded, the senile, the lower class (inveterate ‘problem fami-
lies’), and unprotected children” (1974:269-270). In terms of polic-
ing, Banfield proposed, first, regulating police practices in such a way
as to give victims a greater incentive to take reasonable precautions to
prevent crime; second, intensifying patrols in high-crime neighbor-
hoods and permitting police to stop and frisk; and third, reducing the
time from arrest to conviction and punishment. In addition, as noted
earlier, he recommended that society “abridge to an appropriate de-
gree the freedom of those who in the opinion of a court are extremely
likely to commit violent crimes” (1974:270). For Banfield, the policy
focus was on manipulating opportunities rather than propensities.

James Q. Wilson and Human Nature

Banfield’s writings had a significant influence on Wilson and Kelling’s
“Broken Windows” essay at a number of different levels. Just as the dis-
orderly and obstreperous person in Wilson and Kelling’s work bears
a sharp resemblance to the lower-class individual, the natural devolu-
tion of a disorderly neighborhood is also reminiscent of the logic of
growth. In addition, the policy orientation of both works—the focus
on modifying situational factors and inducements rather than class val-
ues or propensity—is very similar.

Not surprisingly, Banfield also influenced, more generally, the other


34 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

writings of James Q. Wilson. Wilson’s prolific writings on crime can be
grouped into three periods: the first period includes the more policy-
oriented writings such as the “Broken Windows” essay and others an-
thologized in Thinking about Crime (1975), as well as his work on polic-
ing, Varieties of Police Behavior (1968); the second involves more tradi-
tional criminological writings, especially his treatise Crime and Human
Nature (1985), co-authored with his colleague at Harvard University,
Richard Herrnstein; the third includes his more recent writings on
moral theory reflected in works such as The Moral Sense (1993). All
three periods reflect, in different ways and to different degrees,
Banfield’s influence.

In his earlier policy-oriented writings, Wilson, like Banfield, argued
strenuously against trying to remedy the deep environmental causes of
crime, such as poverty, or the psychological roots of crime, such as im-
pulsiveness and present-orientedness. Instead, Wilson proposed more
modest policies aimed at changing the situational factors that allow or
encourage lawbreakers to commit crime—modest in the sense of the
goal to achieve, not the consequences of the policies. Wilson’s princi-
pal recommendations, other than order maintenance, included the
increased use of incarceration, especially for serious and repeat of-
fenders, more rapid trials and administration of punishment, manda-
tory sentencing, and reduced prosecutorial discretion over whom to
charge (Wilson 1975:199-201, 208). Wilson also advocated aggressive
arrest practices as a way to lower crime rates (Wilson and Kelling 1982;
Wilson and Boland 1978 and 1981).

In these early writings, Wilson drew a sharp distinction between
the criminologist’s task of discovering the causes of crime and the pol-
icy analyst’s task of proposing politically feasible measures that would
have some impact on the crime rate. “Policy analysis, as opposed to
causal analysis, begins with a very different perspective,” Wilson wrote
(1975:53). It begins with a perspective that focuses on feasible and
measurable change. In contrast to Banfield—who, in a somewhat self
deprecating way, repeatedly emphasized that hardly any of his pol-
icy proposals were politically acceptable (1974:269, 285)—Wilson was
highly concerned with political feasibility. Wilson’s policy orientation
was mostly the product of a genuine desire to offer workable policy pre-
scriptions—a desire shared by the New Chicago School. “Though in-
tellectually rewarding, from a practical point of view it is a mistake to

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 35

think about crime in terms of its ‘causes’ and then to search for ways to
alleviate those causes,” Wilson noted. “We must think instead of what it
is feasible for a government or a community to do, and then try to dis-
cover, by experimentation and observation, which of those things will
produce, at acceptable costs, desirable changes in the level of criminal
victimization” (1975:207-208) .

In other words, for Wilson, it was the imperative of political feasibil-
ity—rather than pessimism about changing class culture—that was the
driving force behind his policy orientation. To be sure, Wilson shared
with Banfield both a thick conception of human nature and deep
skepticism about changing human nature. In fact, in many passages in
Thinking about Crime, Wilson, like Banfield, suggested that it may well
be impossible to change human nature (see, e.g., Wilson 1975:209).
Nevertheless, Wilson’s principal motivation for situation-oriented poli-
cies was the desire to change the real world by proposing politically
practicable policies. And his principal prescription was to incapacitate
a larger number of habitual offenders (1975:199).

In the second period—in his more criminological writings—Wilson
developed with Richard Herrnstein a comprehensive theory of crime
that, like Banfield’s, emphasized human nature but also focused on
situational factors. In contrast to his earlier writings, Wilson with
Herrnstein distanced himself from the conception of class that was so
central to Banfield’s writings. Whereas, in the earlier period, Wilson
wrote about “lower-class persons” in a very Banfieldian way, suggest-
ing that they are preoccupied with “immediate gratification” and are
“inclined to uninhibited, expressive conduct” (1975:37), Wilson and
Herrnstein recognized in their treatise in 1985 that “this argument
continues to be controversial, and so it seems inappropriate to be-
gin an explanation of criminality by assuming that it is based on
class” (1985:28). They nevertheless developed a notion of present-
orientedness that played a similar role as in Banfield’s writings. They
referred specifically to the concept of “present-oriented[ness]” and
discussed it in similar terms of “discounting” future rewards (1985:62).
In fact, a central principle of their comprehensive theory of crime
was that “people differ in the rate at which they discount the future”
(1985:61).

More generally, Wilson and Herrnstein developed a conception of
human nature as playing an important role in determining crime.


36 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

“The argument of this book,” they explained, “is that there isa human
nature that develops in intimate settings out of a complex interaction
of constitutional and social factors, and that this nature affects how
people choose between the consequences of crime and its alterna-
tives” (1985:508). As with Banfield, Wilson and Herrnstein’s focus on
human nature differentiated their work from sociological writings on
crime, especially theories of strain, control, and cultural deviance,
which traditionally emphasized social processes and their influence on
crime (1985:63). Although Wilson and Herrnstein’s comprehensive
theory of crime attempted to accommodate, to some extent, sociologi-
cal emphases on social processes and norms, it focused to an impor-
tant extent on psychological, biological, and environmentally caused
predispositions to crime. In other words, like Banfield, Wilson and
Herrnstein constructed a theory of crime that focused on propen-
sity—what they refer to as “constitutional” and “developmental” fac-
tors, or “subjective” states of the person—but that also implicated in-
ducement—what they refer to as “social context,” objective factors, or
contingencies. Like Banfield, Wilson and Herrnstein maintained that
it is “very hard for society to change, by plan, the subjective state of
large numbers of persons” (1985:377). In contrast to the earlier Wil-
son, though, they reached this conclusion less because of the distinc-
tion between policy analysis and criminology, and more because of
criminological “truth.”

In his more recent writings on moral theory, Wilson focuses increas-
ing attention on the purported breakdown of morality in the modern
age, and the resulting global increase in crime. This is a departure
from his earlier writings. In Thinking about Crime, for instance, he em-
phasized that “[m]y strong inclination is to resist explanations for ris-
ing crime that are based on the alleged moral breakdown of society,
the community, or the family. I resist in part because most of the fami-
lies and communities I know have not broken down, and in part be-
cause, had they broken down, I cannot imagine any collective action
we could take consistent with our civil liberties that would restore a
moral consensus” (1975:206).

In his 1993 work The Moral Sense, however, Wilson maintains that
moral relativism in the twentieth century contributed, to some extent,
to an increase in crime rates. He suggests that global crime patterns to-

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 37

day respond more to cultural circumstances than, as they did formerly,
to material circumstances, and that one important cultural circum-
stance is “the collapse in the legitimacy of what once was respectfully
called middle-class morality but today is sneeringly referred to as ‘mid-
dle-class values’” (1993:10). Wilson argues that worldwide moral rela-
tivism may contribute to the global increase in crime “by replacing the
belief in personal responsibility with the notion of social causation and
by supplying to those marginal persons at risk for crime a justification
for doing what they might have done anyway” (1993:10). Banfield
too attributed some of the increase in crime to moral relapse. He
suggested that upper- and middle-class persons became more crime-
prone during the 1960s because “these classes have come to have less
respect for authority, including the authority of the law . . . [and be-
cause] their conventional morality has been weakened and partially
destroyed” (1974:193). Wilson’s discussion of the “moral sense” is also
influenced by Banfield’s focus on ethos—as in the ethos of amoral
familism that characterizes southern Italian villagers. Overall, though,
Banfield’s influence may be less apparent here than in the first two
periods.

The New Chicago School

What emerges from the Banfield-Wilson tradition is a common ef-
fort to enrich classical doctrine with a thicker notion of class culture
or human nature, as well as a policy orientation that focuses on the en-
vironmental and situational cues that encourage people to commit
crime. And it is here that the Banfield-Wilson tradition intersects with
the writings of the New Chicago School. Dan Kahan, Tracey Meares,
and others share Wilson’s orientation to policy analysis. In their own
words, they are generating “an intensely practical agenda” of law en-
forcement policies, and their motivations are “as much political as
conceptual” (Kahan and Meares 1998b:806).

In sharp contrast to Wilson, however, these legal scholars do not ad-
vocate lengthier and more severe terms of incarceration. Quite to the
contrary. In this respect they are writing against James Q. Wilson. They
affirmatively promote what they refer to as “milder public-order alter-
natives,” such as youth curfews, anti-gang loitering ordinances, and or-


38 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

der-maintenance crackdowns (Kahan and Meares 1999a:23). These,
they contend, are “politically feasible and morally attractive” substi-
tutes for extended incarceration (Kahan and Meares 1998b:806). At
the same time, though, their policy proposals draw heavily on the logic
of Wilson’s broken windows theory. Kahan in fact relies on the theory
(1997a:369), as do other social norm theorists (see, e.g., Ellickson
1996:1171-73, 1177-79, 1182; Livingston 1997:581-591).

Social norm scholarship in criminal law, I would suggest, is best un-
derstood as a type of constructivist social theory. The emerging lit-
erature attempts to explain behavior by focusing on shared interpre-
tations of social practices. These shared interpretations are socially
constructed, and they move social actors to behave in certain ways. As
Lawrence Lessig explains, “The regulatory effect of norms comes not
from something physical or behavioral. The regulatory effect comes
from something interpretive” (1998:680, emphasis added).

Socially constructed meaning is at the heart of social norm theoriz-
ing. With regard to each and every policy recommendation, social
meaning plays a pivotal, if not the pivotal, role. The reverse sting strat-
egy (the strategy of setting up and arresting purchasers rather than
drug dealers), for example, purportedly changes “the social meaning
of drug-law policy” (Kahan and Meares 1998b:818-819). At present,
the meaning stigmatizes African-Americans as lawbreakers because
they are the predominant targets of sting operations. By redistributing
the impact of drug convictions outside the inner city, reverse stings
“can affect the social meaning of drug offending in ways that encour-
age residents of minority communities to cooperate with police of-
ficers and with each other to reduce crime” (1998b:818-819). Anti-
gang loitering ordinances and youth curfews allegedly affect behavior
by changing the social meaning of gang membership: “The level of
gang activity reflects whether individual juveniles believe that others
value and expect gang membership” (1998b:819). Ordinances and
curfews change the perception among juveniles that peers value gang
criminality by reducing, for instance, the expressive function of the
behavior: “[B]eing out at night becomes a less potent means of dis-
playing toughness because fewer of one’s peers are around to wit-
ness such behavior” (1998b:821). Order-maintenance policing pur-
portedly works because of the social meaning of order. Since order

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 39

means that a neighborhood is in control, changing a neighborhood
from disorderly to orderly will reduce crime (1998b:823). The policy
of encouraging juvenile snitching, it is argued, works by changing the
social meaning of carrying guns. By rewarding kids who turn in their
peers, the strategy “interferes with norms that give guns their mean-
ing” (1998b:825). Finally, church-police cooperation (such as the Elev-
enth District prayer vigil in Chicago) is purportedly effective in part
because it changes the social meaning of the police by casting them in
a new light within the social fabric of the community, and changes po-
lice officers’ perceptions of suspects (1998b:829-830).

All of these proposed policing strategies operate on social mean-
ing. In this regard, social norm scholarship in criminal law traces back,
primarily, to Lawrence Lessig’s 1995 essay “The Regulation of Social
Meaning.” Although Lessig did not originate the social norm turn—
others, most notably Robert Ellickson (1991) and Jon Elster (1989)
preceded him in this respect—Lessig nevertheless initiated the fo-
cus on social meaning as the lens through which we understand so-
cial norms (Lessig 1995, 1996, and 1998; Ellickson 1998:549; Posner
1998a:563). The social norm scholarship in the criminal law area
adopts the social meaning lens, and, in this respect, traces back most
directly to Lessig’s work.

In his 1995 essay, Lessig positions his conception of social meaning
within the framework of constructivist theory. Lessig offers, in the mar-
gin, the following intellectual background to his use of the term “so-
cial meaning”:

It is constructivism that defines modern social theory. Emile Durkheim
is one start: “(S)ocial reality is constructed by the operation of the soci-
ety itself. . . . Social facts are the product of the group life of the total
operation of a society.” In our own time, the notion was advanced most
forcefully in sociology by Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckman’s work,
The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge,
and in law most importantly by Roberto Unger. Unlike some of the ear-
lier theorists, moderns think less about “society itself” constructing it-
self and more about how the actions of individuals and collectivities
work to construct it. Nevertheless, the tradition has maintained its view
about social reality’s source: “Human reality is not provided at birth


40 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

by the physical universe, but rather must be fashioned by individuals
out of the culture into which they are born.” (1995:949 n.19, citations
omitted)

Both Dan Kahan and Tracey Meares rely in important respects on
Lessig’s conception of social meaning (Kahan 1997a:351 n.7; Kahan
1997b:2478 n.8; Kahan 1998:611; Kahan and Meares 1998a:1181;
Kahan and Meares 1998b:815). On its basis, they offer explanations
for the purported effectiveness of the proposed policing stravegies.
They make predictions, as evidenced by their claim that “disorderly
norms create crime” (Kahan and Meares 1998b:806), and they en-
dorse policy prescriptions. But they are candid about the fact that they
are focusing on shared interpretations (1998b:815). In this sense, they
are proposing “an interpretive turn” (Lessig 1996:2184)—a movement
away, however slight, from behavioralism or more traditional eco-
nomic modeling (Lessig 1998:682). This movement, interestingly, mir-
rors a larger intellectual shift toward interpretivism in the human sci-
ences (Foucault 1970:359).

Lessig illustrates the social meaning approach with a discussion of
New York City’s various strategies toward panhandling. During the
late 1980s and early 1990s, the city sought to ban panhandling by pass-
ing a law prohibiting loitering for the purpose of begging (Lessig
1995:1039). That law was struck down by the federal courts under the
First Amendment and, as a result, was not given the chance to change
the social meaning associated with giving to panhandlers.! The Transit
Authority then took a different tack, Lessig explains, and, through an
advertising campaign, communicated to passengers that it was wrong
to give money to panhandlers because it made them less likely to seek
help. That campaign, Lessig reports, was effective and succeeded in
changing the social meaning associated with giving to beggars. Lessig
writes:

Before the Transit Authority started this poster campaign, the refusal
of a passenger to give any money to a panhandler had a relatively un-
ambiguous meaning—identifying the passenger as coldhearted, or
cheap, or uncaring. Thus, the refusal to give was costly for the passen-
ger. But the Authority’s poster campaign ambiguated this meaning.
Now, the refusal could either be because the passenger is coldhearted,
etc., or because the passenger is concerned to do what is best for the

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 41

panhandler. What is best for the panhandler is for the passenger to say
no to the panhandler. Thus the posters succeeded in making it less
costly for the passenger not to give to the panhandler by ambiguating
the social meaning of a refusal to give. (1995:1040)

By changing the social meaning (through ambiguation), the Transit
Authority attempted to change the patterns of giving to panhandlers
and thereby reduce the number of panhandlers.

To say that social norm theory is “constructivist” or “interpretive,”
however, calls for more specificity, since there are today so many differ-
ent types of social construction theories. Contemporary constructivist
theories range from the historical or ironic, to the unmasking or re-
formist, to the more rebellious or revolutionary (Hacking 1999:19—
21). I would characterize the social norm scholarship as moderate, in-
strumental, and at times reformist. First, it is moderate insofar as it
does not suggest that all social meanings are constructed. As Lessig as-
serts, “[S]ome social meanings are constructed” (1995:949). Moreover,
he maintains, even though more than one construction may be possi-
ble, not every construction is possible (1995:949 n.19). Second, it is in-
strumental insofar as it seeks primarily to change social meaning in
order to affect behavior. As discussed earlier, most of the proposed po-
licing strategies operate in this way—most, but not all. And for this rea-
son, third, it has an ambivalent relationship to reform. Again, most of
the time, but not all, it questions, criticizes, or seeks to change social
meaning. To make this clear, I will review here three of the concrete
policy proposals that social norm scholars advocate.

Juvenile Snitching Policies

One of the earliest and longest-lived recommendations of social norm
scholars is the policy of rewarding, in their own words, “juvenile snitch-
ing” as a way to reduce juvenile gun possession (Kahan 1997a:364;
Kahan 1998:611-612; Kahan and Meares 1998b:824-825; Kahan
1999a:1867). Kahan and Meares begin their analysis by suggesting that
guns have social meaning among youths. This, of course, is undoubt-
edly true. (See, e.g., Pattillo and May 1994:16-29; Fagan 1999:29-31.)
Specifically, Kahan and Meares maintain that “[g]un possession can
confer status on the carrier because it expresses confidence and a will-


42 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

ingness to defy authority. Failure to carry a gun, on the other hand,
may signal fear and thus invite aggression” (1998b:824).

Kahan and Meares suggest that we should develop policies to dis-
courage juvenile gun possession that take account of this meaning.
They argue that the traditional policy of rewarding juveniles who vol-
untarily give up their weapons and severely punishing those who do
not is doomed to fail because the policy supports the present social
meaning of gun possession. It “reinforce[s] the message of defiance
associated with carrying guns and thus increase[s] the expressive value
of that behavior” (1998b:825).

In contrast, Kahan and Meares endorse a policy of rewarding juve-
niles who turn in their classmates who are carrying guns:

When students fear that their peers will report them, they are less likely
to display their guns; when students are reluctant to display them, guns
become less valuable for conveying information about attitudes and in-
tentions. In addition, the perception that onlookers are willing to sell
out possessors counteracts the inference that possessors enjoy high sta-
tus among their peers. Encouraging snitching thus reduces the inci-
dence of gun possession both by deconstructing its positive meaning
and by disrupting behavioral norms—including the ready display of
guns—that are essential to that activity’s expressive value. (1998b:825)

The policy of encouraging juvenile snitching, Kahan and Meares ar-
gue, changes the social meaning of gun possession and thereby lowers
the incentive to carry. It works on the inducement to commit crime by
decreasing the attractiveness of guns.

Anti-Gang Loitering Ordinances

Kahan and Meares also propose enforcing anti-gang loitering ordi-
nances. Their analysis begins with the proposition that gang mem-
bership has social meaning—which, again, is undoubtedly true. Spe-
cifically, Kahan and Meares argue, in high-crime neighborhoods a
majority of teens believe that their peers predominantly admire gang
activity. Therefore, in order to reduce gang activity, “the Jaw should
regulate the sources of social meaning that construct th[ese] impres-
sion[s]” (1998b:819). They advocate, on these grounds, the use of
anti-gang loitering ordinances, such as the ordinance that was enacted

The Order-Maintenance Approach * 43

by the city of Chicago in 1992 (held unconstitutionally vague in 1999
by the United States Supreme Court in City of Chicago v. Morales).
Kahan and Meares explain:

A potentially more effective approach is to attack the public signs and
cues that inform juveniles’ (mis) perception that their peers value gang
criminality. That’s what gang loitering laws attempt to do. . . . By pre-
venting gangs from openly displaying their authority, such laws coun-
teract the perception that gang members enjoy high status in the com-
munity. As that perception recedes, the perceived reputation pressure
to join and emulate them should diminish. (1998b:820-821)

Here, the norm-focused hypothesis is that anti-gang loitering ordi-
nances change the social meaning of gang membership, reducing its
attractiveness and thereby reducing the amount of gang activity.

Order-Maintenance Policing

Kahan and Meares also endorse the police strategy of order mainte-
nance. Their analysis, again, starts with social meaning, here the mean-
ing of order and disorder. Kahan writes that “(t]he effect of disorder
on crime can be understood in terms of the effect that social meaning
has on the mechanisms of social influence” (Kahan 1997a:370). Order,
according to Kahan and Meares, means that the community has con-
trol of the neighborhood, that it will not tolerate criminality, and that
it will enforce basic norms of civility. Conversely, disorder means that
the community tolerates crime, that the neighborhood is unsafe, and
that disorderly persons and criminals can and will take over. The so-
cial meaning of disorder makes a neighborhood vulnerable to crime.
“By shaping preferences for crime, accentuating the perceived status
of lawbreaking, and enfeebling the institutions that normally hold
criminal propensities in check,” Kahan and Meares argue, “disorderly
norms create crime” (1998b:806).

The three key concepts, then, are social meaning, social norms, and
social influence. The social meaning in question is the meaning of or-
der and disorder. So, for instance, Kahan writes that “[d]isorder is. . .
pregnant with meaning: Public drunkenness, prostitution, aggressive
panhandling and similar behavior signal. . . that the community is un-
able or unwilling to enforce basic norms” (Kahan 1997a:370). Social


44 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

meanings can have social influence, which is to say they can influence
the behavior of individuals in society. In the order-maintenance con-
text, the social meaning of disorder influences the disorderly to com-
mit crimes and law abiders to leave the neighborhood. Conversely, the
social meaning of order influences the disorderly to resist their incli-
nation to commit crime, and influences law abiders to walk more
freely in the streets at night. It is in this sense that Kahan writes: “Visi-
ble disorder . . . tells individuals that their own forbearance is unlikely
to be reciprocated. . .. The meaning of disorder can also influence the
behavior of committed law-abiders in a way that is likely to increase
crime.” In contrast, Kahan explains, “[w]hen citizens obey norms
of orderliness—and when authorities visibly respond to those who
don’t—onlookers see that the community is intolerant of criminality.
This message counteracts the inferences that point social influence in
the direction of crime” (1997a:371). To take advantage of social influ-
ence, the social norm of orderliness must be enhanced. The idea is, as
the previous passage suggests, that social influence may sway citizens to
“obey norms of orderliness” (1997a:371). The norm of orderliness op-
erates through social meaning to influence the kind of good behavior
on the part of disorderly and honest people that will reduce crime. So-
cial influence then has a feedback effect on social norms, influencing
people to act in a more orderly manner. In this way, changing a social
meaning may change social norms.

In the context of order-maintenance policing, then, order itself
brings about a dynamic relationship between meaning and influ-
ence, a relationship that is illustrated in Figure 2.2. It is important
to emphasize that there is a feedback mechanism in this explana-
tion. Orderliness has a social meaning, which, by means of social influ-
ence, effectively promotes the norm of orderliness itself. The social
norm explanation, accordingly, loops through the figure over and
over.”

At the level of provocation, the New Progressives also take a page
out of the Banfield-Wilson repertoire. In their writings, Kahan and
Meares confront, head-on, the traditional racial coalitions of the civil
rights era. They claim to speak on behalf of the African-American
community against the American Civil Liberties Union. “[C]ircum-
stances have changed since 1960,” they emphasize. “Today African-

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 45

Americans exercise considerable political clout in our nation’s inner-
cities; and far from being terrorized by anti-loitering laws, curfews and
building searches, many inner-city residents support these measures as
potent weapons against the crime that drastically diminishes their eco-
nomic and social prospects” (Kahan and Meares 1999a:8). The New
Progressives claim to speak for inner-city residents and to express what
is really an unspoken and unrecognized majority within that minority.
They have challenged liberal stereotypes and aggressively promoted a
provocative, alternative vision of justice. They have been called “New
Progressives” (Pildes 1999) precisely because they claim to advance the
interests of inner-city residents and of the African-American commu-
nity by challenging the central orthodoxies of the Warren Court and
the civil rights movement.

And, not surprisingly, they elicit sharp responses. Some cheer them
on enthusiastically. “In the lingo of the 1960s,” Jean Bethke Elshtain
writes, “right on!” (1999:11). Wesley Skogan calls them “brave”
(1999:15). Others, however, read their work as neoconservative. “The
measures that Meares and Kahan advocate are not so much about ex-
panding black self-determination,” Margaret Burnham writes, “as they
are about expanding an already discredited approach to crime”
(1999:17). Or, to borrow the title of Mark Tushnet’s response essay,
“Everything Old Is New Again” (1998). Whether “New Progressive”
or neoconservative, they certainly share with Wilson and Banfield a
knack for being provocative.

<— Social norm
Orderliness Honest persons feel safe and
criminals do not commit crimes

Social meaning

\

Community is in control and
criminals are in check

/

Social influence

Figure 2.2. Order-maintenance policing


46 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

The “Revolution in American Policing”

The order-maintenance approach has not been limited to scholarly
books, law review articles, and academic conferences. A number of the
policy proposals have been implemented in large cities, including New
York, Chicago, and Boston, and in smaller cities and rural areas. In
many cases, in fact, it is new policing strategies that have triggered so-
cial norm theorizing, not the other way around. And the combination
of theory and practice has been truly combustible. It has ignited what
has been dubbed the “Blue Revolution,” a “revolution in American po-
licing” (Massing 1998:32; Nifong 1997).

At the outset, it is important to distinguish between these policing
initiatives—order-maintenance crackdowns, anti-gang loitering ordi-
nances, and youth curfews—and what is referred to as “community po-
licing.” Public officials, journalists, and commentators often blur the
distinctions between these policing techniques, sometimes calling the
social norm proposals “community policing,” at other times drawing
sharp distinctions. The slippage requires some attention.

“Community policing,” at its most general level, stands for the idea
that police officers can prevent crimes by integrating themselves into
the community and solving community problems, rather than by
merely responding to emergency calls. Community policing is preven-
tion-oriented, in contrast to the earlier reform model—the model of
professional crime fighting—which centered on the 911 strategy. It
seeks to share with the public the tasks of problem identification,
problem solving, and crime control. It is a means of developing in-
creased communication between the police and the community
(Fielding 1995:25; Kelling and Coles 1996:239; Moore, Trojanowicz,
and Kelling 2000:53-55). In essence, community policing “consists of
two complementary core components, community partnership and
problem solving” (Community Policing Consortium 2000:118). It rests
on the idea that “effective crime-fighting is based upon a ‘partnership’
between police and the residents of the immediate community they
serve” (Spitzer 1999:47).

The difficulty is that “community policing” comes in a wide variety,
and, as Kelling and Coles concede, “has come to mean all things to
all people” (1996:158). Some understand community policing as a

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 47

type of order maintenance whereby police officers maintain neighbor-
hood order by aggressively arresting low-level offenders. Kelling and
Coles, for instance, have characterized New York City’s quality-of-life
initiative as “community policing,” though they are acutely aware of
the tension (1996:109, 145, 161-163). Others understand community
policing as a style of community integration in which the beat cop spe-
cifically withholds enforcement as a way to build community contacts.
So, for instance, in Chicago, some police officers on the beat report-
edly tolerate disorder so as to ingratiate themselves with the commu-
nity (Eig 1996:63; see generally Skogan and Hartnett 1997).

The variations on the theme of community policing are wide. This
may explain why community policing has swept police departments in
the United States and abroad in the past few decades. In a 1994 Na-
tional Institute of Justice survey of police departments, more than 80
percent of police chiefs polled stated that they were either implement-
ing or intended to implement some aspect of community policing
(McEwen 1995:27; see also Murphy 1992). The truth is, however, that
the popularity and success of community policing is attributable in
large part to the vagueness of the definition, to the national decline in
crime beginning in the early 1990s, and to the fact that the expres-
sion “community policing” is far more effective for public relations
purposes than other terms such as “aggressive misdemeanor arrests,”
“stop and frisk,” or “mass building searches.” It is important, then, to
distinguish carefully between the specific types of community policing
that are being discussed. For this reason, I will try to avoid using the
term as much as possible, and turn instead to the more specific tech-
niques of policing that make up the order-maintenance approach to
criminal justice.

New York City’s “Quality-of-Life Initiative”

Rudolph Giuliani was elected mayor of New York City in 1993 on a
platform that focused largely on crime, disorder, and quality-of-life is-
sues, especially on the notorious “squeegee men.” Giuliani appointed
William Bratton police commissioner in December 1993, and together
they soon began implementing a policing strategy called the “quality-
of-life initiative,” expressly premised on the broken windows theory


48 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

(Giuliani and Bratton 1994e:6). Both Giuliani and Bratton cite the
“Broken Windows” essay as the main source of their initiative (Bratton
1995; Bratton 1996:785-789; Bratton 1998:138-139, 152, 192; Giuliani
1998 and 1999). In Bratton’s words, the essay “articulated and put into
beautiful words what I had found from experience. I supported what
[Wilson and Kelling] wrote because I had already lived it” (Bratton
1998:139).

The quality-of-life initiative was modeled on Bratton’s work in the
New York subways. Bratton had first been appointed head of the New
York Transit Police under Mayor David Dinkins in April 1990—re-
cruited by George Kelling to implement a strategy of order main-
tenance based on the broken windows concept (Bratton 1998:140).
From 1990 to 1992, Bratton implemented an aggressive policy of mis-
demeanor arrests in the subways. “We began to apply this [“Broken
Windows”] concept to crime in the subways,” he writes. “Fare eva-
sion was the biggest broken window in the transit system. We were go-
ing to fix that window and see to it that it didn’t get broken again”
(1998:152). Bratton aggressively pursued turnstile jumpers with sub-
way station mini-sweeps. In addition, he changed the procedure for ar-
rests. Instead of issuing what were known as “desk-appearance tick-
ets’”—summonses which were generally disregarded—police officers
began booking and processing suspects on the spot. Bratton initiated
the “Bust Bus,” a city bus that was “completely retrofitted . . . into an
arrest-processing center” (1998:155), He made a number of other
changes at the Transit Police, including revamping radio equipment,
moving the force to nine-millimeter semiautomatic weapons, and de-
signing new uniforms. These changes were all part of a $40 million in-
fusion into the Transit Police in 1990 from Governor Mario Cuomo
(1998:172-176).

As a result, ejections and arrests for misdemeanors both tripled
within a few months of Bratton’s appointment—and, in fact, contin-
ued to escalate through at least 1994 (Kelling and Coles 1996:132-
133). As Bratton soon discovered, “many of those caught committing
these small crimes were also guilty of larger crimes. One out of seven
fare evaders had prior warrants out for their arrest. One out of 21 was
carrying a handgun” (Kaplan 1997). The result was a sharp increase in
arrests on outstanding warrants and gun possession (Purdy 1997).
While the rate of arrests for felonies did not change, reported crimes

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 49

in the subway declined by about 50 percent from 1990 to 1995
(Lardner 1995:56).

When Bratton took over as police commissioner in early 1994, he
began implementing a similar policy aimed at creating public order
by aggressively enforcing laws against quality-of-life offenses such as
public drunkenness, loitering, vandalism, littering, public urination,
panhandling, turnstile jumping, prostitution, and other minor misde-
meanor offenses (Giuliani and Bratton 1994e:6).

Like the subway strategy, the quality-of-life initiative focused on ag-
gressive arrests for minor misdemeanors (Giuliani and Bratton
1994e:39-40). And, as in the subways, Bratton implemented a change
in arrest procedures at the citywide level (Giuliani and Bratton
1994e:9)—with similar results. “Very shortly into our program of deal-
ing with squeegee operators—and I remember this—after the first
group of arrests,” Giuliani recalls, “Police Commissioner Bratton came
back to me and said that some very large percentage—don’t remem-
ber the exact percentage—of the squeegee operators had warrants for
other crimes, a number of them being violence crimes” (Onishi 1998).
As in the subways, the order-maintenance strategy began netting a lot
of other arrests.

The quality-of-life initiative was one of a number of policing strate-
gies that Bratton implemented during his two years as police com-
missioner. Other strategies targeted gun possession, school violence,
drug dealing, domestic violence, auto theft, and police corruption
(Giuliani and Bratton 1994a, 1994b, 1994c, 1994d, and 1994f; Bratton
1998:227-230). One other important initiative, for example, was
called Operation Juggernaut, a strategy of flooding drug-infested
neighborhoods with large numbers of police officers carrying out buy-
and-bust operations, quality-of-life enforcement, and stops and frisks
(Bratton 1998:272-278). Bratton shook up the NYPD in numerous
other ways. He eliminated several layers of bureaucracy, appointed
young and ambitious managers to top positions, and created a bottom-
line mentality. He implemented a business school management-theory
approach that brought him “a coterie of business school admirers”
(“NYPD, Inc.” 1995; see also Lardner 1995; Bratton 1998:224). He in-
creased the power of precinct commanders and instituted biweekly
meetings, known as Crime Control Strategy Meetings or Compstat
(for computer-statistics) meetings, where the top administrators would



50 - ILLUSION OF ORDER

grill precinct commanders on crime on their beat (Kelling and Coles
1996:146; Bratton 1998:233). But, in the words of Bratton himself, the
quality-of-life initiative was the “linchpin strategy” (1998:228; see also
Giuliani and Bratton 1994e:7).

Bratton’s successor, Howard Safir, continued the strategy of aggres-
sive misdemeanor arrests, and also promoted a more aggressive stop-
and-frisk policy. In 1997 Safir tripled the size of the Street Crime Unit
(SCU)—originally a small, specialized plainclothes enforcement unit
created in the 1970s under Police Commissioner Patrick Murphy,
which was refocused on gun-oriented policing under Bratton
(Giuliani and Bratton 1994a:12, 16)—to about 400 officers, and sharp-
ened even further its focus on getting guns off the street by means of
aggressive stop-and-frisk procedures. Safir credited the unit with about
40 percent of all illegal gun confiscations in New York City in 1998.
During 1998, the SCU, with only 435 officers out of a 40,000-member
police force, was responsible for more than 10 percent of documented
stop-and-frisk encounters citywide (Spitzer 1999:59). The unit stopped
and frisked at least 45,000 people in 1997 and 1998 (Cooper 1999;
Rosen 2000:26)—a conservative estimate based on reported searches
only, which suggests that the real number was higher. The SCU re-
ceived notorious attention in 1999 as a result of the shooting death
of an unarmed man, Amadou Diallo, by four of its members. It has
undergone changes since then, including a return to uniforms and an
increase in the number of minority officers.

New York City’s quality-of-life initiative has variously been called “or-
der-maintenance policing,” “community policing,” “broken windows,”
and “zero tolerance.” Very little, though, turns on the question of no-
menclature. Both Giuliani and Bratton have used the various terms in-
terchangeably since the inception of the policing initiative. Clearly,
the initiative was originally premised on the broken windows theory.
Equally clearly, the implementation of the initiative revealed other jus-
tifications for its continued use. It has been continuously implemented
in New York City in part because, it is believed, it promotes the broken
windows theory and has produced increased orderliness in the city,
but also because it has resulted in the arrest of suspects on outstanding
warrants, as well as suspects linked to other crimes, and because it has
functioned as a type of gun-oriented policing. In this sense, the most

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 51

appropriate label for New York City’s quality-of-life initiative is “order-
maintenance” or “broken windows” policing.‘

Chicago’s Anti-Gang Loitering Ordinance

In June 1992 the city of Chicago enacted an anti-gang loitering ordi-
nance. The ordinance prohibited any person from loitering with one
or more other persons whom the police reasonably believed to be a
member of a street gang. Specifically, the ordinance provided that
“[w]henever a police officer observes a person whom he reasonably
believes to be a criminal street gang member loitering in any public
place with one or more other persons, he shall order all such persons
to disperse and remove themselves from the area. Any person who
does not promptly obey such an order is in violation of this section.”
The ordinance defined loitering as “to remain in any one place with
no apparent purpose.” The ordinance subjected any violator to a fine,
to imprisonment for not more than six months, to community service,
or to some combination of the three (Chicago Municipal Code §8-4-
015 [added June 17, 1992]).

The Chicago Police Department adopted implementing regula-
tions in 1992, and began enforcing the ordinance gradually in 1993
through most of 1995. During the three-year period of implementa-
tion, the police issued over 89,000 orders to disperse and arrested over
42,000 persons under the ordinance (Morales 1999:49; Schulhofer and
Alschuler 2000:7). In 1995 alone, the police made over 22,000 arrests
under the ordinance (Schulhofer and Alschuler 2000:13).

Enforcement of the ordinance was enjoined in December 1995,
when a state appellate court in Illinois ruled that the ordinance was
unconstitutional for its vagueness, its overbreadth, and the fact that it
criminalized the status of being a gang member (Youkhana 1995). The
Illinois Supreme Court and the United States Supreme Court affirmed
(Morales 1997 and 1999). Despite the temporary litigation setback,
however, the city council of Chicago quickly got back to work on a new
anti-gang loitering ordinance. Their task was made easy by Justice San-
dra Day O’Connor, who, in a somewhat unusual maneuver for the Su-
preme Court, had telegraphed to the city council, in a concurring
opinion in Morales, how they might redraft the ordinance. “The term


52 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

‘loiter,’” O’Connor wrote, “might possibly be construed in a more lim-
ited fashion to mean ‘to remain in any one place with no apparent
purpose other than to establish control over identifiable areas, to in-
timidate others from entering those areas, or to conceal illegal activi-
ties. Such a definition,” O’Connor pregnantly suggested, “would avoid
the vagueness problems of the ordinance as construed by the Illinois
Supreme Court” (Morales 1999:68).

Not surprisingly, the revised draft of the anti-gang loitering ordi-
nance, which was passed by the city council in February 2000, by a vote
of 44 to 5 (Fingeret 2000), defines “gang loitering” as remaining in any
one place when the purpose is “to enable a criminal street gang to
establish control over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from en-
tering those areas, or to conceal illegal activities” (Chicago Munici-
pal Code §8-4-015[d][1] [added February 16, 2000]). The revised
ordinance limits enforcement to high-crime neighborhoods, as desig-
nated by the police superintendent. It specifies the time period—
three hours—during which the dispersal order remains in effect. And
it adds a sentence enhancement for repeat offenders. The sentencing
provision of the ordinance was revised to read:

(e) Any person who fails to obey promptly an order [to disperse] under
section (a), or who engages in further gang loitering within sight or
hearing of the place at which such an order was issued during the three
hour period following the time the order was issued, is subject to a fine
of not less than $100 and not more than $500 for each offense, or im-
prisonment for not more than six months for each offense, or both. A
second or subsequent offense shall be punishable by a mandatory min-
imum sentence of not less than five days imprisonment.

In addition to or instead of the above penalties, any person who vio-
lates this section may be required to perform up to 120 hours of com-
munity service. (§8—4-015[e])

The Chicago police started arresting people under the new ordi-
nance in August 2000 (Belluck 2000). In addition, the Chicago coun-
cil passed, at the same time, a narcotics-related anti-loitering ordi-
nance very similar to the anti-gang ordinance. It too provided for a
sentence enhancement for habitual offenders (Chicago Municipal
Code §8-4-017 [added February 16, 2000]). These are but two of

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 53

dozens of targeted anti-loitering ordinances that were enacted in the
1990s (Johnson 2000:A14).

Youth Curfews

Youth curfews are another very popular measure. In a 1997 survey of
347 cities conducted by the United States Conference of Mayors, 276
were found to have enacted a youth curfew; 190 of those had been en-
acted within the previous ten years (U.S. Conference of Mayors 1997;
Beaumont 1998). Since 1990, 90 cities with populations over 100,000
have either enacted a new curfew or modified an existing one. More-
over, four out of five cities with a population over 30,000 have curfews
today (Privor 1999:420).

Youth curfews are especially popular among mayors and city of
ficials. When these officials were polled in the Conference of Mayors
survey, 93 percent of the cities surveyed responded that curfews are
useful. About 80 percent reported that curfews had made the streets
safer for residents, and most had found that the curfews had resulted
in decreased traffic at night, increased security for residents, and a de-
cline in graffiti and vandalism. More than 80 percent of cities surveyed
stated that the curfews helped to curb gang violence. These cities
found that the curfews were an effective tool to reach potential gang
members and that the curfews had helped to educate parents as to the
signs of gang membership. Only nineteen surveyed cities reported
that curfews were not useful. Twelve percent of the cities surveyed re-
ported that curfews had no impact on street safety, noting that it is
people over the age of seventeen who commit the most serious crime,
and that the curfews are typically not enforced owing to lack of city re-
sources (U.S. Conference of Mayors 1997).

Other Policy Initiatives

Police departments, municipalities, and courts have experimented
with other order-maintenance and norm-focused strategies. In Chi-
cago, for instance, the Housing Authority (CHA) began conducting
mass building searches in September 1988. Between 1988 and 1994,
the CHA, with the aid of the Chicago police and other law enforce-
ment agencies, conducted searches of at least sixty buildings (Kirby


54 + ILLUSION OF ORDER

1994). In 1993 the CHA instituted an unwritten policy of conducting
warrantless searches of entire buildings if random gunfire occurred
in the area. This resulted in the warrantless searches, in the sum-
mer of 1993, of several public housing projects, including the Robert
Taylor Homes and Stateway Gardens (O’Connor 1994). The searches
prompted the American Civil Liberties Union to file a federal law-
suit. On February 14, 1995, United States District Judge Wayne
Anderson issued a temporary injunction barring the searches, and on
August 16, 1995, the injunction was made permanent (“Injunction
Forbids Sweeps by CHA” 1995). According to the Chicago Tribune, the
CHA has been attempting to get residents to agree formally to allow
searches of their apartments as a rider to the standard lease, though
residents were not being denied housing for failing to sign the agree-
ment. The ACLU was planning to challenge this effort (Crawford
1994).

In Charleston, South Carolina, the chief of police implemented a
juvenile snitching policy specifically designed to keep firearms away
from schools. The New York Times reported, “With money from several
local businesses, the Charleston police will now pay $100 to any stu-
dent who provides information on a person who has an illegal hand-
gun in a public place” (Butterfield 1996). Other cities, including
Boston, have also implemented order-maintenance crackdowns as
part of larger strategies to combat juvenile gun carrying (Kennedy
1998:5) 5

These are some of the diverse strands that together make up the order-
maintenance approach to criminal justice. There are, of course, im-
portant differences between the various theories and practices. The
New Progressives, for example, do not advocate, like James Q. Wilson,
incapacitating increased numbers of repeat offenders for lengthier pe-
riods of time. In fact, it is precisely against this trend in criminal justice
that Kahan and Meares revolted. Similarly, the New Progressives do
not talk about “lower-class” individuals—even with the caveat, which
Banfield repeatedly insisted upon, that “lower-class” is not a proxy
term for “black” or “poor” (1974:235). To the contrary, the New Pro-
gressives boldly speak on behalf of inner-city residents and the African-

The Order-Maintenance Approach + 55

American community. They claim to represent these communities and
to be working on their behalf to improve their living conditions.
Despite these important differences, the tradition of Banfield and
Wilson and the New Progressives have a lot in common, especially
at the conceptual level. What they share is the desire to build on and
enrich the classical model of criminology. They all seek to enrich
the economic notion of preferences. Banfield accomplished this with
concepts such as “lower-class individuals,” “present-orientedness,” and
“amoral familism”; Wilson by focusing on “human nature”; social
norm theorists by developing social meaning and expressive prefer-
ences. They also all seek to broaden the range of opportunities.
Banfield and Wilson oriented their policy discussions toward reshap-
ing situational factors; the New Progressives enrich the conception of
opportunities by focusing on social meaning and possible changes in
meaning. In addition, these various intellectual traditions share an im-
portant focus on the social norm and meaning of orderliness. Their
central insight is that order in a community may influence the behav-
ior of neighborhood residents and outsiders in such a way as to im-
prove the quality of life in the neighborhood and decrease serious

criminal activity. And their insights have met with overwhelming popu-
larity.
