I

Criminal Law

II

WEST ACADEMIC PUBLISHING’S
LAW SCHOOL ADVISORY BOARD
___________

JESSE H. CHOPER
Professor of Law and Dean Emeritus,
University of California, Berkeley

JOSHUA DRESSLER
Professor of Law, Michael E. Moritz College of Law,
The Ohio State University

YALE KAMISAR
Professor of Law Emeritus, University of San Diego
Professor of Law Emeritus, University of Michigan

MARY KAY KANE
Professor of Law, Chancellor and Dean Emeritus,
University of California,
Hastings College of the Law

LARRY D. KRAMER
President, William and Flora Hewlett Foundation

JONATHAN R. MACEY
Professor of Law, Yale Law School

ARTHUR R. MILLER
University Professor, New York University
Formerly Bruce Bromley Professor of Law, Harvard University

GRANT S. NELSON
Professor of Law, Pepperdine University
Professor of Law Emeritus, University of California, Los Angeles

A. BENJAMIN SPENCER
Professor of Law, University of Virginia School of Law

JAMES J. WHITE
Robert A. Sullivan Professor of Law Emeritus,
University of Michigan

III
BLACK

LETTER

OUTLINES

Criminal Law
THIRD EDITION

by Joshua Dressler
Distinguished University Professor
Frank R. Strong Chair in Law
Michael E. Moritz College of Law
The Ohio State University

BLACK LETTER SERIES®

Mat #41712648

IV
The publisher is not engaged in rendering legal or other professional advice, and this publication is
not a substitute for the advice of an attorney. If you require legal or other expert advice, you should
seek the services of a competent attorney or other professional.
Black Letter Series is a trademark registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
© West, a Thomson business, 2005
© 2010 Thomson Reuters
© 2015 LEG, Inc. d/b/a West Academic
444 Cedar Street, Suite 700
St. Paul, MN 55101
1-877-888-1330
West, West Academic Publishing, and West Academic are trademarks of West Publishing
Corporation, used under license.
Printed in the United States of America
ISBN: 978-1-63459-162-1

V

To Lucy Belle
To Maya Shoshana
To Gideon Jacob

VII

Preface
This “Black Letter” is designed to help a law student recognize and
understand the basic principles and issues of law covered in a law school
course. It can be used both as a study aid when preparing for classes and as
a review of the subject matter when studying for an examination.
Each “Black Letter” is written by experienced law school teachers who
are recognized national authorities on the subject covered.
The law is succinctly stated by the authors of this ″Black Letter.″ In
addition, the exceptions to the rules are stated in the text. The rules and
exceptions have purposely been condensed to facilitate quick and easy
recollection. For an in-depth study of a point of law, citations to major
student texts are given.
If the subject covered by this text is a code or code-related course, the
code section or rule is set forth and discussed wherever applicable.
FORMAT
The format of this “Black Letter” is specially designed for review. (1)
Text. First, it is recommended that the entire text be studied and, if deemed
necessary, supplemented by the student texts cited. (2) Capsule Summary.
The Capsule Summary is an abbreviated review of the subject matter which
can be used both before and after studying the main body of the text. The
headings in the Capsule Summary follow the main text of the ″Black Letter.
″ (3) Table of Contents. The Table of Contents is in outline form to help
you organize the details of the subject and the Summary of Contents gives
you a final overview of the materials. (4) Sample Examination. The
Sample Examinations in Appendix A give you the opportunity to test
yourself with the type of questions asked on an exam and compare your
answer with a model answer.
In addition, a number of other features are included to help you
understand the subject matter and prepare for examinations:

Perspective: In this feature, the authors discuss their approach to the
topic, the approach used in preparing the materials, and any tips on studying
for and writing examinations.
Analysis: This feature, at the beginning of each section, is designed to
give a quick summary of a particular section to help you recall the subject
matter and to help you determine which areas need the most extensive
review.
Examples: This feature is designed to illustrate, through fact situations,
the law just stated. This, we believe, should help you analytically approach
a question on the examination.
Glossary: This feature is designed to refamiliarize you with the
meaning of a particular legal term. We believe that the recognition of words
of art used in an examination helps you to better analyze the question. In
addition, when writing an examination you should know the precise
definition of a word of art you intend to use.
We believe that the materials in this “Black Letter” will facilitate your
study of a law school course and assure success in writing examinations not
only for the course but for the bar examination. We wish you success.

The Publisher
2015

IX

Summary of Contents
PREFACE
Perspective
Capsule Summary
PART ONE. INTRODUCTORY PRINCIPLES
I. Criminal Law Overview
II. “Tools” of the Criminal Law
III. Review Questions
PART TWO. ACTUS REUS
I. Actus Reus: Overview
II. Voluntary Act
III. Omissions
IV. Social Harm
V. Review Questions
PART THREE. MENS REA
I. Mens Rea: General Principles
II. Common Law
III. Model Penal Code
IV. Strict Liability
V. Review Questions
PART FOUR. MENS REA AND MISTAKES OF FACT OR LAW
I. Mistake of Fact
II. Mistake of Law
III. Review Questions
PART FIVE. CAUSATION

I. Actual Cause (Cause-in-Fact)
II. Proximate Cause (Legal Cause)
III. Review Questions
PART SIX. DEFENSES TO CRIME: JUSTIFICATIONS
I. Justification Defenses: Generally
II. Self-Defense
III. Defense-of-Third-Parties
IV. Defenses of Property and Habitation
V. Law Enforcement Defenses
VI. Necessity
VII. Review Questions
X
PART SEVEN. DEFENSES TO CRIME: EXCUSES
I. Excuse Defenses: Generally
II. Duress
III. Intoxication
IV. Insanity
V. Diminished Capacity
VI. Entrapment
VII. Review Questions
PART EIGHT. INCHOATE CONDUCT
I. Attempt
II. Conspiracy
III. Solicitation
IV. Other Inchoate Offenses
V. Review Questions
PART NINE. COMPLICITY
I. Accomplice Liability: Common Law
II. Conspiracy Liability
III. Model Penal Code

IV. Review Questions
PART TEN. CRIMINAL HOMICIDE
I. Criminal Homicide: Overview
II. Common Law: Murder
III. Common Law: Manslaughter
IV. Model Penal Code
V. Review Questions
PART ELEVEN. RAPE
I. Common Law: Forcible Rape
II. Common Law: Rape by Nonforcible Means
III. Model Penal Code
IV. Review Questions
PART TWELVE. THEFT
I. Larceny
II. Embezzlement
III. False Pretenses
IV. Review Questions
Appendix A. Answers to Review Questions
Appendix B. Sample Essay Questions
Appendix C. Answers to Essay Questions
Appendix D. Glossary
TABLE OF CASES
INDEX

XI

Table of Contents
PREFACE
Perspective
Capsule Summary
PART ONE. INTRODUCTORY PRINCIPLES
I. Criminal Law Overview
A. “Criminal” Versus “Civil”
1. The Problem
2. Definition of “Crime”
3. The Essence of the Criminal Law: A Preliminary Start
4. The Essence of the Criminal Law: A Better Answer
B. Sources of the Criminal Law
1. Common Law
2. Statutes
a. A New Source
b. Common Law: Continuing Relevance
i. Gaps
ii. Statutory Interpretation
3. Model Penal Code
a. What Is It?
b. Why Was It Created?
c. Why Learn It?
C. Limits on the Criminal Law
D. Burden of Proof: Basics
E. Judge Versus Jury
1. Constitutional Law

a. Rule
b. Rationale for Jury Trial Right
2. Jury Nullification
a. What Is It?
b. The Law
II. “Tools” of the Criminal Law
A. Overview
B. Theories of Punishment
1. Different Theories
2. Principles of Utilitarianism
a. Augmenting Happiness
b. Role of Punishment
c. Forms of Utilitarianism
i. General Deterrence
XII
ii. Specific Deterrence
iii. Rehabilitation
d. Underlying Premises
3. Principles of Retribution
a. Just Deserts
b. Rationale
c. Underlying Premise
4. Mixing the Theories: Hybrid Approach
a. Overview
b. One Hybrid Approach
c. “Limiting Retributivism”
C. Proportionality of Punishment
1. General Principle
2. Utilitarian Meaning
3. Retributive Meaning
4. Difference in Outcome: An Example

a. Utilitarian Analysis
b. Retributive Analysis
5. Constitutional Law
a. Death Penalty Cases
b. Imprisonment Cases
D. Legality
1. Requirement of Previously Defined Conduct
a. General Principle
b. Rationale
c. Constitutional Law
i. Ex Post Facto
ii. Due Process
2. Fair Notice
a. Constitutional Law
i. General Rule
3. Nondiscriminatory Enforcement
E. Burden of Proof
1. Burden of Production
2. Burden of Persuasion
a. Degree of Burden
i. Elements of a Crime
ii. Defenses to Crimes
iii. Sentencing Facts
III. Review Questions
PART TWO. ACTUS REUS
I. Actus Reus: Overview
A. Definition
B. Two Elements
1. Voluntary Act or Legal Omission
2. Social Harm
II. Voluntary Act
A. General Rule

1. Conduct
2. Common Law Definition of Voluntary Act
a. Degree of Movement Required
XIII
b.

Meaning of “Willed”
i. Unwilled Acts
ii. Drawing the Line
3. Model Penal Code
4. Constitutional Law
a. Punishment of Drug Addiction
b. Punishment for Public Drunkenness
5. Avoiding Confusion
a. Coerced Acts
b. Crimes of Possession
i. Solution
6. Important Study Point
B. Rationale of Voluntary Act Requirement
1. Utilitarian
a. Competing Argument
2. Retribution
III. Omissions
A. General Rule
B. Rationale for the General Rule
1. Proving the Omitter’s State of Mind
2. Line-Drawing Problems
3. Promoting Individual Liberty
C. Exceptions to the General Rule
1. Crimes of Omission: Statutory Duty
2. Crimes of Commission
a. Duty by Status
b. Duty by Contract

c. Duty by Voluntary Assumption
d. Duty by Risk Creation
IV. Social Harm
A. Definition
1. Breadth of Definition
B. Identifying the Social Harm
C. Breaking Down the Social Harm into Categories
1. “Result” Elements (or Crimes)
2. “Conduct” Elements (or Crimes)
3. “Attendant Circumstance” Elements
V. Review Questions
PART THREE. MENS REA
I. Mens Rea: General Principles
A. Meaning of “Mens Rea”
1. Broad (“Culpability”) Meaning
2. Narrow (“Elemental”) Meaning
3. Practice Point
B. Rationale of the Mens Rea Requirement
1. Utilitarian Argument
a. Contrary Argument
2. Retributive Argument
a. The Supreme Court Speaks
XIV
II.

Common Law
A. “Intentionally”
1. Definition
a. Study Point
2. Subjective Fault
3. Transferred Intent Doctrine
a. Criticism of Doctrine
B. “Knowledge” or “Knowingly”

1. Definition
a. Criticism of “Wilful Blindness” Doctrine
C. Risk-Taking: “Recklessness” and “Criminal Negligence”
1. Overview
2. Unjustified Risk-Taking
3. Drawing Lines
4. “Criminal Negligence”
a. Degree of Risk
b. Objective Fault
i. Subjectivizing the “Reasonable Person”
c. Debate Regarding Punishment for Negligence
i. Critique
ii. Rebuttal
5. “Recklessness”
a. Holmes’s View
b. Modern Definition
D. “Malice”
1. Special Definition
E. “Specific Intent” and “General Intent”
1. Terminological Confusion
2. “Specific Intent” Offenses
3. “General Intent” Offenses
F. Statutory Construction
1. Common Law Interpretive Rules of Thumb
a. Legislative Intent
b. Position of the Mens Rea Term in Definition of Offense
c. Punctuation
d. Attendant Circumstances
III. Model Penal Code
A. Section 2.02, Subsection 1
1. Language
a. Study Point

2. Significance of Subsection
a. Role of Mens Rea
b. Elemental Approach
c. Fewer Mens Rea Terms
B. Culpability Terms Defined
1. Purposely
2. Knowingly
a. Results
b. Attendant Circumstances
3. Recklessly
a. Basic Definition
XV
b.

Standard for Evaluating Conduct
i. “In the Actor’s Situation”
4. Negligently
C. Interpretative Rules
1. Default Position
2. When Just One Mens Rea Term Is Mentioned
IV. Strict Liability
A. Nature of a Strict Liability Offense
1. Clarification
B. Public Welfare Offenses
1. Characteristics of Most Public Welfare Offenses
a. Nature of the Conduct
b. Punishment
c. Degree of Social Danger
C. Non-Public Welfare Offenses
D. Constitutionality of Strict Liability Offenses
1. Presumption Against Strict Liability
E. Model Penal Code
1. Statutes That Are Silent Regarding Mens Rea

V.

Review Questions

PART FOUR. MENS REA AND MISTAKES OF FACT OR LAW
I. Mistake of Fact
A. Common Law
1. Overview and Study Point
2. Specific-Intent Offenses
a. Rule
b. Study Point
3. General-Intent Offenses
a. Ordinary Rule
b. Exception: “Moral Wrong” Doctrine
i. How to Apply the Doctrine
c. Alternative Exception: “Legal Wrong” Doctrine
4. Strict-Liability Offenses
B. Model Penal Code
1. General Rule
2. Exception to the General Rule
II. Mistake of Law
A. General Principles
1. General Rule
2. Purported Justifications for the Rule
a. Certainty of the Law
i. Rebuttal
b. Concern About Fraud
i. Rebuttal
c. Promoting Knowledge of the Law
i. Rebuttal
B. Exceptions to the General Rule
1. Mistakes That Negate the Mens Rea
a. Rationale
2. Authorized-Reliance Doctrine
a. On Whom or What Body Is Reliance Reasonable

XVI
3. Due Process Clause
a. Facts of Lambert
b. Holding
c. Scope of the Holding
III. Review Questions
PART FIVE. CAUSATION
I. Actual Cause (Cause-in-Fact)
A. General Principles
1. Rule
2. Study Point
B. Steps for Determining the “Actual Cause”
1. Identifying the Relevant Conduct
2. Frame the Question Properly
a. Significance of “Yes”
b. Significance of “No”
C. Multiple Actual Causes
1. Study Point
D. Concurrent Sufficient Causes
1. Substantial Factor Test
2. Model Penal Code
II. Proximate Cause (Legal Cause)
A. General Principles
1. Role of “Proximate Cause” in Legal Analysis
a. Relationship of “Proximate Cause” to “Actual Cause”
b. Proximate Causation and Justice
2. Common Law, Model Penal Code, and Study Point
B. Direct Cause
1. Looking for a “Direct Cause”
2. Significance of Identifying a Direct Cause
C. Intervening Cause

1. Definition
2. General Role of Intervening Causes
3. Nature of Intervening Cause
a. “Responsive” and “Coincidental” Distinguished
b. Legal Significance of Terminology
4. Other Important Factors
a. Intended-Consequences Doctrine
b. Free, Deliberate, Informed Human Intervention
c. Apparent Safety Doctrine
III. Review Questions
PART SIX. DEFENSES TO CRIME: JUSTIFICATIONS
I. Justification Defenses: Generally
A. Definition
B. Basic Structure of Justification Defenses
1. Necessity
2. Proportionality
3. Reasonable Belief
II. Self-Defense
A. Common Law
1. General Rule
XVII
2. Definition of “Deadly Force”
3. “Aggressor”
a. Definition
b. Losing the “Aggressor” Status
i. Nondeadly Aggressors
ii. Deadly Aggressor
4. Proportionality of Force: Deadly Against Deadly
5. “Unlawful Force”/“Unlawful Threat”
6. “Imminency”
7. Necessity to Use Deadly Force

a. Use of Less Force
b. Retreat?
i. Majority Rule
ii. Minority Position
8. “Reasonable Belief”
a. General Rule
i. Imperfect Defense
b. What Is a “Reasonable Belief”?
c. Battered Women and Self-Defense
i. Battered Woman Syndrome (BWS) Testimony
ii. Legal Trends
iii. Observation
B. Model Penal Code
1. General Rule
a. Comparison to Common Law
i. Belief Requirement
ii. Imminency
2. Limitations on General Rule
a. Defendant as Aggressor
b. Retreat
c. Other “Non-Necessity” Circumstances
III. Defense-of-Third-Parties
A. Common Law
1. General Rule
2. Minority Rule
B. Model Penal Code
IV. Defenses of Property and Habitation
A. Defense of Property
1. Common Law
a. Important Clarification
b. Another Important Clarification
c. Study Point

2. Model Penal Code
a. Belief Requirement
b. Recapture of Property
c. Deadly Force
B. Defense of Habitation
1. Common Law
a. Deadly Force
i. Study Point
b. Older, Broader Rule
i. Study Point
XVIII
c. Narrower Rule
2. Model Penal Code
C. Special Issue: Spring Guns
1. Common Law
a. Critical Feature of the Rule
2. Model Penal Code
V. Law Enforcement Defenses
A. Crime Prevention
1. Common Law
a. Original (Now Minority) Approach
b. Modern (Majority) Approach
2. Model Penal Code
B. Arrest
1. Common Law
a. Rule for Police Officers
i. Comparison to Crime Prevention Defense
ii. Rationale of Rule
b. Special Problem of “Citizen Arrests”
2. Model Penal Code
C. Constitutional Law

1. Overview
2. Tennessee v. Garner
3. Beyond Garner
a. Non-Deadly Force
b. Deadly Force, Post-Garner
VI. Necessity
A. Common Law
1. Elements of the Defense
a. Lesser-Evils Analysis
i. Reasonable Belief
b. Imminency of Harm
c. Causal Element
d. Blamelessness of the Actor
2. Homicide Prosecutions
a. The Case
b. Legal Observations
c. Theoretical Observations
B. Model Penal Code
1. Elements
2. Comparison to Common Law
VII. Review Questions
PART SEVEN. DEFENSES TO CRIME: EXCUSES
I. Excuse Defenses: Generally
A. Excuse: Defined
1. Rationale
a. Utilitarian Argument
b. Retributive Argument
B. Justification Versus Excuse
II. Duress
A. Rationale of the Defense: Justification or Excuse?
1. Duress as a Justification Defense

XIX
2. Duress as an Excuse Defense
B. Common Law
1. Elements of Defense
2. Breaking Down the Components
a. Nature of the Threat
i. Deadly Force
ii. Imminency
iii. Reasonable Belief
b. Non-Fault of Defendant
3. Coerced Homicides
a. Rationale
4. Intolerable Prison Conditions
a. The Issue
b. The Law
c. Nature of the Defense
i. Conceptual Problems
ii. Practical Significance
C. Model Penal Code
1. Defense
2. Breaking Down the Components
a. Nature of the Coercion
i. Threat or Use
ii. Unlawfulness of Threat or Force
iii. Reasonable Firmness Standard
3. Coerced Homicides
III. Intoxication
A. Common Law: Voluntary Intoxication
1. Definition of “Intoxication”
2. Not an Excuse Defense
3. Mens Rea Defense
a. Rationale

b. Exceptions to Rule
4. “Temporary” Insanity
5. “Fixed” Insanity
B. Model Penal Code: “Self-Induced” (Voluntary) Intoxication
1. Exception to General Rule
C. Involuntary Intoxication
1. What Makes Intoxication Involuntary?
2. When Does Involuntary Intoxication Exculpate?
a. Lack of Mens Rea
b. “Temporary Insanity”
IV. Insanity
A. Rationale of Defense
1. Utilitarian Argument
a. Counter-Arguments
i. Specific Deterrence
ii. General Deterrence
2. Retributive Argument
B. The M’Naghten Test of Insanity
1. Rule
XX
2. Clarification of the Rule
a. “Know” Versus “Appreciate”
b. “Right/Wrong” Prong
i. Deific-Decree Rule
3. Criticisms of M’Naghten
a. Outmoded
b. “Know”/“Appreciate”
c. Expert Testimony Hampered
C. The “Irresistible Impulse” (“Control”) Test of Insanity
1. Rule
2. Criticisms of the Test

a. All-or-Nothing Feature
b. The “Impulse” Element
c. Reliability of Proof
D. The “Product” (Durham) Test of Insanity
1. Rule
2. Support for the Test
3. Criticisms of the Test
a. Penological Arguments
b. Psychiatric Influence
E. Model Penal Code Test of Insanity
1. Rule
2. Closer Analysis
a. Avoiding All-or-Nothing Judgments
b. Cognitive Prong
c. Volitional Prong
V. Diminished Capacity
A. Putting “Diminished Capacity” in Context
1. Mens Rea Version
2. Partial Responsibility Version
B. Diminished Capacity and Mens Rea
1. Model Penal Code Approach
2. Common Law
a. Reasons for Hostility to the Defense
i. Concerns About Psychiatric Testimony
ii. Doubts About the Need for the Defense
iii. Post-Trial Implications
iv. Specific Intent Versus General Intent
C. Partial Responsibility
1. Common Law
2. Model Penal Code
VI. Entrapment
A. Overview

B.

Subjective Test
1. Origins of the Test
2. Test
a. Innocent Persons Versus Unwary Criminals
b. Predisposition of the Defendant
3. Rationale of the Subjective Test
a. Criticisms of the Subjective Test
i. Legislative Intent Argument Is Fictional
XXI

ii. Unfairness of the Test
iii. Inconsistent with Criminal Law Doctrine
C. “Objective” Test
1. Test
a. Variation on the Theme
2. Rationale of the Objective Test
a. Deterrence
b. Judicial Integrity
3. Criticisms of the Objective Test
a. Deterrence
b. Judicial Integrity
D. Procedural Aspects of “Entrapment”
E. Entrapment and the Due Process Clause
VII. Review Questions
PART EIGHT. INCHOATE CONDUCT
I. Attempt
A. Common Law
1. General Principles
a. Basic Definition
b. Grading of Offense
i. Attempt as a Lesser Crime
c. Merger Doctrine

2. Actus Reus
a. Last Act Test
b. Dangerous Proximity Test
c. Physical Proximity Test
d. “Unequivocality”/“Res Ipsa Loquitur” Test
e. Probable Desistance Test
3. Mens Rea
a. Dual Intent
i. First “Intent”
ii. Second “Intent”
b. Comparing Mens Rea of Attempt to Target Offense
i. Higher Mens Rea
ii. Specific-Intent Versus General-Intent
c. Special Problem: Attendant Circumstances
i. Alternative Approaches
4. Special Defense: Impossibility
a. General Rule
b. Factual Impossibility
c. Legal Impossibility
i. Pure Legal Impossibility
ii. Hybrid Legal Impossibility
d. Should the Factual/Legal Distinction Be Followed?
B. Model Penal Code
1. General Principles
a. Definition
b. Grading of Offense
c. Merger
XXII
2. Actus Reus
a. Test
i. Important Clarification

ii. Distinction from Common Law
3. Mens Rea
a. Rule
b. Special Problem: Attendant Circumstances
i. Rule
4. Special Defense: Impossibility
5. Special Defense: Renunciation of Criminal Purpose
a. Rationale
b. Common Law Counter-Rationale
II. Conspiracy
A. Common Law
1. General Principles
a. Definition
b. Grading
c. Rationale of the Offense
i. Preventive Law Enforcement
ii. Special Dangerousness
d. Merger
i. Rationale of No-Merger Rule
2. Actus Reus: Basics
a. Overt Act
b. Method of Forming the Agreement
c. Nature of Agreement
3. Mens Rea: The Basics
a. General Rule
b. Purpose Versus Knowledge
i. The Issue
ii. Case Law
4. Plurality Requirement
a. Important Clarification
b. Observations About the Plurality Requirement
5. Parties to an Agreement

a. The Issue
b. Structure of Conspiracies
i. Wheel Conspiracy
ii. Chain Conspiracy
iii. Chain-Wheel Conspiracy
6. Objectives of a Conspiracy
a. Issue
b. Rule
i. Comment on Rule
7. Special Defense: Wharton’s Rule
a. Rule
i. Justification of the Rule
b. Wharton’s Rule Exceptions
i. Unnecessary Party
ii. Third-Party Exception
c. Breakdown of the Rule
XXIII
8. Special Defense: Legislative-Exemption Rule
a. Rule
b. Significance of the Rule
9. Special Defense?: Impossibility
10. Special Defense?: Abandonment
a. No Defense to Crime of Conspiracy
b. Relevance of Abandonment
B. Model Penal Code
1. General Principles
a. Definition
b. Grading
c. Merger
2. Actus Reus: How It Differs from Common Law
a. Overt Act

b. Nature of Agreement
3. Mens Rea
4. Plurality Rule
5. Parties to Agreement
6. Objectives of a Conspiracy
7. Special Defenses
a. Legislative-Exemption Rule
b. Renunciation of Criminal Purpose
III. Solicitation
A. General Principles
1. Definition
a. Model Penal Code
2. Grading
a. Model Penal Code
3. Merger
B. Actus Reus
1. General Rule
2. Unsuccessful Communications
a. Model Penal Code
3. Relationship of Solicitor to Solicited Party
C. Mens Rea
1. Common Law
2. Model Penal Code
D. Defense: Renunciation
IV. Other Inchoate Offenses
A. Assault
1. Common Law Definition
2. Modern Statutes
B. Inchoate Offenses in Disguise
1. Burglary
2. Larceny
V. Review Questions

PART NINE. COMPLICITY
I. Accomplice Liability: Common Law
A. General Principles
1. General Rule
2. Accomplice Liability as Derivative Liability
XXIV
3. Justification for Derivative Liability
4. Common Law Terminology
a. Principal in the First Degree
i. Innocent Instrumentality Doctrine
b. Principal in the Second Degree
c. Accessory Before the Fact
d. Accessory After the Fact
e. Why the Distinctions Mattered
i. Venue
ii. Proper Pleading
iii. Timing of Prosecution
iv. Acquittal of Principal
B. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Assistance
1. If No Assistance
2. Trivial Assistance
a. Encouragement
3. Presence at the Scene
4. Omissions
C. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Mens Rea
1. Rule
2. Crimes of Recklessness or Negligence
3. Natural-and-Probable-Consequences Doctrine
D. Accomplice Liability: If the Perpetrator Is Acquitted
1. If No Crime Occurred
2. If Perpetrator Is Acquitted on Grounds of a Defense

E. Perpetrator and Accomplice: Degrees of Guilt
F. Special Defense: Legislative-Exemption Rule
II. Conspiracy Liability
A. The Pinkerton Doctrine
1. Breadth of the Rule
III. Model Penal Code
A. Forms of Complicity Liability
1. Innocent-Instrumentality Doctrine
2. Accomplice Liability
a. Study Point
3. Pinkerton Rule
B. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Assistance
1. Rule
2. Comparison to Common Law
a. “Agree to Aid”
b. “Attempt to Aid”
C. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Mens Rea
1. Rule
2. Exception to the Requirement of Purpose
D. Accomplice Liability: If the Perpetrator Is Acquitted
E. Special Defenses
1. Legislative-Exemption Rule
2. Inevitable Incidence
3. Abandonment
F.
Special Provision to Consider: Relationship of Accomplice
Liability to Criminal Attempts
XXV
IV. Review Questions
PART TEN. CRIMINAL HOMICIDE
I. Criminal Homicide: Overview
A. “Homicide”

1. Definition
2. “Criminal Homicide”
B. “Human Being”
1. At the Start of Life
2. At the End of Life
a. Brain Death
C. Year-and-a-Day Rule
1. Rationale of Rule
2. Modern Approach
D. A Brief Touch of History
II. Common Law: Murder
A. Definition of “Murder”
1. “Malice”
2. “Aforethought”
B. Murder: Intent to Kill
1. General Rule
2. Proving Intent
a. Natural and Probable Consequences Inference
i. Constitutional Law Intervenes
ii. Common Sense to the Rescue
b. Deadly Weapon Rule
3. Statutory Reform: “Wilful, Deliberate, Premeditated” Formula
a. Historical Note
i. Study Point
b. The “Wilful, Deliberate, Premeditated” Formula
i. Wilful
ii. Premeditated
iii. Deliberate
iv. What If …
C. Murder: Intent to Inflict Grievous Bodily Injury
1. “Grievous Bodily Injury”
2. Statutory Approach

a. Study Point
D. Murder: “Depraved Heart” (Extreme Recklessness)
1. General Rule
2. What Is “Depraved Heart”/“Extreme Recklessness”?
3. Statutory Approach
E. Felony-Murder Rule
1. General Rule
a. Statutory Approach
2. Rationale of the Rule
3. Controversies Regarding Felony-Murder
a. Deterrence
b. Retributive Criticism: Culpability
4. Limitations on Felony-Murder Rule
a. Inherently-Dangerous-Felony Limitation
XXVI
b.

Independent-Felony Limitation
i. The Easy Case
ii. The Difficult Cases
c. Res Gestae Limitation
i. Important Clarification (The Res Gestae Rule)
d. Killing by a Non-Felon
i. Initial Observation
ii. Judicial Approach to Issue
III. Common Law: Manslaughter
A. Manslaughter: General Principles
1. Definition of “Manslaughter”
2. Categories of Manslaughter
a. Voluntary Manslaughter
i. Study Point
b. Involuntary Manslaughter
i. Criminal Negligence

ii. Unlawful-Act Doctrine
3. Murder Versus Manslaughter
a. Intentional Killings
b. Unintentional Killings
i. Recklessness Versus Negligence
ii. Accidental Killings
B. Voluntary Manslaughter: Provocation (“Heat-of-Passion”)
1. General Rule
2. Rationale of the Provocation Doctrine
a. Partial Justification
b. Partial Excuse
c. Critique
3. Elements of the Defense
a. Adequate Provocation
i. Fixed Categories
ii. Modern Trend
b. State of Passion
c. Suddenness
d. Causal Connection
C. Involuntary Manslaughter: Criminal Negligence
1. General Rule
2. Murder Versus Manslaughter
D. Involuntary Manslaughter: Unlawful-Act Doctrine
1. General Rule
2. Scope of the Rule
a. Broad Version
b. Limitations
IV. Model Penal Code
A. Criminal Homicide: Overview
1. “Human Being”
B. Murder
1. Rule

2. Degrees of Murder?
3. Common Law Versus MPC
a. Types of Murder
i. Intent to Kill
XXVII
ii. Intent to Commit Grievous Bodily Injury
iii. Depraved Heart
iv. Felony-Murder
C. Manslaughter
1. Recklessness
a. Comparison to Common Law
2. Extreme Mental or Emotional Disturbance
a. Study Point
b. Comparison to Common Law
i. Common Law Rigidity/Narrowness Rejected
ii. Mixed Subjectivity and Objectivity
3. What Is “Missing”
D. Negligent Homicide
V. Review Questions
PART ELEVEN. RAPE
I. Common Law: Forcible Rape
A. In General
1. Statutory Law
B. Actus Reus in Detail
1. “Sexual Intercourse by a Male with a Female …”
a. Modern Reform Statutes
2. “… Not His Wife” (Marital Immunity)
a. Rationale
i. Consent
ii. Property Law
iii. Protect Marriage

b. Modern Law
3. Nonconsent
4. Force
a. General Rule
b. How Much Force
i. Resistance Rule
c. Moving Away from Force
i. Requiring Less Force
ii. Changing the Resistance Requirement
iii. Abandoning the Force Requirement Altogether
C. Mens Rea
1. General Rule
2. Minority Rules
a. No Mistake-of-Fact “Defense”
b. Unreasonable Mistake-of-Fact as a “Defense”
II. Common Law: Rape by Nonforcible Means
A. Statutory Rape
1. Statutory Background
2. Rationale
3. Mistake of Fact Regarding Age
B. Rape by Fraud
1. Fraud in the Inducement
2. Fraud in the Factum
XXVIII
III. Model Penal Code
A. Forcible Rape
1. Definition
2. Clarification
3. Looking a Little Deeper
4. Grading Rape
B. Other Forms of Rape

C.

Gross Sexual Imposition
1. Clarification
IV. Review Questions
PART TWELVE. THEFT
I. Larceny
A. General Principles
1. Common Law Definition
a. Actus Reus
i. Possession
b. Mens Rea
2. Grade of the Offense
a. Value of Property Taken
i. Thief’s Belief About Value
B. Actus Reus in Detail
1. Trespass
a. Definition of “Trespass”
i. Clarification
b. Taking Possession by Fraud
i. Larceny Versus the Crime of False Pretenses
2. Taking Possession (“Caption”)
a. Possession Versus Custody: Drawing the Distinction
i. Possession
ii. Custody
iii. Importance of the Custody/Possession Distinction
b.
Special Possession/Custody Rules in Employment
Relationship
i. Employer to Employee
ii. Third Person to Employee for Employer
c. Bailments: The Breaking Bulk Doctrine
3. Carrying Away (“Asportation”)
a. Clarification
4. Personal Property of Another

a.

“Personal Property”
i. Personal Versus Real Property
ii. Animals
iii. Intangible Property
b. “Of Another”
C. Mens Rea: “Intent to Steal”
1. General Rule
a. Recklessness
2. Concurrence Requirement
a. “Continuing Trespass” Doctrine
D. Special Problem: Lost or Mislaid Property
1. Lost Property
a. Possessory Interest of the Owner
XXIX
b. State of Mind of the Finder
2. Mislaid Property
a. Reasonable Clue to Ownership
II. Embezzlement
A. Elements of the Offense
1. Manner of Obtaining Possession
2. Conversion
3. Entrustment
B. Larceny Versus Embezzlement
III. False Pretenses
A. Elements of the Offense
1. Title
2. Nature of Fraud
a. How the Misrepresentation Occurs
b. Fact Versus Opinion
c. Existing Fact Versus a Promise of Future Conduct
i. Rationale

ii. Model Penal Code
3. Mens Rea
IV. Review Questions
Appendix A. Answers to Review Questions
Appendix B. Sample Essay Questions
Appendix C. Answers to Essay Questions
Appendix D. Glossary
TABLE OF CASES
INDEX

1

Perspective
CONVERSATION WITH THE READER
When I was in law school (it was ages ago, but I remember it well), I liked
it when a professor would start class with some introductory comments,
perhaps giving us some idea of where we were planning to go in class that
day or that week. It helped me to put the materials in context, and it reduced
my first-year angst just a bit.
Sometimes a professor would also tell us in that introduction that a
particular topic we were about to consider was especially hard (because …),
or especially interesting (because …), or especially controversial (because
…), and so on. I liked having the professor talk to me (or us, really) that
way. So, I plan to do the same here, by having these brief introductory
“conversations” with you at the beginning of each Part of the Black Letter
and, if the spirit moves me, more often. (Of course, it is generally a onesided conversation—me to you—but you get the idea.) You can view these
conversations as “off the record” comments.
To get us in the mood, I am going to carry on a “conversation” between us
right now. But, to avoid it being entirely one-sided, I will ask “your”
questions and then try to answer them.
BUYING THIS BLACK LETTER OUTLINE
FIRST THINGS FIRST. SHOULD I BUY AN OUTLINE?
That all depends. An outline is a helpful learning tool, but only if it is
accurate, covers most of what is needed for your class, and is reasonably
clear, and only if you will not misuse it. If these requirements are not met,
you definitely should not buy an outline. If these requirements are met, then
it may be suitable for purchase.
WAIT, AREN’T ALL OUTLINES ACCURATE?
Hmmm. When I went to law school (in the ancient past of the 1970s), some
of the outlines on the market were anonymously written. I later learned that

there was good reason for this: the authors were third-year law students and
recent law graduates whose knowledge of their subject-matter was—well,
to put it kindly—sparse.
When I became a teacher, I saw from “the other side” how a bad outline can
hurt students. I began to find certain common mis-statements of law in
some of my students’ answers to my examination questions. At first, I
worried that I had misspoken in class. Later, I discovered that the students
were parroting back statements from a particular outline. Parroting is
always bad. Parroting incorrect statements is worse than bad.
Over time, the “study aid market” has improved considerably. Now,
outlines published by the major law publishers are written by experts in the
field. This does not mean that the outlines are error-free, any more than any
other source of information. And, beyond a minor error here or there, legal
experts in any subject will differ at times on matters of law. That said,
today, I really believe that students can use outlines, such as those in the
Black Letter Series, with confidence. Some will be better than others in one
way or another (e.g., clearer; provide better examples; and/or cover
precisely the topics your particular professor has chosen to cover), but
generally they are reliable. But, that moves us to the more important point:
you must not misuse study aids, such as outlines.
2
WHAT DO YOU MEAN ABOUT MISUSING THE OUTLINES?
Let’s start with a silly example: a hammer is a good tool to use if you want
to put a nail in a piece of wood, but it is a terrible tool to use if you want to
wash your car windshield. And, even if you use it properly, it certainly is
insufficient to build an entire house.
My point simply is this: An accurate, coherent, fairly complete law outline
is a useful tool in learning a subject, but it is just one tool in the process. If
you use the outline properly, it can help you. But, if you use it to do things
for which it was not intended, you will hurt yourself. Therefore, before you
buy an outline, and certainly before you use it, make sure that you are
prepared to use it properly.

Perhaps the single most critical part of the law school process—this is
especially so in the first year of your legal education—is learning legalreasoning skills (“learning to think like a lawyer”). This may seem hard for
some of you to believe when you start your legal education, but law schools
are more interested in honing your legal thinking skills than in teaching you
the law itself. After all, there is too much law to learn in law school
anyway, and the law is always changing, so what you need are the skills to
be able to function as a lawyer.
That critical learning process comes through the daily reading of your class
materials and your participation in the class dialogue. An outline is never a
substitute for the casebooks and any other sources your teachers assign. It is
never a substitute for classroom discussion as a learning tool. If you use the
outline to avoid coming to class or as a substitute for reading the assigned
materials and thinking deeply (I stress, deeply) about the assigned materials,
you will hurt yourself in class and on the examination, and you will be
impairing your future as a lawyer.
Also, virtually no rule is as smooth as an outline may make it seem. Rules
have a wonderful, at times mysterious, texture to them—rationales,
complexities, exceptions, permutations—to which outlines should make
you sensitive, so that you can read your casebook with special care, but they
cannot provide that nuanced aspect of the law.
WOW, FROM WHAT YOU ARE SAYING IT SOUNDS TO ME LIKE
YOU DON’T THINK I SHOULD BUY AN OUTLINE. CORRECT?
No, that is definitely not my point (or else why would I have written this
outline?). For most students, used properly, an outline is well worth the
cost. If your experience in law school is anything like my own, no matter
how hard I worked to understand what was going on in class, I needed help,
especially in the first year. I needed help articulating the rules of law and,
maybe more importantly, I needed help seeing how the rules fit together in
a coherent manner.
That is where a good outline will serve you well. It can give you a good
boost to understanding the law you are studying in class. By its nature, what
an outline does best is to explain legal rules in a brief, clear, organized

fashion. And, just as importantly, by seeing how the outline is organized,
section by section, you can see how the pieces of the jigsaw fit together.
You may not need an outline for all of your classes (I suspect my publisher
is not thrilled that I am saying this, but truth is truth)—I used them in
almost all my 1L classes, and only occasionally beyond that—but inevitably
there will be courses in which outlines will provide that extra boost you
need: to improve your understanding of the law, and to enhance your
confidence as you prepare for class or an examination.
OKAY, WHY SHOULD I BUY THIS OUTLINE RATHER THAN
ANOTHER ONE?
I am not here to bury other outlines, only to praise my own.
3
It is accurate. I have taught criminal law for more than thirty-seven years, as
I write this. I have written a great deal in the field. You can use this outline
with a high degree of confidence.
It is clear. Look at it and see.
It covers most, perhaps all, of the major subjects that you will be studying
in your class.
And, it will make you sensitive to the special problems in the law that will
require your special care.
STUDYING CRIMINAL LAW
OKAY, ENOUGH OF ALL THAT. WHAT IS “CRIMINAL LAW”? IS
THIS THE COURSE WHERE I LEARN ABOUT MIRANDA, CAR
SEARCHES, AND WHETHER THOSE COPS I SEE IN ALL THOSE
GREAT TV SHOWS ARE DOING THE RIGHT THING?
No. Some students are a little disappointed by that answer, but they
shouldn’t be, because this is a class in which you are asked to think about
some of the most profound moral questions that arise in the law.
I tell my students on the first day of class that this is the course with the Big
Questions: Do people possess free will? Why is it justifiable to punish
people for their wrongdoing? When is it appropriate for the Government to

take a person’s life or liberty? When is it justifiable for one individual to
take another person’s life? Is it ever proper to kill an innocent person?
When should we excuse people for their wrongdoing? When is it fair to
hold a person accountable for the actions of others? And so on. These are
the sorts of questions with which lawyers have wrestled for centuries. More
importantly perhaps, these are the sorts of questions that philosophers,
theologians, poets, and (yes!) scientists, as well as just plain regular people
have wrestled with for centuries.
In terms of essentials, in this class you will likely learn about the basic
components of any crime, defenses to criminal conduct, the circumstances
under which a person may be punished for conduct that falls short of
success, and the concept of complicity (legal accountability of one person
for the actions of another). You will also study various crimes in your class.
AH, A CRIME. WHAT IS A “CRIME”? IS THIS JUST ANOTHER
“TORTS” CLASS?
Well, now you are moving into the Outline. I will cover that in Part I. I will
say this much now: criminal law is (or, at least, should be) different from
tort law. Basically, a crime is a wrong, usually a moral wrong, committed
against the society as a whole. Notice how criminal cases are titled in your
casebook: The People of the United States v. Jones, or The People of the
State of [x] v. Smith. This distinguishes it from a tort action, which is a suit
between private parties. Criminal prosecutions are brought in our name
because we are the victims of crimes, both as individuals and as a
community. And, it is we who punish the person convicted of the crime.
Tort actions are intended to compensate victims for their injuries. Criminal
prosecutions are brought in order to punish wrongdoers. That difference is
important to your appreciation of Criminal Law.
WHAT LAW WILL I HAVE TO LEARN IN MY CLASS? WILL I
LEARN THE LAW OF MY OWN STATE?
Some professors spend no time on the law of the state in which your law
school is found. This is because some, maybe many, of you will practice
law out-of-state anyway. Some
4

professors will touch on your state law, and help you become familiar with
it. But, you can trust that the basic rules you will learn in your class are the
same no matter where you practice. You will study the common law and
probably the Model Penal Code. You will also learn some constitutional
law principles that affect the criminal law. And you will learn the important
skill of statutory construction. More on all of this in Part One.
AS THE SEMESTER IS PROCEEDING, I MAY NEED HELP
ORGANIZING MY THOUGHTS ABOUT CRIMINAL LAW. CAN YOU
OFFER ADVICE?
Yes. First and foremost, use whatever technique your teacher recommends.
Here, however, is my own way of thinking about the subject.
First, learn the definitions of the crimes that are emphasized by your
teacher or in your casebook as the semester proceeds. This job is easy: it is
just a case of memorization. You will find most of the important crimes
defined in this Outline.
Second, there are certain broad principles or concepts of criminal law that
you are apt to need all semester. Become familiar with them, so that you
can use them when you need them. In this Outline, I call them the “tools” of
the Criminal Law, and they covered in Part One. They include: (1) theories
of punishment; (2) the principle of legality; (3) the concept of
proportionality; and (4) burdens of proof.
Third, you need to be able to analyze the relevant facts of any case in
relation to the basic “elements” of a crime. That is, in order to determine
whether the defendant is guilty of a crime, you need to break up the
definition of the crime into its constituent parts. As you will learn, there are
certain basic elements to most crimes. Unless your professor provides a
different approach, which he or she may do, I recommend that you organize
your analysis of the elements of a crime in the following order (as discussed
in the outline):
1. Voluntary act (or omission) (Part Two)
2. Social harm (Part Two)
3. Mens rea (Parts Three and Four)
4. Actual causation (Part Five)

5. Proximate causation (Part Five)
Fourth, even if the elements of the crime are proved, the defendant may
have a defense to his or her conduct. You should consider the defenses after
you resolve the “elements.” Organize your thoughts about the defenses in
the following way:
1. Ask: Was the defendant justified in doing what (s)he did? The socalled justification defenses are considered in Part Six.
2. Then ask: Should the defendant be excused for what (s)he did? The
excuse defenses are covered in Part Seven.
Fifth, if the defendant did not successfully complete the offense, consider
whether (s)he proceeded far enough along to be guilty of a so-called
“inchoate” (that is, incomplete or unsuccessful) offense. Generally
speaking, there are three crimes to consider: (1) attempt; (2) conspiracy;
and (3) solicitation. Part Eight covers this area.
Sixth, if more than one person participated in the criminal enterprise,
consider whether the persons who did not personally commit the offense are
accountable for the actions of the perpetrator (Part Nine). This requires you
to determine whether the non-perpetrators are accomplices and/or coconspirators in the crime and, therefore, can be prosecuted for the offense in
question.
5
I GUESS I AM READY TO START. BUT BEFORE I GET TOO DEEP
INTO THE MATERIALS, ARE THERE OTHER SOURCES I CAN
TURN TO BEYOND THE OUTLINE FOR HELP?
Of course. First and foremost, ask your professor for advice. Your teacher is
the best source for everything. There is a lot out there: some of the materials
are very good. Your professor can help you pick out the best reading
materials to meet your needs.
One of the best sources of help is a “hornbook” or legal text in the field.
Some are directed at lawyers, others are aimed at students. Like an outline,
they explain the general principles of law, but they do so in greater depth
than is possible in an outline. The major hornbooks are usually on reserve

in a law library, so you may not need to buy them. Sometimes, however, it
will be worth the cost to purchase (and hold on to for later use). Ask
students who have already taken Criminal Law for advice. Not too
surprisingly, I would suggest my treatise, Understanding Criminal Law
(LexisNexis, 6th Ed. 2012).
If you want to look deeply into a very narrow subject, you will probably
want to look at a book or law review article on the subject. Ask your
professor for suggestions. Also, use the bibliography in your casebook, if
there is one, to see what sources the author of your casebook recommends.
Also, the Dressler Hornbook mentioned above offers many source
suggestions.
OKAY, ANY MORE ADVICE?
Yes, have fun. If this outline makes it possible for you to enjoy law school a
little more, and stress a little less, I will be pleased.
EXAMINATION PRACTICE-POINTERS
Examination-taking is an art. A very bright student—and a future fine
lawyer—can do very poorly on a test because (s)he has not studied
adequately or has not learned the art of examination-taking. The reality is
that although a student who does not have a good grasp of the law cannot
do too well on an examination, a student who understands the law in its full
complexity will do less well than (s)he should if (s)he has not yet learned
how to take law school examinations.
Another hard reality is that there is no single, foolproof way to take an
essay examination in any course. Talk to experienced law students and you
are apt to find almost as many recipes for success as the number of cooks to
whom you speak. Examination-taking, like studying for an examination, is
very personal: what will work for you might not work for someone else;
and, just as importantly, there are differences in expectations among
professors (just as judges differ in what they want from the lawyers who
practice before them).
Nonetheless, there are certain suggestions that probably have merit in most
cases. What follows, therefore, is a summary of what I advise my students. I

would look over the following comments just before you take an essay
examination.
DO’S AND DON’T’S IN ESSAY EXAMINATION-TAKING
1.

DO read the facts in the essay question carefully.

Read over the essay facts twice. The first time, read the essay fairly quickly.
The purpose of the first reading should be to get an overview of the facts
and to see what the teacher wants you to do with them. The second reading
is the key one: now you are poring over the facts in order to answer the
question the professor has asked you.
6
2.

DO read the “call” of the question carefully.

The “call” is the portion of the question, usually at the end, where your
teacher tells you exactly what you are being asked to do with the facts. It
might say something very general: “Discuss the criminal liability of the
parties.” Or, it might be far more specific, such as: “Jones is prosecuted for
murder. Discuss her criminal liability for this crime.” Or, it may be even
more specific: “Jones is prosecuted for murder. What defenses might she
raise at trial, and will they succeed?”
One of the great tragedies in examination-taking occurs when a student
answers a question that was not asked (or, worse still, does not answer the
question that was asked). For example, a fact pattern may suggest a number
of crimes committed by various parties. Students who do not read the call
of the question carefully are apt to assume that the professor wants them to
discuss every crime committed by every person discussed in the essay.
Sometimes this assumption is correct. Other times, however, the teacher has
a narrower focus: (s)he may want more in-depth discussion of fewer crimes.
Therefore, (s)he may ask you to discuss only certain specified aspects of the
case. If a student discusses issues not asked, (s)he will likely not receive
any credit for this; meanwhile, (s)he is not answering the question that was
asked.
3.

DO NOT rush to start answering the question.

Novice students often become fearful when they see someone nearby
answering an essay question while they are still thinking about what to
write. Of course, you can spend too much time thinking and too little time
writing an answer, but more often an inexperienced law student’s “sin” is to
think and organize too little, or, at least, write in too disorganized a manner.
Organize your thoughts before you begin to write. To do so, you may want
to prepare a brief outline before you write your “real” answer—just
something that will help you remember what you plan to write about and in
what order. Just write down a few words on each issue to remind you.
How much time should you spend in this organizational process?
Unfortunately, there is no sure answer. It depends on many factors, not the
least of which is how fast a writer (or computer typist) you are.
4.

DO budget your time carefully.

Here is a common scenario: a student has three essay questions of equal
value to write in three hours. Rather than spend one hour on each question
as (s)he should (given their equal value), the student spends 70 minutes on
each of the first two questions. Obviously, (s)he has little time—only 40
minutes—to read, think about, and answer the third question. Almost
always, the few extra points (s)he might earn on the first two questions
because (s)he spent extra time on them are lost in spades on the third
question! It is a net loss.
Remember this, if you remember nothing else from my comments: Nobody
can say everything that there is to say on any single essay question
during an in-class timed examination. (Or, perhaps, I should say: if you
do have time to say everything you know, then maybe you know too little!)
Therefore, be a tough taskmaster on yourself: If you should spend one hour
on a question (for example, if the professor recommends an hour, or tells
you that this question will count one-third of your grade on a three-hour
exam), spend only one hour on it, no matter what. Strictly apportion your
time during that hour. By looking at the outline you prepared (see above),
you should be able to see in advance what needs to be said. By checking the
time regularly to see where you are in the hour and where you are in your
answer, you can decide when you

7
will need to stop discussing an issue and move on. That is a far better
situation than to write at the end of your exam answer (as some of my
students have done over the years): “Sorry, Professor, I ran out of time.”
Remember, everyone taking the exam is in the same predicament, so don’t
panic when you can’t say everything you want on every issue.
5.
If you handwrite your exam (rather than use a computer), DO skip
pages in your blue book, i.e., leave every other page blank.
The reason is simple: no matter how well you organize your answer in
advance, you will forget to say something, or a great idea will dart into your
mind after you have moved on to another issue. Rather than stick those
afterthoughts in at the end of the exam, go back to the spot where it
belongs, draw an arrow to the blank page, and stick in the new thought. It
may not be neat, but it is easier to follow than if you put it in at the end of
your answer where it definitely does not belong. This puts you on equal
footing with your computer cut-and-paste colleagues.
6. In answering a question, DO NOT add facts that are not there, and DO
NOT create issues that are not reasonably apparent from the facts.
Let me start with an extreme—and downright silly—example, but one that
actually happened. I gave an essay question that involved a fairly simple set
of facts, in which John shot and instantly killed Jane, his wife. One student,
perhaps assuming that I was planning to raise some weighty moral issues
that I discussed in class, wrote in her bluebook, “If Jane had been a fetus,
then….” The student then proceeded to discuss the definition of “human
being” and the common law rule that a fetus not born alive is not a “human
being” within the meaning of the common law. (We learned that in class.)
Wonderfully interesting and accurate, but irrelevant to the given facts. As I
have said, there is rarely enough time on an exam to say everything you
could in a perfect world; you certainly don’t have time to discuss nonissues. Use your time to discuss the issues that a lawyer would really worry
about in the real world.
Nostalgia Department: I remember the one and only practice examination I
took as a first year student at UCLA. It was in Civil Procedure. I prepared

feverishly for the examination, and I wrote what I considered to be an
erudite answer, in which I provided my professor virtually everything there
was to know about Civil Procedure (or, at least, that we had learned in class
at that stage of the semester). I left the examination very proud of myself.
Later, he returned our examinations. I received a “D.” In red, at the end of
my answer, was the following comment from my acerbic instructor: “If I
had wanted Corpus Juris Secundum I would have asked for it.” I had no
idea what he meant, so I sheepishly went and asked. His answer: I had
spouted back encyclopedic information about Civil Procedure that had little
to do with the facts in the essay question. I could have telephoned in my
answer without even reading the facts. As I mentioned above, law
professors want you to learn how to think like a lawyer, and not primarily
memorize rules and spit them back mindlessly. That means you need to use
the law you learn to analyze the facts given to you on the examination.
How do you know whether the facts call for discussion of a particular
subject? It is not always easy to tell. (It shouldn’t be easy: the job of
lawyers is to figure out what the real issues are in their case.) For example,
suppose the facts tell you that D left work, went to a bar, then drove home,
and there killed her husband. Assume that you are asked to discuss D’s
possible criminal liability for the homicide. Well, is intoxication an issue? It
is hard to say. If the facts had not mentioned that she went to a bar, the
answer would clearly be that intoxication is not a viable issue—you
wouldn’t discuss it. However, given that D went to the bar, you should ask
yourself, “If I were a defense lawyer, and my
8
client described these facts to me, what additional information would I need
in order to properly defend her?” Almost certainly you would ask her
questions, such as “What did you drink?” and “How many drinks did you
have?” On an examination, therefore, it would be appropriate to write (in
the appropriate place in the discussion): “The facts are unclear as to D’s
possible state of intoxication. We know that she went to a bar, so it is
reasonable to assume that she drank intoxicants. However, we do not know
how much she drank or the quality of her mental processes thereafter. If the

facts were to be found that….” Then, you can discuss the hypothetical
possibilities.
7.

DO NOT make conclusory statements.

You have probably already heard it more often than you want: Professors
are more interested in how you get to your answer than what your answer
is. Within limits, this is true. It is wholly unsatisfactory to say that Donald
is guilty of murder unless you tell me why. It is wholly unsatisfactory to say
that Donald is guilty of murder because he intentionally killed Victor,
unless you tell me how you came to the conclusion that Donald
intentionally killed Victor. In short, always listen to a little voice in the back
of your mind that is asking you “Why? What makes you reach this
conclusion?” whenever you make a flat assertion.
8.

DO define legal terms.

Remember what it is you are doing: you are trying to show your professor
what you know. Therefore, it is important to show that you know what legal
terms mean. Ideally, you should define terms in your discussion of them.
For example, if you are attempting to show that the defendant acted
recklessly, define “recklessness.” If you do not expressly define legal
terminology, then make sure that your factual discussion is sufficiently
thorough that the professor can tell from it that you know what the term
means.
9. DO NOT write introductions and conclusions to your answers, unless
your teacher tells you to do so.
You are not writing a brief for a court or a memorandum to an associate in a
law firm: you are writing an answer to an examination under severe time
pressures. Therefore, my advice (although there are teachers who feel
differently) is: get directly into your answer. Skip introductions in which
you say, “I am going to discuss…. I will show that….” Skip conclusions,
too. Your time is too short.
10. DO NOT panic.
You will survive. Life goes on. Keep your perspective. No examination is as
important as your health and that of your loved ones.
WRITING A CRIMINAL LAW EXAMINATION

Here are a few pointers. (This advice will be of most use if you read it
after you have studied the entire Outline, just before the exam.) Again,
however, ignore my advice if your professor provides his or her own
practice-pointers.
1. Separate out your thoughts (and ultimately your answer) by defendants
and crimes.
That is, if the facts involve Ann and Bob, who arguably robbed and killed
Charles together, you should look at the problems in terms of Ann-Robbery,
Ann-Murder, Bob-Robbery, and Bob-Murder. That is, analyze each
defendant separately. And, with one exception noted at point 6 below, talk
about each crime separately!
9
2.

Be explicit about the crime and defendant under discussion.

For example, if you are discussing Ann’s liability for the robbery, say so.
The easiest way to do this is to put something like:
State v. Ann (robbery)
Then discuss Ann’s liability for the robbery, element by element. By doing
it this way, you tell the teacher (and remind yourself) what defendant and
what crime is under discussion. Then, when you are through with your
discussion of the robbery charge against Ann, you turn to the next problem,
for example,
State v. Ann (murder)
and so on.
3.

Discuss a crime in a logical order.

A.
Completed crimes. Barring contrary advice from your professor, I
recommend that you discuss any crime in the order listed earlier in this
Perspective: (1) voluntary act (or omission); (2) social harm (that is, discuss
the specific actus reus elements of the crime)1; (3) mens rea of the
particular crime; (4) actual cause; and (5) proximate cause. Then discuss
defenses, starting with any relevant justification defenses, and then moving
to excuse defenses.

B. Inchoate offenses. If you are discussing an inchoate offense, such as
attempt, your discussion can be more limited. Basically, you will need to
discuss: (1) the actus reus (did the actor go far enough to constitute an
attempt?); and (2) mens rea of attempt. Then discuss any possible defenses.
Although the justification and excuse defenses might apply, be especially
careful to look for possible crime-specific defenses, e.g., legal impossibility
and abandonment.
C. Complicity. If you are discussing a defendant’s potential accomplice’s
liability, you will discuss the “elements” of accomplice liability: Did the
defendant assist (the actus reus of complicity liability)?; and did the
defendant act with the requisite mens rea. Defenses, where relevant, can
then be discussed.
4.

Discuss multiple defendants in a logical order.

If the facts involve multiple potential defendants, there is usually a logical
order to discuss the defendants. As you learn(ed), an accomplice’s liability
is derived from the principal’s liability. That is simply a matter of logic. If
Ann actually robbed a bank, it would be illogical to discuss Bob’s liability
first, as his liability as a potential accomplice depends on finding that a
robbery occurred. Therefore, always discuss the alleged perpetrator’s
liability first. Then, discuss the liability of the secondary party(ies).
5.
If the question involves multiple crimes, discuss them in a logical
order, if there is one.
Sometimes it does not matter in what order you discuss crimes. If Donald is
charged with robbery and rape, you might discuss either one first. You may
as well do them in chronological order, i.e., in the order that the crimes
allegedly occurred.
But, sometimes you can see (especially if you have done your necessary
pre-answer organization) that there is a logical order to the discussion. For
example, if you have a potential robbery and murder charge against
Defendant Linda, you may see that the prosecutor’s murder charge could be
based on felony-murder principles. If so, you would
10

do well to discuss the felony first. Then, when you get to your murder
discussion and, more particularly, to the felony-murder issue, you can
simply say, “As discussed earlier, the defendant is (not) guilty of the felony
of robbery. Therefore …”
6.

Special Problem: Criminal Homicide.

Unless your professor (or the “call” of the question) tells you otherwise, any
time you discuss a defendant’s possible guilt for the crime of murder, you
will also want to discuss manslaughter and/or negligent homicide, lesser
included offenses of murder, if the facts suggest the possibility of guilt for
one of these lesser offenses. As you learn(ed), an intentional killing can be
murder or manslaughter. And, the line between a reckless murder and
negligent manslaughter is thin.
There are two ways to handle your homicide discussion. First, you can
discuss the defendant’s liability for murder (“State v. Jones (murder)”),
element by element. Then, start all over again, under separate title (“State v,
Jones (manslaughter)”), discussing the defendant’s liability for
manslaughter, incorporating by reference all of your earlier discussion of
“voluntary act,” “social harm,” “actual cause,” “proximate cause,” and the
defenses. Simply discuss fully the issue of mens rea, as this is the only real
difference between murder and manslaughter. But that seems like a waste of
time and space, right? So….
Alternatively—I prefer this—discuss the defendant’s liability in terms of
“criminal homicide”: Discuss the elements of both crimes together, since
there is no difference between them, except when you reach mens rea. At
that point, you would “start at the top” by discussing the mens rea of
murder, and then (assuming there is a plausible case for it) discussing the
possibility that the defendant has the mens rea of manslaughter or negligent
homicide. This is the one situation where it is acceptable to discuss two
crimes together.
__________________________
1

For example, if you are discussing the common law crime of burglary, discuss separately each
element of the actus reus: (1) breaking; (2) entering; (3) dwelling house; (4) of another; and (5) at
night.

11

Capsule Summary
PART ONE: INTRODUCTORY PRINCIPLES
I.

CRIMINAL LAW OVERVIEW
A.

“Criminal” Versus “Civil”
1. The Essence of the Criminal Law
What distinguishes a criminal from a civil sanction and all that
distinguishes it, is the judgment of community condemnation
that accompanies and justifies its imposition. A “crime” is (or, at
least should be) limited to conduct that, if duly shown to have
taken place, will incur a formal and solemn pronouncement of
the moral condemnation of the community.

B.

Sources of the Criminal Law
1. Common Law
“Common law” is judge-made law. For the most part, British
common law became American common law.
2. Statutes
Today, all criminal lawyers in this country turn first to a book—
often characterized as a “penal code”—that contains
legislatively-drafted definitions of crimes, defenses to crimes,
and other relevant doctrines of criminal law, which apply in that
lawyer’s jurisdiction.
3. Model Penal Code
The Model Penal Code (typically abbreviated as “MPC”) is a
code created in the 1950s and adopted in 1962 by the American
Law Institute, a prestigious organization composed of top

judges, scholars, and lawyers. Portions of the MPC have become
law in many states.
C.

Limits on the Criminal Law
State and federal legislation is subject to the strictures of the United
States Constitution (and, with state laws, the constitution of the
relevant state). Some of these strictures are discussed throughout
this Outline.

D.

Burden of Proof: Basics
A basic American principle of criminal law is that a defendant is
presumed innocent. The Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and
Fourteenth Amendments of the Constitution require that, to convict
a defendant, the government must persuade the factfinder beyond a
reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime
charged.
12

E.

Judge Versus Jury
1. Constitutional Law
The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution provides
that “in all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the
right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury.” Despite
the phrase “in all criminal prosecutions,” the Supreme Court has
generally limited the right to a jury trial to prosecutions of
crimes for which the maximum potential punishment exceeds
incarceration of six months.
2. Jury Nullification
Jury nullification occurs when the jury decides that the
prosecution has proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt, but
for reasons of conscience it disregards the facts and/or the law
and acquits the defendant. Jurors have the power to nullify
(because the Double Jeopardy Clause of the United States
Constitution forbids reprosecution of the same offense after an

acquittal), but not the right to do so. Therefore, a defendant is
not entitled to have the jury instructed that it may nullify the law.
II.

“TOOLS” OF THE CRIMINAL LAW
A. Theories of Punishment
1. Different Theories
Two broad theories of punishment exist: utilitarianism and
retribution.
2. Principles of Utilitarianism
a. Augmenting Happiness
Utilitarianism holds that the general object of all laws is to
augment the total happiness of the community by excluding,
as much as possible, everything that subtracts from that
happiness, i.e., everything that causes “mischief” (pain).
b. Role of Punishment
Both crime and punishment are bad because they both result
in pain to individuals and to society as a whole. Therefore,
the pain of punishment is undesirable unless its infliction is
likely to prevent a greater amount of pain in the form of
future crime.
c. Forms of Utilitarianism
i.

General Deterrence
A person is punished in order to send a message to others
(the general society or, at least, persons who might be
contemplating criminal conduct) that crime does not pay.

ii. Specific Deterrence
D is punished in order to deter D from future criminal
activity. This is done in either of two ways: by
incapacitation (incarceration of D prevents her from
committing additional crimes in the general community
for the duration of her

13
sentence); and/or by intimidation (D’s punishment serves
as a painful reminder, so that upon release D will be
deterred from future criminal conduct).
iii. Rehabilitation
Advocates of this form of utilitarianism believe that the
criminal law can prevent future crime by reforming an
individual, by providing her with employment skills,
psychological aid, etc., so that she will not want or need
to commit offenses in the future.
3. Principles of Retribution
a. Just Deserts
Punishment of a wrongdoer is justified as a deserved response
to wrongdoing. Retributivists punish because of the
wrongdoing—the criminal gets his just deserts—regardless of
whether such punishment will deter future crime.
b. Rationale
Wrongdoing creates a moral disequilibrium in society. The
wrongdoer obtains the benefits of the law (namely, that other
people have respected his rights), even as he does not accept
the law’s burdens (respecting others’ rights). Proportional
punishment of the wrongdoer—“paying his debt”—brings
him back into moral equilibrium. Another justification is that
both crime and punishment are forms of communication: one
who commits a crime sends an implicit message to the victim
that the wrongdoer’s rights are more important than others’
rights; punishment is a symbolic way of showing the criminal
—and reaffirming for victims—that this message was wrong.
Punishment proportional to the offense defeats the offender: it
brings him down to his proper place in relation to others.
B.

Proportionality of Punishment

1. General Principle
A general principle of criminal law is that punishment should be
proportional to the offense committed.
2. Utilitarian Meaning
Punishment is proportional if it involves the infliction of no
more pain than necessary to fulfill the law’s deterrent goal of
reducing a greater amount of crime.
3. Retributive Meaning
Punishment should be proportional to the harm caused on the
present occasion, taking into consideration the actor’s degree of
culpability for causing the harm.
14
4. Constitutional Law
The Eighth Amendment Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause
prohibits grossly disproportional punishment.
a. Death Penalty Cases
The Supreme Court has held that death is grossly
disproportional punishment for the crime of rape, because the
latter offense does not involve the taking of human life. This
is consistent with retributive proportionality principles.
b. Imprisonment Cases
According to the Supreme Court’s most recent
pronouncement, there is only a very “narrow proportionality
principle” outside the context of the death penalty. The
legislature (not the judiciary) has primary authority in setting
punishments. No non-capital incarcerative punishment will be
declared unconstitutional unless there are objective grounds
—not simply a judge’s own subjective views of the propriety
of the punishment—for determining that the punishment is
grossly disproportionate to the crime.

C.

Legality
1. Requirement of Previously Defined Conduct
a. General Principle
The so-called “principle of legality” is that there can be no
crime without (pre-existent) law, no punishment without (preexistent) law.
b. Constitutional Law
The principle of legality not only is a common law doctrine,
but has deep constitutional roots. Legislatures are prohibited
by the Ex Post Facto Clause of the United States Constitution
from enacting laws that would punish conduct that was lawful
at the time of its commission, or that increases the
punishment for an act committed before the law took effect.
In turn, courts are prohibited from enlarging the scope of
criminal statutes by the Due Process Clause.
2. Fair Notice
A corollary of the legality principle is that a person may not be
punished for an offense unless the statute is sufficiently clear that
a person of ordinary intelligence can understand its meaning.
This is a fundamental common law concept, with constitutional
roots as well in the Due Process Clause.
3. Nondiscriminatory Enforcement
Another corollary of the legality principle is that a criminal
statute should not be so broadly worded that it is susceptible to
discriminatory enforcement by law enforcement officers, thereby
unduly expanding government power.
15

D.

Burden of Proof
1. Burden of Production

This burden relates to the question of which party—the
defendant or the government—has the obligation to first
introduce evidence on a given issue. The party with this
obligation, who fails to satisfy this burden, loses on the issue. In
general, the government has the burden of production regarding
elements of a crime; the defendant carries the burden as to
affirmative defenses.
2. Burden of Persuasion
Once the burden of production has been satisfied, the next
question becomes: who has the burden of persuading the
factfinder on the particular issue? The party with the burden of
production does not necessarily have the burden of persuasion.
a. Degree of Burden
i.

Elements of a Crime
The Due Process Clause of the Constitution requires that
the government carry the burden of persuasion, beyond a
reasonable doubt, as to “every fact necessary to constitute
the crime charged.” The Court has limited the word
“fact”—and, thus, the prosecutor’s constitutional
obligation to carry the burden of production beyond a
reasonable doubt—to elements of an offense, and not to
defenses and mitigating factors.

ii. Defenses to Crimes
A legislature is free to place the burden of persuasion
regarding a criminal law defense on either party—the
defendant or government—and to set the burden very
high (proof beyond a reasonable doubt), somewhat high
(clear and convincing evidence) or low (proof by
preponderance of the evidence).

PART TWO: ACTUS REUS
I. ACTUS REUS: OVERVIEW

A.

Definition
The “actus reus” of an offense is the physical, or external,
component of a crime that society does not want to occur.

B. Two Elements
The actus reus of a crime consists of two components, both of
which must be proved by the prosecutor beyond a reasonable doubt.
1. Voluntary Act or Legal Omission
Generally speaking, there can be no crime in the absence of
conduct. But, only a certain type of conduct qualifies, namely,
conduct that includes a
16
voluntary act. In rare circumstances, a person may be prosecuted
because of what he or she did not do—an absence of conduct.
An “omission” substitutes for a voluntary act when the defendant
has a legal duty to act.
2. Social Harm
People are not punished for conduct (or omissions), but rather
for conduct (or omissions) that result in “social harm.”
II. VOLUNTARY ACT
A.

General Rule
A person is not ordinarily guilty of a criminal offense unless his
conduct includes a voluntary act.
1. Common Law Definition of Voluntary Act
A “voluntary act” is a willed muscular contraction or bodily
movement by the actor. An act is “willed” if the bodily
movement was controlled by the mind of the actor.
2. Model Penal Code

The MPC does not define “voluntary act.” It provides examples
of involuntary actions: a reflex or convulsion; bodily movement
while unconscious or asleep; conduct during hypnosis or as a
result of hypnotic suggestion; and/or “a bodily movement that
otherwise is not a product of the effort or determination of the
actor, either conscious or habitual.”
3. Constitutional Law
The Supreme Court has never expressly held that punishment of
an involuntary actor is unconstitutional. However, it has
invalidated statutes that criminalize a “status” or “condition”
(such as being a drug addict), rather than conduct.
4. Important Study Point
To be guilty of an offense, it is sufficient that the person’s
conduct included a voluntary act. It is not necessary that all
aspects of his conduct be voluntary.
B.

Rationale of Voluntary Act Requirement
1. Utilitarian
A person who acts involuntarily cannot be deterred. Therefore, it
is useless to punish the involuntary actor. It results in pain
without the benefit of crime reduction.
2. Retribution
A more persuasive justification for the voluntary act requirement
is that blame and punishment presuppose free will: a person does
not deserve to be punished unless she chooses to put her bad
thoughts into action.
17

III. OMISSIONS
A.

General Rule

Ordinarily, a person is not guilty of a crime for failing to act, even if
such failure permits harm to occur to another, and even if the person
could act at no risk to personal safety.
B.

Rationale for the General Rule
1. Proving the Omitter’s State of Mind
Criminal conduct requires a guilty state of mind (mens rea). It is
often difficult to determine the state of mind of one who fails to
act.
2. Line-Drawing Problems
Difficult line-drawing problems—which omitters should be
prosecuted?—arise in omission cases.
3. Promoting Individual Liberty
In a society such as ours, premised on individual liberties and
limited government, the criminal law should be used to prevent
persons from causing positive harm to others, but it should not
be used to coerce people to act to benefit others.

C.

Exceptions to the General Rule
Notwithstanding the general rule, a person has a legal duty to act in
limited circumstances, if he is physically capable of doing so.
1. Crimes of Omission: Statutory Duty
Some statutes expressly require a person to perform specified
acts. Failure to perform those acts, by definition, constitutes an
offense. Such an offense may be characterized as a “crime of
omission.”
2. Crimes of Commission
The criminal law sometimes permits prosecution for a crime of
commission (an offense that, by definition, appears to require
proof of conduct, rather than an omission), although the basis of
the prosecution is an omission. Thus, we have a case of what
might be characterized as commission-by-omission.

a. Duty by Status
A person has a common law duty to protect another with
whom he has a special status relationship, typically, one
based on dependency or interdependency, such as parent-tochild, spouse-to-spouse, and master-to-servant.
b. Duty by Contract
A person may have an express contract to come to the aid of
another, or such a contract may be implied-in-law.
18
c. Duty by Voluntary Assumption
One who voluntarily assumes the care of another must
continue to assist if a subsequent omission would place the
victim in a worse position than if the Good Samaritan had not
assumed care at all.
d. Duty by Risk Creation
One who creates a risk of harm to another must thereafter act
to prevent subsequent harm.
IV. SOCIAL HARM
A.

Definition
“Social harm” may be defined as the destruction of, injury to, or
endangerment of, some socially valuable interest.

B.

Identifying the Social Harm
You can determine the “social harm” of an offense by looking at the
definition of the crime and identifying the words in that describe the
external conduct that constitutes the crime.

C.

Breaking Down the Social Harm into Categories
It is sometimes essential for a lawyer (especially in jurisdictions that
follow the Model Penal Code) to be able to look at the definition of
a crime, more specifically the actus reus portion, and divide up the

“social harm” elements into one or more of the following three
categories.
1. “Result” Elements (or Crimes)
Some crimes prohibit a specific result, such as the death of
another human being.
2. “Conduct” Elements (or Crimes)
Some crimes prohibit specific conduct, whether or not tangible
harm results thereby, such as offenses that prohibit drunk
driving.
3. “Attendant Circumstance” Elements
A “result” or “conduct” is not an offense unless certain
“attendant circumstances” exist. An “attendant circumstance” is
a fact that exists at the time of the actor’s conduct, or at the time
of a particular result, which is required to be proven in the
definition of the offense.
19

PART THREE: MENS REA
I. MENS REA: GENERAL PRINCIPLES
A.

Meaning of “Mens Rea”
1. Broad (“Culpability”) Meaning
A person has acted with “mens rea” in the broad sense of the
term if she committed the actus reus of an offense with a
“vicious will,” “evil mind,” or “morally blameworthy” or
“culpable” state of mind.
2. Narrow (“Elemental”) Meaning
“Mens rea” exists in the narrow sense of the term if, but only if,
a person commits the actus reus of an offense with the particular

mental state set out expressly in the definition of that offense.
This may be called the “elemental” definition of mens rea.
B.

Rationale of the Mens Rea Requirement
1. Utilitarian Argument
It is frequently asserted that a person who commits the actus
reus of an offense without a mens rea is not dangerous, could not
have been deterred, and is not in need of reform. Therefore, her
punishment would be counter-utilitarian. (There is a competing
utilitarian argument—one that might suggest that sometimes a
utilitarian would support abandoning the mens rea requirement
—set out in the Main Outline.)
2. Retributive Argument
The mens rea requirement is solidly supported by the retributive
principle of just deserts. A person who commits the actus reus of
an offense in a morally innocent manner, i.e., accidentally, does
not deserve to be punished, as she did not choose to act
unlawfully.

II.

COMMON LAW
A.

“Intentionally”
1. Definition
A person commits the social harm of an offense “intentionally”
if: (1) it was her conscious object to cause the result; or (2) if she
knew that the result was virtually certain to occur because of her
conduct.
2. Transferred Intent Doctrine
Courts frequently speak of a “transferred intent” doctrine: A
person acts “intentionally” as the term is defined above, if the
result of her conduct differs from that which she desired only in
respect to the identity of the victim.
20

B.

“Knowledge” or “Knowingly”
1. Definition
Some offenses require proof that the actor had knowledge of an
attendant circumstance. At common law, a person acts
“knowingly” regarding an existing fact (an “attendant
circumstance”) if she either: (1) is aware of the fact; (2) correctly
believes that the fact exists; or (3) suspects that the fact exists
and purposely avoids learning if her suspicion is correct. The
latter form of “knowledge” is sometimes called “wilful
blindness.”

C.

Risk-Taking: “Recklessness” and “Criminal Negligence”
1. Overview
Risk-taking is properly divisible into various types: justifiable
risk-taking; unjustifiable risk-taking that may properly result in
tort damages; and unjustifiable risk-taking that may also result in
criminal punishment. The latter form of risk-taking may be
divided into categories: “negligent” risk-taking and “reckless”
risk-taking.
2. Unjustified Risk-Taking
In order to determine whether risk-taking is justifiable or not,
one must look at three factors: the gravity of harm that a
reasonable person would foresee might occur as the result of the
risk-taking conduct; the probability that this harm will occur;
and the reason for the proposed conduct, i.e., the benefit to the
individual or society of taking the risk. A risk is unjustifiable if
the gravity of the foreseeable harm, multiplied by the probability
of its occurrence, outweighs the foreseeable benefit from the
conduct.
3. “Criminal Negligence”
A person acts in a “criminally negligent” manner if she should
be aware that her conduct creates a substantial and unjustifiable

risk of social harm. Synonyms for “criminal negligence,” include
“gross negligence” and “culpable negligence.”
4. “Recklessness”
a. Holmes’s View
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., believed that a person acts
“recklessly” if she should be aware that she is taking a very
substantial and unjustifiable risk. This is simply a heightened
version of “criminal negligence.” Notice, under this view:
“civil negligence” involves unjustifiable risk-taking;
“criminal negligence” is substantial and unjustifiable risktaking; and “recklessness” (as defined here) is very
substantial and unjustifiable risk-taking.
b. Modern Definition
Most courts now provide that a person acts “recklessly” if she
consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
her conduct will cause the social harm of the offense. Under
this definition, “recklessness” differs from “criminal
negligence” in that it
21
requires that the actor subjectively be aware of the substantial
and unjustifiable risk, whereas the negligent actor is unaware
of the risk, but should be.
D.

“Malice”
A person acts with “malice” if she intentionally or recklessly causes
the social harm of an offense, as the latter mens rea terms are
defined above. There is a special and different definition in the
context of murder, discussed later.

E.

“Specific Intent” and “General Intent”
The common law distinguishes between “general intent” and
“specific intent” crimes. The distinction is critical, because some

defenses apply only, or more broadly, in the case of so-called
“specific intent” offenses.
1. “Specific Intent” Offenses
In most cases, a “specific intent” offense is one that explicitly
contains one of the following mens rea elements in its definition:
(1) the intent to commit some act over and beyond the actus reus
of the offense; (2) a special motive for committing the actus reus
of the offense; or (3) awareness of a particular attendant
circumstance.
2. “General Intent” Offenses
Any offense that requires proof of a culpable mental state, but
which does not contain a specific intent, is a “general intent”
offense. Sometimes, such an offense will have no explicit mens
rea term in the definition of the offense; it is enough that the
defendant committed the actus reus with any culpable state of
mind.
F.

Statutory Construction
A frequent issue in criminal law litigation is whether a mens rea
term in the definition of an offense applies to all or only some of the
actus reus elements in the definition of the crime. In the absence of
explicit rules, courts have struggled to interpret modern statutes.
1. Common Law Interpretive Rules of Thumb
a. Legislative Intent
The ultimate issue for any court today—always—is to
determine what the legislature intended. A court will try to
resolve interpretive problems by ascertaining the intention of
the drafters of the law, sometimes by looking through
legislative history. Often, however, evidence regarding
legislative intent is non-existent or ambiguous, so courts must
look elsewhere.
b. Position of the Mens Rea Term in Definition of Offense

Courts often look at the placement of the mens rea term in the
definition of the offense, in order to ascertain legislative
intent. See the Main Outline for a useful example.
22
c. Punctuation
Sometimes punctuation is relied upon to determine that a
phrase set off by commas is independent of the language that
precedes or follows it. See the Main Outline for a useful
example.
d. Attendant Circumstances
Courts sometimes assume that, absent evidence to the
contrary, mens rea terms in the definitions of offenses do not
apply to “attendant circumstance” elements of the crime.
III. MODEL PENAL CODE
A.

Section 2.02, Subsection 1
1. Language
In general, “a person is not guilty of an offense unless he acted
purposely, knowingly, recklessly, or negligently, as the law may
require, with respect to each material element of the offense.”
2. Significance of Subsection
a. Role of Mens Rea
In general, the MPC requires proof of mens rea. More
significantly, it requires proof of some particular mens rea—
purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence—as to each
material element of the offense. This contrasts with the
common law, where there might be a mens rea requirement as
to one element but no mens rea required as to other elements.
In other words, with the MPC, each actus reus element
should be “covered” by some mens rea requirement. No
elements are left naked!

B.

Culpability Terms Defined
1. Purposely
The common law term “intentionally” is not used in the Model
Penal Code. Instead, the MPC subdivides “intent” into its two
alternative components, and calls them “purposely” and
“knowingly.” A person causes a result “purposely” if it is her
conscious object to cause the result.
2. Knowingly
a. Results
A person “knowingly” causes a result if she is aware that the
result is “practically certain” to occur from her conduct.
b. Attendant Circumstances
A person acts “knowingly” as to an attendant circumstance if
he is aware that the circumstance exists, or if he is aware “of
a high probability of its existence, unless he actually believes
that it does not exist.” The latter provision is the Code version
of the “wilful blindness” doctrine discussed earlier.
23
3. Recklessly
a. Basic Definition
A person is said to have acted recklessly if “he consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the material
element exists or will result from his conduct.”
b. Standard for Evaluating Conduct
The Code provides, basically, that the standard discussed
earlier—measuring the gravity of foreseeable harm, the
probability of its occurrence, and the reasons for taking the
risk—should be applied. One is reckless when the risk-taking
“involves a gross deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would observe in the actor’s situation.”

4. Negligently
A person acts negligently when he should be aware of a
“substantial and unjustifiable risk.” This is a risk that constitutes
“a gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable
person would observe in the actor’s situation.” The critical
difference between recklessness and negligence under the Code
is that in the former case, the actor is consciously aware of the
substantial and unjustifiable risk, but proceeds anyway; in the
case of negligence, the actor is not aware of the risk, but should
be.
C.

Interpretative Rules
1. Default Position
The MPC requires some mens rea term for each element of an
offense (§ 2.05 aside). If the statute defining an offense is silent
regarding the issue of mens rea as to one or more of the actus
reus elements, the Code provides that “such element is
established if a person acts purposely, knowingly, or recklessly
with respect thereto.” In essence, you fill in the blank with
“purposely, knowingly, or recklessly.”
2. When Just One Mens Rea Term Is Mentioned
If the definition of a MPC statute only sets out a single mens rea
element in the definition of the offense, that mens rea term
applies to every material element of the offense, unless a
contrary legislative intent “plainly appears.”

IV. STRICT LIABILITY
A.

Nature of a Strict Liability Offense
An offense is “strict liability” in nature if commission of the actus
reus of the offense, without proof of a mens rea, is sufficient to
convict the actor.

B.

Public Welfare Offenses

Strict liability most often applies in relation to “public welfare”
offenses.
24
1. Characteristics of Most Public Welfare Offenses
a. Nature of the Conduct
Such offenses typically involve malum prohibitum conduct,
i.e., conduct that is wrongful only because it is prohibited
(e.g., motor vehicle laws), as distinguished from malum in se
conduct, i.e., inherently wrongful conduct (e.g., murder).
b. Punishment
The penalty for violation of a public welfare offense is
usually minor, such as a monetary fine or a very short jail
sentence.
c. Degree of Social Danger
A single violation of a public welfare offense often threatens
the safety of many persons, e.g., transportation of explosives
on a highway not designated for such use.
C.

Non-Public Welfare Offenses
On rare occasion, non-public welfare offenses are considered strict
liability in nature. Statutory rape is the most common example of
such an offense.

D.

Constitutionality of Strict Liability Offenses
Strict-liability offenses are not per se unconstitutional. Nonetheless,
there is a strong presumption against strict liability as to offenses
that have their roots in the common law. In such circumstances, a
court will not assume (absent evidence to the contrary) that the
legislature intended to abandon the common law mens rea
requirement, even if the statute is silent regarding this element.

PART FOUR: MENS REA AND MISTAKES OF
FACT OR LAW
I.

MISTAKE OF FACT
A.

Common Law
1. Specific-Intent Offenses
A defendant is not guilty of a specific-intent crime if her mistake
of fact negates the specific-intent element of the offense. Even
an unreasonable mistake of fact—a mistake that a reasonable
person would not make—will exculpate the actor if the mistake
negates the mens rea required for the offense.
2. General-Intent Offenses
a. Ordinary Rule
A defendant is not guilty of a general-intent offense if her
mistake of fact was reasonable. An unreasonable mistake of
fact does not exculpate.
25
b. Exception: “Moral Wrong” Doctrine
Although the principle stated above is the general rule, on
rare occasion a court will convict a defendant of an offense,
although her mistake of fact was reasonable, if her conduct
violates the “moral wrong” doctrine. This doctrine provides
that there should be no exculpation for a mistake where, if the
facts had been as the actor believed them to be, her conduct
would be immoral, albeit non-criminal. By knowingly
committing a morally wrong act, an actor assumes the risk
that the facts are not as she believed them to be, i.e., that her
actions are not just morally wrong, but also legally wrong.
See the Example in the Main Outline.
c. Alternative Exception: “Legal Wrong” Doctrine

Occasionally, a court will convict a defendant of an offense,
although her mistake of fact was reasonable, if her conduct
violates the “legal wrong” doctrine. This rule substitutes the
word “illegal” for “immoral” in the description of the moralwrong doctrine, but is otherwise applied in the same manner.
Thus, a person is guilty of criminal offense X, despite a
reasonable mistake of fact, if she would be guilty of a
different, albeit lesser, crime Y, if the factual situation were
as she supposed. See the Example in the Main Outline.
3. Strict-Liability Offenses
A mistake of fact, whether reasonable or unreasonable, is never a
defense to a strict-liability offense. This rule is logical: a strictliability offense is one that requires no proof of mens rea.
Therefore, there is no mens rea to negate. A defendant’s mistake
of fact is legally irrelevant.
B.

Model Penal Code
1. General Rule
Subject to one exception noted below, a mistake of fact is a
defense to a crime if the mistake negates a mental state element
required in the definition of the offense. The Code dispenses
with the common law distinction between “general intent” and
“specific intent” offenses: the mistake-of-fact rule applies to all
offenses in the same manner. Either the defendant had the
required mens rea set out in the definition of the offense or she
didn’t.
2. Exception to the General Rule
In a variation on the common law legal-wrong doctrine, the
defense of mistake-of-fact is inapplicable if the defendant would
be guilty of a lesser offense had the facts been as she believed
them to be. However, under such circumstances—unlike the
common law—the defendant will be punished at the level of the
lesser, rather than the greater, offense.

26
II.

MISTAKE OF LAW
A.

General Principles
1. General Rule
In general, knowledge of the law is not an element of an offense.
Moreover, a mistake of law—even a reasonable one!—does not
ordinarily relieve an actor of liability for the commission of a
criminal offense.
2. Purported Justifications for the Rule
a. Certainty of the Law
The law is definite. Therefore, any mistake of law is
inherently unreasonable. See the Main Outline for rebuttal
arguments.
b. Concern About Fraud
If a mistake-of-law defense were recognized, it would invite
fraud. Every defendant would assert ignorance or mistake,
and it would be nearly impossible to disprove the claim. See
the Main Outline for rebuttal arguments.
c. Promoting Knowledge of the Law
We want people to learn the law. To promote education—to
deter ignorance—the law must apply strict liability principles.
See the Main Outline for rebuttal arguments.

B.

Exceptions to the General Rule
1. Mistakes That Negate the Mens Rea
A defendant is not guilty of an offense if his mistake of law,
whether reasonable or unreasonable, negates an element of the
crime charged.
2. Authorized-Reliance Doctrine

A person is not guilty of a criminal offense if, at the time of the
offense, she reasonably relied on an official statement of the law,
later determined to be erroneous, obtained from a person or
public body with responsibility for the interpretation,
administration, or enforcement of the law defining the offense.
a. On Whom or What Body Is Reliance Reasonable
Although the common law is less clear than the Model Penal
Code in this regard, apparently a defendant may reasonably
rely on an official statement of the law found in a statute,
judicial opinion, administrative ruling, or an official
interpretation of the law given by one who is responsible for
the law’s enforcement or interpretation, such as the United
States or State Attorney General.
3. Due Process Clause
In very rare circumstances, it offends due process to punish a
person for a crime of which she was unaware at the time of her
conduct. The Due Process Clause apparently is violated if three
factors exist: (1) the
27
“unknown” offense criminalizes an omission; (2) the duty to act
is based on a status condition rather than conduct; and (3) the
offense is malum prohibitum in nature.

PART FIVE: CAUSATION
I. ACTUAL CAUSE (CAUSE-IN-FACT)
A.

General Principles
1. Rule
A person is not guilty of an offense unless she is an actual cause
of the ensuing harm. Both the common law and the Model Penal
Code provide that conduct is the “actual cause” of the prohibited

result if the result would not have occurred but for the actor’s
conduct.
B.

Steps for Determining the “Actual Cause”
1. Identifying the Relevant Conduct
Determine what is (are) the relevant voluntary act(s) committed
by D. If the case is based on an omission, determine what the
omission is, and substitute that for the “voluntary act” in the
following discussion.
2. Frame the Question Properly
Ask the question: “But for D’s voluntary act [omission] would
the social harm have occurred when it did?” If the social harm
would have occurred when it did even if D had not acted, D is
not the actual cause of the harm and, therefore, is not guilty of
the offense. In a sense, “yes” [the social hard would have
occurred when it did anyway] means “no” (no causal liability). If
the social harm would not have occurred when it did but for D’s
voluntary act(s), D is an actual cause of the social harm, in
which case you move on to the remaining causation issue
(proximate cause).

C.

Multiple Actual Causes
There usually are multiple actual causes of a result. A person who
dies of lung cancer, for example, might not have died when she did
but for her smoking habit and living in a smog-polluted city. It can
also be the case that two persons—two potential defendants—are
the actual cause of a result. See the Main Outline for useful
examples.

D.

Concurrent Sufficient Causes
In rare circumstances, the “but for” test may fail to reach the
morally sensible result. The problem arises when two acts, either
one of which is sufficient to cause the resulting harm when it did,
occur concurrently. See the Main Outline for useful examples.

1. Substantial Factor Test
In such cases, many courts resort to the “substantial factor” test,
a standard that is often used in tort cases. The question to be
asked is: “Was D’s conduct a substantial factor in the resulting
harm?”
28
2. Model Penal Code
The MPC does not apply the substantial factor test—it uses the
“but for” test in all cases. However, the Commentary to the Code
explains that, in deciding whether a defendant was a “but for”
cause of a “result,” one would state the “result” with great
specificity. See the Main Outline for details.
II.

PROXIMATE CAUSE (LEGAL CAUSE)
A.

General Principles
1. Role of “Proximate Cause” in Legal Analysis
A person who is an actual cause of resulting harm is not
responsible for it unless she is also the proximate (or “legal”)
cause of the harm. When the law states that a defendant was the
proximate cause of a result, this is a shorthand way of saying that
it is morally just to hold this person responsible for the harm.
2. Common Law, Model Penal Code, and Study Point
As with any “what is morally just” analysis, there is no single or
straightforward answer. The common law provides various
potential factors to consider. The drafters of the Code have
another way of handling the issue: they treat “proximate
causation” as a culpability, rather than causal, issue. The MPC
issue is whether the defendant can be said to have purposely,
knowingly, recklessly, or negligently (whichever is relevant in a
particular case) caused “a particular result,” if the “result”
occurred in an odd or unexpected manner. The Code takes all of
the common law factors discussed below and basically rolls

them into one, explicitly policy-oriented, question for the jury:
Was “the actual result … too remote or accidental in its
occurrence to have a [just] bearing on the actor’s liability or on
the gravity of the offense.”
B.

Direct Cause
A direct cause is a but-for cause in which no other cause intervenes
between it and the resulting social harm. A voluntary act that is a
direct cause of the social harm is also a proximate cause of it. This
is because there is no other candidate for causal responsibility.

C.

Intervening Cause
1. Definition
An “intervening cause” is an actual cause (a “but for” cause) of
social harm that arises after D’s causal contribution to the result.
2. General Role of Intervening Causes
An intervening cause does not necessarily relieve a defendant of
causal responsibility for the resulting harm. At common law,
various factors come into play in proximate causation analysis.
29
3. Nature of Intervening Cause
It is useful, although not always dispositive, to determine
whether the intervening cause was a response to the defendant’s
act or merely a coincidence.
a. “Response” and “Coincidence” Distinguished
An intervening cause is a responsive intervening cause if it
occurs as a response to the defendant’s earlier conduct. An
intervening cause is coincidental if the factor would have
come into play even in the absence of the defendant’s
conduct.
b. Legal Significance of Terminology

Generally speaking, a defendant is causally responsible for a
responsive intervening cause, unless the responsive
intervening act was not only unforeseeable but freakish. In
contrast, a defendant is not ordinarily causally responsible for
a coincidental intervening cause, unless its occurrence was
foreseeable to a reasonable person in the defendant’s
situation.
4. Other Important Factors
a. Intended Consequences Doctrine
In general, a defendant is the proximate cause of a result,
even if there is an intervening cause, if the defendant intended
the result that occurred. But, one should be very precise in
stating what result the defendant intended: a person may want
someone dead in a particular manner, in which case this
doctrine only applies if the result occurs in the desired
manner.
b. Free, Deliberate, Informed Human Intervention
In general, a defendant is not the proximate cause of a result
if a free, deliberate, and informed act of another human being
intervenes.
c. Apparent Safety Doctrine
Even though the defendant has created a dangerous situation,
she is not responsible for the ensuing result if it can be
determined that the dangerous situation created by the
defendant is over—that the victim, once at risk, has reached
apparent safety, only then to be jeopardized by another cause.

PART
I.

SIX:
DEFENSES
JUSTIFICATIONS

TO

JUSTIFICATION DEFENSES: GENERALLY
A.

Definition

CRIME:

A justification defense is one that indicates society’s conclusion that
the defendant’s conduct was morally good, socially desirable, or (at
least) not wrongful.
30
B.

Basic Structure of Justification Defenses
In general, a justification defense contains three components.
1. Necessity
Ordinarily, use of force against another is not justifiable unless it
is necessary.
2. Proportionality
Ordinarily, a person may not use force that is disproportional to
the threat that motivates the use of force. For example, deadly
force should not be used to repel a non-deadly threat.
3. Reasonable Belief
A person may be able to successfully assert a justification
defense even if she is wrong about the circumstances. Ordinarily,
a defendant’s use of force is justified if she possesses a
reasonable, even if incorrect, belief that the use of force is
necessary and proportional to the supposed threat.

II.

SELF-DEFENSE
A.

Common Law
1. General Rule
Subject to clarification below, a person is justified in using
deadly force against another if: (a) he is not the aggressor; and
(b) he reasonably believes that such force is necessary to repel
the imminent use of unlawful deadly force by the other person.
2. Definition of “Deadly Force”
The term “deadly force”—whether applied to the actions of the
aggressor or the person resisting aggression—is typically defined

as “force likely to cause, or intended to cause, death or serious
bodily harm.”
3. “Aggressor”
An aggressor may not use deadly force in self-defense. It is
possible, however, for an aggressor to purge himself of his status
as an aggressor and regain the right of self-defense.
a. Definition
An “aggressor” is one who commits an “unlawful act
reasonably calculated to produce an affray foreboding
injurious or fatal consequences.”
b. Losing the “Aggressor” Status
i.

Nondeadly Aggressors
A, a nondeadly aggressor, may regain her right of selfdefense against B, if B responds to A’s nondeadly
aggression by threatening to use excessive—deadly—
force in response. Courts differ, however, regarding how
A regains the right to use deadly force.
31
(1)

Majority Rule
A immediately regains her right of self-defense, as
soon as B threatens excessive force.

(2)

Minority Rule
If B responds to A’s nondeadly aggression by
threatening to use deadly force against A, A may not
use deadly force in self-defense unless A first
retreats, and B continues to threaten A with deadly
force. If no safe retreat is possible, however, A may
immediately use deadly force.

ii. Deadly Aggressor

A, a deadly aggressor, loses the right of self-defense in a
conflict unless she abandons her deadly design and
communicates this fact to B.
4. Proportionality of Force: Deadly Against Deadly
Deadly force may not be used in response to a nondeadly threat,
even if this is the only way to repel the nondeadly threat.
5. “Unlawful Force”/“Unlawful Threat”
A person has no right to defend herself against lawful justified
force. She may only respond to unlawful threats of force.
6. “Imminency”
Although modern courts are somewhat less strict than their
predecessors, generally speaking a person may not use deadly
force in self-defense unless the aggressor’s threatened force will
occur immediately, almost at that instant.
7. Necessity to Use Deadly Force
A person may not use deadly force unless it is necessary.
a. Use of Less Force
A person may not use deadly force to repel an unlawful
deadly attack if more moderate (nondeadly) force will do the
job.
b. Retreat?
Must non-aggressors retreat—flee to a safe place—rather
than stand their ground and use deadly force? Today, there is
a conflict on this subject in non-Model Penal Code
jurisdictions. A majority of non-MPC jurisdictions do not
have a retreat requirement. A minority of jurisdictions
provide that, with one key exception, a non-aggressor may
not use deadly force to repel an attack if she knows of a
completely safe place to which she can retreat. The exception
is that a non-aggressor is never required to retreat from her
own home.

32
8. “Reasonable Belief”
a. General Rule
The self-defense rules discussed above are modified by the
“reasonable belief” principle, which provides that a person
may use deadly force in self-defense if she has reasonable
grounds to believe, and actually believes, that she is in
imminent danger of death or serious bodily harm, and that use
of deadly force is necessary to protect herself, even if her
reasonable beliefs in these regards are incorrect.
b. What Is a “Reasonable Belief”?
A reasonable belief is a belief that a reasonable person would
hold in the actor’s situation. But, that only shifts the question
to the issue: who is a “reasonable person”? Ordinarily, the
defendant’s physical characteristics may be incorporated into
the “reasonable person.” Many courts today also subscribe to
the view that prior experiences of the defendant (such as her
prior experiences with the decedent) that help the defendant
evaluate the present situation are relevant.
c. Battered Women and Self-Defense
How should the law deal with the situation of a woman,
physically abused for years by her husband or live-in partner,
who kills her abuser at a moment when she is not, in fact,
under imminent attack, for example, when the batterer is
sleeping? Can we say that the battered woman reasonably
believed that the batterer represented an imminent threat in
such nonconfrontational circumstances?
i.

Legal Trends
Most courts prohibit an instruction on self-defense if the
homicide occurred in nonconfrontational circumstances,
on the ground that no reasonable juror could believe that
the defendant, as a reasonable person, would believe that

a sleeping man represents an imminent threat. But, a few
courts now do permit such cases to go to the jury if
“Battered Woman Syndrome” evidence is introduced to
show that the defendant, as a battered woman, suffered
from this condition. See the Main Outline for more
details.
B.

Model Penal Code
1. General Rule
Subject to the limitations discussed below, a person is not
justified in using deadly force against another unless she believes
that such force is immediately necessary to protect herself
against the exercise of unlawful deadly force, force likely to
cause serious bodily harm, a kidnapping, or sexual intercourse
compelled by force or threat, by the other person on the present
occasion. See the Main Outline for a comparison of this rule to
the common law. There are significant differences.
33
2. Limitations on General Rule
Even if deadly force is otherwise permitted, it is impermissible
in two key circumstances.
a. Defendant as Aggressor
As with the common law, the defense is not permitted if the
actor is the aggressor, which the Code defines as one who
“provokes” the use of force against herself “in the same
encounter” for the “purpose of causing death or serious
bodily injury.”
b. Retreat
The Code follows the minority common law position that a
non-aggressor must retreat if she knows that she can thereby
avoid the need to use deadly force with complete safety to
herself. This retreat requirement, however, is itself subject to

various exceptions, most notably that a person need not
retreat from her own dwelling.
c. Other “Non-Necessity” Circumstances
The Code explicitly provides that deadly force may not be
used if, subject to various exceptions, the defendant can avoid
doing so “by surrendering possession of a thing to a person
asserting a claim of right thereto or by complying with a
demand that he abstain from any action that he has no duty to
take.”
III. DEFENSE-OF-THIRD-PARTIES
A.

Common Law
1. General Rule
A person is justified is using deadly force to protect a third party
from unlawful use of force by an aggressor. The intervenor’s
right to use force parallels the third party’s apparent right of selfdefense. That is, the third party may use force when, and to the
extent that, she reasonably believes that the third party would be
justified in using force to protect herself.
2. Minority Rule
Some jurisdictions provide that a person may only use force to
defend a third party if the person being defended would in fact
have been justified in using the same degree of force in selfdefense. That is, the intervenor is placed in the shoes of the party
whom she is seeking to defend. If the other person has no right
of self-defense, even though the intervenor reasonably believes
that she does, the intervenor loses her claim.

B.

Model Penal Code
A person is justified in using deadly force to protect another if: (1)
the intervenor would be justified in using such force to protect
herself, if the facts were as she believed them to be; (2) according to
the facts as the intervenor believes them to be, the third person

would be justified in using such force to protect herself; (3) the
intervenor believes force is necessary for the third party’s
protection; and (4) if the third party would be required to retreat
under
34
the Code self-protection rules, the intervenor must attempt to cause
the third party to retreat before using deadly force.
IV. DEFENSES OF PROPERTY AND HABITATION
A.

Defense of Property
1. Common Law
A person is never justified in using deadly force to defend her
real or personal property. A person is justified in using
nondeadly force if she reasonably believes that such force is
necessary to prevent the imminent, unlawful dispossession of her
property. Some jurisdictions also provide that, prior to using
force, the property defender must ask the dispossessor to desist
from his conduct, unless such a request would be futile or
dangerous.
a. Important Clarification
With one exception, the defender must be in lawful
possession of the property at the time force is used. If she has
already been dispossessed of the property, force may not be
used to recapture the property. Instead, the victim of
dispossession must seek judicial redress. The exception to
this rule is that nondeadly force is permitted in fresh pursuit
of a dispossessor of property. In such circumstances, the use
of force to recapture the property is treated as an extension of
the original effort to prevent dispossession.
b. Another Important Clarification
The defender’s right to use force is based on her rightful
possession of the property; she does not need to have title to

it.
2. Model Penal Code
The MPC differs from the common law in various key respects.
a. Belief Requirement
As with other justifications defenses, the right to use force to
protect property is based on the actor’s subjective belief,
subject to the provisions of § 3.09, previously discussed in
the Main Outline.
b. Recapture of Property
With one exception, the MPC goes further than the common
law in that it generally authorizes use of nondeadly force to
retake possession of land or recapture personal property, even
after fresh pursuit has ended, if the actor believes that the
dispossessor has no claim of right to the property. The
exception is that in the case of land, a recapturer may not use
force unless she believes that it would constitute an
“exceptional hardship” to delay re-entry until she can obtain a
court order.
c. Deadly Force
The Code authorizes the use of deadly force if D believes that
V: (1) intends to dispossess D of his dwelling other than
under a claim-of-right
35
to possession; or (2) intends to commit arson, burglary,
robbery or felonious theft inside the dwelling and (2a) V “has
employed or threatened deadly force against or in the
presence” of D or (2b) the use of nondeadly force to prevent
commission of the crime would expose D or another to
substantial risk of serious bodily harm.
B.

Defense of Habitation

1. Common Law
a. Older, Broader Rule
D is justified in using deadly force against V if the actor
reasonably believes that: (1) V intends unlawfully and
imminently to enter D’s dwelling; (2) V intends to commit
any felony inside, or to cause bodily injury, no matter how
slight, to any occupant; and (3) deadly force is necessary to
prevent the entry.
b. Narrower Rule
Many (perhaps most) jurisdictions no longer apply the broad
rule set out above and instead hold that deadly force is limited
to circumstances in which D believes that V will commit an
“atrocious” (violent or dangerous) felony inside the dwelling
if V enters. The other requirements set out above (namely (1)
and (3)) still apply.
2. Model Penal Code
The Code does not recognize a separate interest in habitation, as
distinguished from defense of property. See the comments above
in regard to the MPC defense-of-property claim.
C.

Special Issue: Spring Guns
1. Common Law
A person may use a spring gun to inflict deadly force on another
“where an intrusion is, in fact, such that a person, were he
present, would be justified in taking the life or inflicting the
bodily harm with his own hands.” As the italicized words
suggest, the user of the spring gun acts at her peril: the deadly
force must be necessary.
2. Model Penal Code
The justifiable use of force does not extend to any mechanical
device that is intended to use, or is known to create, a significant
risk of causing death or serious bodily injury.

V.

LAW ENFORCEMENT DEFENSES
A.

Crime Prevention
1. Common Law
a. Original (Now Minority) Approach
The original common law rule, followed today in a few
jurisdictions, is that a police officer or private citizen is
justified in using deadly force upon another if she reasonably
believes that: (1) the other person is
36
committing any felony; and (2) deadly force is necessary to
prevent commission of the crime. This version of the defense
is controversial because it can authorize use of force grossly
disproportional to the threat caused by the felon.
b. Modern (Majority) Approach
The majority rule differs from the original rule in one critical
way: deadly force is only permitted if the actor reasonably
believes that the other person is about to commit an
“atrocious” felony, i.e., a felony that involves a significant
risk of serious bodily harm to an innocent person. Among the
felonies that are considered atrocious are: murder,
manslaughter, robbery, arson, rape, and burglary.
2. Model Penal Code
A police officer or private party may not use deadly force to
prevent a felony unless she believes that: (1) there is a
substantial risk that the suspect will cause death or serious bodily
harm to another unless commission or consummation of the
offense is prevented; (2) the force is immediately necessary to
prevent commission of the offense; and (3) use of deadly force
presents no substantial risk of injury to bystanders. As with other
Code justification defenses, the defense is based on the actor’s
subjective belief, subject always to Code provisions that permit

prosecution for reckless or negligent homicide if the actor’s
beliefs were reckless or negligent, as the case may be.
B. Arrest
1. Common Law
a. Rule for Police Officers
A police officer is justified in using deadly force against
another if she reasonably believes that: (1) the suspect
committed any felony; and (2) such force is necessary to
immediately effectuate the arrest. As discussed below, this
rule is now subject to constitutional limitation.
b. Special Problem of “Citizen Arrests”
Common law jurists were hesitant to permit private citizens
to use deadly force in “citizen arrests.” Therefore, although
the rules vary considerably by jurisdiction, limitations on the
use of deadly force by private parties are common. These
may include: (i) limitation of the use of deadly force to
atrocious felonies; (ii) a requirement that the private person
give notice of her intention to make the arrest; and (iii) denial
of the defense if the suspect in fact did not commit the felony,
even if the private party reasonably believed that she did.
2. Model Penal Code
Deadly force may never be used by private citizens acting on
their own to make an arrest or to prevent a suspect’s escape.
However, a police officer (or private citizen assisting the officer)
may use deadly force to effectuate an arrest if she believes that:
(1) the force can be applied at no risk to innocent bystanders; (2)
such force is immediately necessary to make the
37
arrest; and either (3a) the felony for which the person is being
arrested included the use or threatened use of deadly force; or

(3b) a substantial risk exists that the suspect will cause serious
bodily harm to another if she is not apprehended immediately.
C.

Constitutional Law
1. Overview
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution
prohibits “unreasonable searches and seizures” by government
officers, including by the police. In turn, an arrest of a person
constitutes a “seizure” of that individual. So, police use of force
to effectuate an arrest—and, thus, “seize” the person—must be
performed in a constitutionally reasonable manner.
2. Tennessee v. Garner
In Tennessee v. Garner (1985), the Supreme Court’s first
decision on the subject, the Court held that it is unconstitutional
for a police officer to use deadly force against an escaping felon
unless: (1) the officer has “probable cause to believe that the
suspect poses a significant threat of death or serious physical
injury to the officer or others” if the suspect is able to escape; (2)
the officer first warns the suspect of her intention to use deadly
force (“Stop or I’ll shoot!”), unless such a warning would be
futile; and (3) the officer reasonably believes that deadly force is
necessary to make the arrest or prevent escape. Thus, deadly
force may not be used against, for example, a fleeing unarmed
thief.
3. Beyond Garner
a. Non-Deadly Force
In Graham v. Connor (1989), the Court held “that all claims
that law enforcement officers have used excessive force—
deadly or not—in the course of an arrest, should be analyzed
under the Fourth Amendment … ‘reasonableness’ standard.”
Among the relevant factors to be considered, the Court stated,
are the seriousness of the crime, the extent to which the
suspect poses an immediate threat to the safety of others, and

the extent to which the suspect is resisting arrest or
attempting to escape.
b. Deadly Force, Post-Garner
In Scott v. Harris (2007), the Supreme Court returned to the
issue of use of deadly force in arrest situations, and suggested
that there is no rigid rule for determining when police use of
force constitutes an unreasonable seizure of a felon: “In the
end we must still slosh through the factbound morass of
‘reasonableness.’ ” Among the factors to consider are those
set out above, as well as the “relative culpability” of the
persons whose lives are put at risk.
38
VI.

NECESSITY
A.

Common Law
1. Elements of the Defense
a. Lesser-Evils Analysis
The actor must be faced with a choice of evils or harms, and
he must choose to commit the lesser of the evils. Put
differently, the harm that D seeks to prevent by his conduct
must be greater than the harm he reasonably expects to cause
by his conduct. The balancing of the harms is conducted by
the judge or jury; the defendant’s belief that he is acting
properly is not in itself sufficient.
b. Imminency of Harm
The actor must be seeking to avoid imminent harm. This rule
is strictly enforced: if there is sufficient time to seek a lawful
avenue, the actor must take that lawful route.
c. Causal Element
The actor must reasonably believe that his actions will abate
the threatened harm.

d. Blamelessness of the Actor
Many courts and/or statutes provide that the actor must not be
at fault in creating the necessity.
2. Homicide Prosecutions
It is unclear whether the defense of necessity applies to the crime
of murder, although there is substantial support for the
understanding that the defense does not apply to the killing of an
innocent person. Fortunately, the issue has only rarely arisen.
The leading case—and the one most likely to be in your
casebook—is Regina v. Dudley and Stephens. Read the Main
Outline for discussion of this case.
B.

Model Penal Code
1. Elements
A person is justified in committing an act that otherwise would
constitute an offense if: (a) the actor believes that the conduct is
necessary to avoid harm to himself or another; (b) the harm that
the actor seeks to avoid is greater than that sought to be avoided
by the law prohibiting his conduct; and (c) there does not plainly
exist any legislative intent to exclude the justification claimed by
the actor. If the actor was reckless or negligent in bringing about
the emergency, the defense is unavailable in a prosecution for
any offense for which recklessness or negligence, as the case
may be, is sufficient to prove guilt.
39
2. Comparison to Common Law
Under the Code, the threatened harm need not be imminent.
Moreover, the Commentary to the Code expressly states that this
defense is available in homicide prosecutions.

PART

SEVEN: DEFENSES
EXCUSES

TO

CRIME:

I.

EXCUSE DEFENSES: GENERALLY
A.

Excuse: Defined
An excuse defense is one that indicates that, although the actor
committed the elements of the offense, and although his actions
were unjustified—wrongful—the law does not blame him for his
wrongful conduct.

B.

Justification Versus Excuse
A justification defense tends to focus on the wrongfulness of an act
or a result; an excuse defense focuses on the actor. The distinction
between the two categories of defenses—justifications and excuses
—is an important one, more fully laid out in the Main Outline.

II.

DURESS
A.

Rationale of the Defense: Justification or Excuse?
1. Duress as a Justification Defense
A few courts and treatises treat duress as if it were sub-species of
the necessity defense and, thus, as a justification defense.
According to this view, the only meaningful difference between
necessity and duress is that the former defense involves natural,
i.e., non-human, pressures, whereas duress involves humanbased threats (e.g., a terrorist demanding an innocent person to
commit a crime against other innocent persons; a criminal
forcing an innocent person to rob a bank).
2. Duress as an Excuse Defense
Most courts and treatises treat duress as an excuse defense, and
not as a justification defense. Intuitively, most people believe
that a coerced person (based on the definition of duress
discussed below) is morally blameless, but not that she has done
nothing wrong. The essence of the duress defense is that a
person is not to blame for her conduct if, because of an unlawful
threat, she lacks a fair opportunity to conform her conduct to the
law.

B.

Common Law
1. Elements of Defense
Generally speaking, a defendant will be acquitted of an offense
other than murder on the basis of duress if she proves that she
committed the offense because: (a) another person unlawfully
threatened imminently to kill or grievously injure her or another
person unless she committed the crime;
40
and (b) she is not at fault in exposing herself to the threat. See
the Main Outline for more details.
2. Coerced Homicides
The common law duress defense does not apply to the offense of
murder. The no-defense rule is sometimes defended on the
utilitarian ground that the drive for self-preservation, although
strong, is not irresistible; therefore, people should be persuaded
(by the threat of punishment) to resist such coercion. The rule is
also defended on the moral ground that it is better to die than to
kill an innocent person. However, this latter argument only
serves to show that a person is not justified in killing an innocent
person. It does not explain why a coerced actor should not be
excused on the ground that virtually anyone, short of a saintly
hero, would succumb to the coercion.
3. Intolerable Prison Conditions
a. The Issue
Suppose a prisoner is threatened by another inmate with
sexual or physical assault, is denied critical medical care by
prison officials, or is placed in some other intolerable
condition. Therefore, the inmate escapes confinement, but is
caught and returned to prison. She is now prosecuted for the
offense of prison escape. The inmate wishes to avoid
conviction for escape by arguing that she fled as a result of

the intolerable prison condition. The frequently litigated issue
is whether the inmate may make such a claim in court; and, if
she may, is her claim one of necessity (justification) or excuse
(duress)?
b. The Law
Originally, courts did not permit inmates to raise prison
conditions as a defense to their escape. Today most courts
recognize a limited defense. Some courts require the escapee
to turn herself in after the escape, once the prison condition
“has lost its coercive force,” or else the defense is
automatically lost. Other courts are more lenient and treat’s
an escapee’s failure to turn herself in as just one factor to be
considered by the jury in determining whether the escapee
should be acquitted.
c. Nature of the Defense
Courts are fairly evenly divided on the question of whether
the defense claim is basically one of duress or necessity. See
the Main Outline to understand the conceptual problems in
deciding whether these cases fall under duress or necessity,
and to appreciate the practical significance of this issue.
C.

Model Penal Code
1. Defense
The Model Penal Code unambiguously treats duress as an
excuse, and not a justification, defense. Thus, the defense may
be raised although the defendant did not commit the lesser of
two evils. Instead, the defendant
41
must show that: (a) he committed an offense because he was
coerced to do so by another person’s use, or threat to use,
unlawful force against him or a third party; and (b) a person of
reasonable firmness would have committed the offense. The
Code further provides that the defense is lost if the coerced actor

put himself in a situation “in which it was probable that he
would be subjected to duress.” Furthermore, if he was negligent
in placing himself in the situation, the defense is unavailable if
he is prosecuted for an offense for which negligence is sufficient
to prove guilt.
2. Coerced Homicides
Unlike the common law, there is no bar to use of the duress
defense in murder prosecutions. See the Main Outline for details
of the other distinctions between the common law and MPC
versions of the defense of duress.
III. INTOXICATION
A.

Common Law: Voluntary Intoxication
1. Definition of “Intoxication”
Intoxication may be defined as a disturbance of an actor’s mental
or physical capacities resulting from the ingestion of any foreign
substance, most notably alcohol or drugs, including lawfully
prescribed medication.
2. Not an Excuse Defense
A person is never excused for his criminal conduct on the ground
that he became voluntarily intoxicated. Indeed, the act of getting
intoxicated enhances, rather than mitigates, culpability.
3. Mens Rea Defense
Although voluntary intoxication is not an excuse for criminal
conduct, most jurisdictions following the common law provide
that a person is not guilty of a specific-intent offense if, as the
result of voluntary intoxication, he lacked the capacity or
otherwise did not form the specific intent required for the crime.
However, voluntary intoxication does not exculpate for generalintent offenses.
4. “Temporary” Insanity

A defendant is not entitled to argue that, due to voluntary
intoxication, he did not know right from wrong, or did not know
what he was doing, at the time of the offense, even though such a
mental state would result in acquittal on insanity grounds if he
suffered from a mental illness.
5. “Fixed” Insanity
Long-term use of alcohol or drugs can cause brain damage or
cause the individual to suffer from chronic mental illness. In
such circumstances, the defendant who seeks acquittal is not
claiming he should be exculpated because he was voluntarily
intoxicated at the time of the crime, but rather that, because of
long-term use of intoxicants, he is insane. Such a claim is
recognized by the common law, but the applicable defense is
insanity, and not intoxication.
42
B.

Model Penal Code: “Self-Induced” (Voluntary) Intoxication
Subject to one exception, voluntary intoxication is a defense to any
crime if it negates an element of the offense.
1. Exception to General Rule
If the defendant is charged with an offense for which
recklessness suffices to convict, she cannot avoid conviction by
proving that, because of intoxication, she was unaware of the
riskiness of her conduct. That is, even if the defendant’s actual
culpability is that of negligence—she should have been aware
that her conduct created a substantial and unjustifiable risk of
harm—she may be convicted of an offense requiring
recklessness (which ordinarily requires actual awareness of the
risk), if the reason for her failure to perceive the risk is her selfinduced intoxication.

C.

Involuntary Intoxication
1. What Makes Intoxication Involuntary?

Intoxication is involuntary if any of the following occurs: (a)
coercion: the actor is forced to ingest the intoxicant; (b) mistake:
the actor innocently ingests an intoxicant; (c) prescribed
medication: the actor becomes unexpectedly intoxicated from
ingestion of a medically prescribed drug, perhaps due to an
allergic reaction; or (d) pathological intoxication: the actor’s
intoxication is “grossly excessive in degree, given the amount of
intoxicant, to which the actor does not know he is susceptible.”
2. When Does Involuntary Intoxication Exculpate?
a. Lack of Mens Rea
The defendant will be acquitted if, as a result of involuntary
intoxication, the actor lacks the requisite mental state of the
offense for which she was charged, whether the offense could
be denominated as specific-intent or general-intent. This is
the common law and MPC rule.
b. “Temporary Insanity”
Unlike the rule with voluntary intoxication, a defendant will
be exculpated on the ground of “temporary insanity” if, due
to involuntary intoxication rather than mental illness, she
otherwise satisfies the jurisdiction’s insanity test (e.g., she did
not know right from wrong, or did not understand what she
was doing, because of involuntary intoxication). This is the
common law and Model Penal Code rule.
IV. INSANITY
A.

Rationale of Defense
1. Utilitarian Argument
A person who suffers from a severe cognitive or volitional
disorder, i.e., a disorder that undermines the actor’s ability to
perceive reality (cognition) or to control her conduct (volition),
is undeterrable by the threat of
43

punishment. Therefore, punishment is inefficacious. See the
Main Outline for counter-arguments.
2. Retributive Argument
The insanity defense distinguishes the mad from the bad; it
separates those whom we consider evil from those whom we
consider sick. A person is not a moral agent, and thus is not
fairly subject to moral condemnation, if she lacked the capacity
to make a rational choice to violate the law or if she lacks the
capacity to control her conduct.
B. The M’Naghten Test of Insanity
1. Rule
A person is legally insane if, at the time of the act, he was
laboring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind,
as: (1) not to know the nature and quality of the act he was
doing; or, (2), if he did know it, that he did not know what he
was doing was wrong. See the Main Outline for criticisms of the
M’Naghten test.
2. Clarification of the Rule
a. “Know” Versus “Appreciate”
Although the M’Naghten test originally was phrased in terms
of whether the defendant “knew” the nature and quality of his
action or “knew” right from wrong, many jurisdictions now
use the word “appreciate.” “Appreciate” is a word intended to
convey a deeper, or broader, sense of understanding than
simple “knowledge.” See the Main Outline for clarification.
b. “Right/Wrong” Prong
Courts have split fairly evenly on whether this prong refers to
legal or moral wrongfulness. In jurisdictions that use the
“moral wrong” test, the relevant issue is not whether the
defendant believed that his act was morally right, but rather

whether he knew (or appreciated) that society considered his
actions morally wrong.
C. The “Irresistible Impulse” (“Control”) Test of Insanity
1. Rule
In general, this supplement to M’Naghten provides that a person
is insane if, as the result of mental illness or defect, she “acted
with an irresistible and uncontrollable impulse,” or if she “lost
the power to choose between … right and wrong, and to avoid
doing the act in question, as that [her] free agency was at the
time destroyed.” See the Main Outline for criticisms of the test.
D. The “Product” (Durham) Test of Insanity
1. Rule
A person is excused if his unlawful act was the product of a
mental disease or defect. As subsequently defined, “mental
disease or defect” is “any abnormal condition of the mind which
substantially affects mental or
44
emotional processes and substantially impairs behavior
controls.” Thus, to be acquitted according to this rule, two
matters must be proved: the defendant suffered from a mental
disease or defect at the time of the crime; and, but for the mental
disease or defect, he would not have committed the crime. See
the Main Outline for criticisms of the test.
E.

Model Penal Code Test of Insanity
1. Rule
The MPC test represents a broadened version of the M’Naghten
and irresistible impulse tests. With modifications, it retains the
second prong of M’Naghten and adds the volitional prong. The
Code provides that a person is not responsible for her conduct if,
at the time of the criminal act, as the result of a mental disease or

defect (a term left undefined), she lacked the substantial capacity
either: (1) to appreciate the criminality (or, in the alternative,
wrongfulness) of her actions; or (2) to conform her conduct to
the dictates of the law.
2. Closer Analysis
a. Avoiding All-or-Nothing Judgments
Both MPC prongs are modified by the phrase “lacks
substantial capacity.” Total cognitive or volitional incapacity
is not required.
b. Cognitive Prong
First, the Code uses the word “appreciate” rather than
M’Naghten’s “know,” to permit a deeper, fuller analysis of
the individual’s cognitive capacity. Second, the drafters chose
not to decide between “legal wrong” and “moral wrong”: they
invited legislators, in adopting the Code provision, to choose
between the words “criminality” (legal wrong) and
“wrongfulness” (moral wrong).
c. Volitional Prong
This prong is phrased to avoid the undesirable or potentially
misleading words “irresistible” and “impulse.” A person who
has a very strong, but not irresistible, desire to commit a
crime, including one who acts non-impulsively after
considerable thought, can fall within the language of the
MPC.
V.

DIMINISHED CAPACITY
A.

Putting “Diminished Capacity” in Context
1. Mens Rea Version
A defendant may potentially raise a claim of “diminished
capacity” in order to show that he lacked the requisite mens rea
for an offense. In that manner, “diminished capacity” works like
mistake-of-fact or voluntary intoxication—it does not excuse the

wrongdoer, but serves to show that the prosecutor has failed to
prove an essential element of an offense.
45
2. Partial Responsibility Version
“Diminished capacity” may also serve as a highly controversial
excuse defense, used exclusively in criminal homicide
prosecutions, as a basis for reducing the severity of the offense.
B.

Diminished Capacity and Mens Rea
A sane person may suffer from a mental disability (e.g., mental
illness, mental retardation, Alzheimer’s) that arguably prevents him
from forming the mental state required for the commission of an
offense.
1. Model Penal Code Approach
As a matter of logic, a defendant should be acquitted of any
offense for which he lacked the requisite mens rea, including
those cases in which he lacked the mental state because of a
mental disability, whether that disability is permanent or
temporary. This is the position taken by the Model Penal Code.
2. Common Law
Logic notwithstanding, most states permit evidence of an
abnormal mental condition, if at all, in order to negate the
specific intent in a specific-intent offense. Psychiatric evidence is
inadmissible in the prosecution of general-intent offenses. A
minority of jurisdictions do not permit diminished capacity to be
claimed in any case. See the Main Outline for the reasons for
judicial hostility to the doctrine of diminished capacity.

C.

Partial Responsibility
1. Common Law
In this country, the partial defense was originated in California
and adopted by a small number of other courts. This rule, no

longer followed in California, provides that a person who
commits a criminal homicide and suffers from some mental
illness or abnormality short of insanity may have her offense
reduced because of her diminished mental capacity. States that
recognize the partial-responsibility claim permit reduction of the
offense from first-degree to second-degree murder, or from
murder to manslaughter. The underlying rationale of the partial
responsibility doctrine is that a person who does not meet a
jurisdiction’s definition of insanity, but who suffers from a
mental abnormality, is less deserving of punishment than a killer
who acts with a normal state of mind. Therefore, she should be
convicted of a lesser offense.
2. Model Penal Code
The Code provides that a homicide that would otherwise be
murder is reduced to manslaughter if the homicide was the result
of “extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which there is a
reasonable explanation or excuse.” This language is intended to
permit courts to recognize a partial responsibility defense.
46
VI.

ENTRAPMENT
A.

Overview
Entrapment issues arise when law enforcement agencies use
undercover police officers to investigate crimes. The issue is how
far the police may go in such undercover activity. Over time, two
different approaches have developed, one called the “subjective”
approach, which is followed in federal courts and many state courts;
the other is the “objective” approach followed by some states.

B.

Subjective Test
1. Test
Entrapment is proved if a government agent implants in the mind
of an innocent person the disposition to commit the alleged

offense and induces its commission in order that the government
may prosecute. The defense does not apply if a private party,
rather than a government agent, induces the crime. According to
the Supreme Court, the police may employ “artifice and
stratagem” to trap an unwary criminal, but it is improper when a
criminal design, originating with the government, is used to
induce an innocent person.
a. Predisposition of the Defendant
Applying the subjective test, entrapment does not occur if the
government agent induces a “predisposed” person to commit
the offense. A person is criminally “predisposed,” if, when he
is first approached by the government, he is ready and willing
to commit the type of crime charged if a favorable
opportunity to do so presents itself.
2. Rationale of the Subjective Test
The Supreme Court justifies the subjective version of entrapment
on the ground that Congress did not intend its criminal sanctions
to be applied to innocent persons induced by government
officials to commit criminal offenses. See the Main Outline for
the criticisms of the subjective test.
C.

“Objective” Test
1. Test
In states that apply this standard, the test generally seeks to
determine whether “the police conduct falls below standards, to
which common feelings respond for the proper use of
government power.” Some states provide that entrapment only
exists if the police conduct is sufficiently egregious that it would
induce an ordinary law-abiding individual to commit the offense.
2. Rationale of the Objective Test
First, the defense should be used to deter police overreaching.
Second, some argue that a court should protect “the purity of its
own temple” by making sure that guilt is not proved by ignoble

means. See the Main Outline for the criticisms of the objective
test.
47
D.

Procedural Aspects of “Entrapment”
Although entrapment is a criminal law defense, some jurisdictions
(primarily those that apply the objective test) permit the defendant
to raise the defense in a pre-trial hearing before a judge. If the judge
determines that the defendant was entrapped, the prosecution is
barred. No trial is held. In most jurisdictions, entrapment is treated
like all other defenses: the defendant has the burden to raise the
entrapment defense and present evidence in support of the claim at
trial. If the factfinder determines that the defendant was entrapped,
it brings back a not-guilty verdict.

E.

Entrapment and the Due Process Clause
Although entrapment is not a constitutional doctrine, the Supreme
Court has stated in dictum that police conduct could become so
outrageous as to violate the Due Process Clause of the United States
Constitution. More than once, however, the Court has refused to
find a due process violation in entrapment-like circumstances.

PART EIGHT: INCHOATE CONDUCT
I. ATTEMPT
A.

Common Law
1. General Principles
a. Basic Definition
In general, an attempt occurs when a person, with the intent
to commit a criminal offense, engages in conduct that
constitutes the beginning of the perpetration of, rather than
mere preparation for, the target (i.e., intended) offense.
b. Grading of Offense

A criminal attempt was a common law misdemeanor in
England, regardless of the seriousness of the target offense.
Today, modern statutes provide that an attempt to commit a
felony is a felony, but it is considered a lesser felony that the
target offense.
c. Merger Doctrine
A criminal attempt merges into the target offense, if it is
successfully completed.
2. Actus Reus
There is no single common law test of when an attempt occurs.
Typically, the common law tests focus on how close the actor is
to completing the target offense. See the Main Outline for
examples of each test.
a. Last Act Test
The rule used to be that a criminal attempt only occurred
when a person performed all of the acts that she believed
were necessary to
48
commit the target offense. Today, there is general agreement
that an attempt occurs at least by the time of the last act, but
no jurisdiction requires that it reach this stage on all
occasions.
b. Dangerous Proximity Test
Oliver Wendell Holmes announced the “dangerous proximity
to success” test. This standard is not satisfied unless the
conduct “is so near to the result that the danger of success is
very great.” In this regard, courts consider three factors: the
nearness of the danger; the substantiality of the harm; and the
degree of societal apprehension felt as the result of the
defendant’s conduct. The more serious the offense, the less

close the actor must come to completing the offense to be
convicted of attempt.
c. Physical Proximity Test
To be guilty of attempt under this test, an act “must go so far
that it would result, or apparently result in the actual
commission of the crime it was designed to effect, if not
extrinsically hindered or frustrated by extraneous
circumstances.” Or, stated differently, the actor’s conduct
must approach sufficiently near to the completed offense “to
stand either as the first or some subsequent step in a direct
movement toward the commission of the offense after the
preparations are made.”
d. “Unequivocality”/“Res Ipsa Loquitur” Test
This test provides that a person is not guilty of a criminal
attempt until her conduct ceases to be equivocal, i.e., her
conduct, standing alone, demonstrates her criminal intent.
e. Probable Desistance Test
A person is guilty of attempt if she has proceeded past “the
point of no return,” i.e., the point past which an ordinary
person is likely to abandon her criminal endeavor.
3. Mens Rea
a. Dual Intent
A criminal attempt involves two “intents.” First, the actor
must intentionally commit the acts that constitute the actus
reus of an attempt, as discussed above. Second, the actor
must commit the actus reus of an attempt with the specific
intent to commit the target offense.
b. Comparing Mens Rea of Attempt to Target Offense
An attempt sometimes requires a higher level of mens rea
than is necessary to commit the target offense. Second,
“attempt” is a specific-intent offense, even if the target crime
is general-intent.

c. Special Problem: Attendant Circumstances
At common law, it is unclear what mens rea, if any, an actor
must possess regarding an attendant circumstance to be guilty
of attempt.
49
Some courts hold that a person may only be convicted of a
criminal attempt if he is at least reckless with regard to an
attendant circumstance. Other courts believe that it is
sufficient that the actor is as culpable regarding an attendant
circumstance as is required for that element of the target
crime. See the Main Outline for clarification.
4. Special Defense: Impossibility
a. General Rule
The common law distinguished between “factual” and “legal”
impossibility. Legal impossibility was a defense to an
attempt; factual impossibility was not.
b. Factual Impossibility
Factual impossibility, which is not a defense, may be defined
as occurring when an actor’s intended end constitutes a crime,
but he fails to complete the offense because of a factual
circumstance unknown to him or beyond his control. One
way to phrase this is: if the facts had been as the defendant
believed them to be, would his conduct have constituted a
crime? If yes, then this is a case of factual impossibility.
c. Legal Impossibility
There are two varieties of “legal impossibility.”
i.

Pure Legal Impossibility
This form of impossibility applies when an actor engages
in lawful conduct that she incorrectly believes constitutes
a crime. See the Main Outline for examples.

ii. Hybrid Legal Impossibility
The more typical case of legal impossibility occurs when
an actor’s goal is illegal (this distinguishes it from pure
legal impossibility), but commission of the offense is
impossible due to a mistake by the actor regarding the
legal status of some factual circumstance relevant to her
conduct. See the Main Outline for examples. This is a
very difficult concept.
B.

Model Penal Code
1. General Principles
a. Grading of Offense
Unlike the common law and non-MPC statutes, the MPC
generally treats inchoate offenses as offenses of the same
degree, and thus subject to the same punishment, as the target
offense. The one exception is that, for a felony characterized
as a “felony of the first degree” under the Code—basically, an
offense that carries a maximum punishment of life
imprisonment—an attempt to commit such an offense is a
felony of the second degree, i.e., a lesser offense.
50
b. Merger
The common law merger doctrine applies as well under the
Code.
2. Actus Reus
The Code abandons all of the common law tests described above
and replaces them with a substantial step standard. Specifically,
one has gone far enough to constitute an attempt if the act or
omission constitutes a substantial step in the course of conduct
planned to culminate in the commission of the crime. One
significant difference between the substantial step test and the
various common law standards is that, in general, the common

law looked to see how close the defendant was to completing the
crime, whereas the MPC looks to see how far the defendant’s
conduct has proceeded from the point of initiation of the target
offense.
3. Mens Rea
Please see the Main Outline for clarification of certain inartfully
drafted, but critically important, aspects of the MPC criminal
attempt statute.
a. Rule
The Code uses slightly different language than the common
law, but the analysis is essentially the same. A person is not
guilty of attempt unless he: “purposely engages in conduct
that would constitute the crime”; acts “with the purpose of
causing” or “with the belief that it will cause” the criminal
result; or “purposely does … an act … constituting a
substantial step” in furtherance of the offense. In short,
“purpose” is the mens rea for a criminal attempt.
b. Special Problem: Attendant Circumstances
The “purpose” requirement for an attempt does not apply to
attendant circumstances. As to attendant circumstances, a
person is guilty of an attempt if she “act[s] with the kind of
culpability otherwise required for commission of the [target]
crime.” In short, the actor need only be as culpable regarding
an attendant circumstance as is required for the target offense.
4. Special Defense: Impossibility
The MPC has abandoned the hybrid legal impossibility defense.
Pure legal impossibility remains a defense.
5. Special Defense: Renunciation of Criminal Purpose
The Code (but not the common law) recognizes a defense of
“renunciation of criminal purpose.” A person is not guilty of a
criminal attempt, even if her actions constitute a substantial step
in the commission of an offense, if: (1) she abandons her effort

to commit the crime or prevents it from being committed; and
(2) her conduct manifests a complete and voluntary renunciation
of her criminal purpose. This defense is sometimes described as
the “abandonment” defense.
51
II.

CONSPIRACY
A.

Common Law
1. General Principles
a. Definition
A common law conspiracy is an agreement between two or
more persons to commit an unlawful act or series of unlawful
acts.
b. Grading
At original common law, conspiracy was a misdemeanor.
Today, conspiracy to commit a felony is usually a felony, but
typically is a lesser offense than the target crime.
c. Rationale of the Offense
i.

Preventive Law Enforcement
Like other inchoate offenses, recognition of the offense of
conspiracy provides a basis for the police to arrest people
before they commit another offense.

ii. Special Dangerousness
Group criminality is considered more dangerous than
individual wrongdoing. The thesis is that when people
combine to commit an offense, they are more dangerous
than an individual criminal, because of their combined
resources, strength, and expertise. They are also thought
to be less likely to abandon their criminal purpose if they
know that other persons are involved.
d. Merger

A common law conspiracy does not merge into the attempted
or completed offense that is the object of the agreement.
2. Actus Reus: Basics
The gist of a conspiracy is the agreement by the parties to
commit an unlawful act or series of unlawful acts together.
a. Overt Act
A common law conspiracy is committed as soon as the
agreement is made. No act in furtherance of it is required.
Today, many statutes provide that a conspiracy does not occur
unless at least one party to the agreement commits an overt
act in furtherance of it. The overt act, however, need not
constitute an attempt to commit the target offense.
b. Method of Forming the Agreement
The conspiratorial agreement need not be in writing, nor even
be verbally expressed. It may be implied from the actions of
the parties.
52
c. Nature of Agreement
The object of the agreement must be unlawful. For purposes
of conspiracy, an “unlawful” act is a morally wrongful act; it
need not be a criminal act.
3. Mens Rea: The Basics
a. General Rule
Conspiracy is a dual-intent offense. First, the parties must
intend to form an agreement (the actus reus of the
conspiracy). Second, they must intend that the object(s) of
their agreement be achieved. This second intent makes
conspiracy a specific-intent offense.
b. Purpose Versus Knowledge
i.

The Issue

An issue that arises in some conspiracy prosecutions is
whether a person may be convicted of conspiracy if, with
knowledge that another person intends to commit an
unlawful act, but with indifference as to whether the
crime is committed, he furnishes an instrumentality for
that offense or provides a service to the other person that
aids in its commission.
ii. Case Law
The law is split on this issue. Most courts, however, will
not convict a person unless he acts with the purpose of
promoting or facilitating the offense. Knowledge, coupled
with indifference as to whether the offense is committed,
is insufficient. But, sometimes one can infer purpose from
knowledge. See the Main Outline for examples.
4. Plurality Requirement
No person is guilty of conspiracy unless two or more persons
possess the requisite mens rea. However, the plurality doctrine
does not require that two persons be prosecuted and convicted of
conspiracy. It is satisfactory that the prosecutor proves beyond a
reasonable doubt that there were two or more persons who
formed the agreement with the requisite mens rea.
5. Parties to an Agreement
Even if it is clear that a conspiracy exists, it is sometimes
difficult to determine who is a party to the conspiracy. The Main
Outline, through examples, discusses so-called “wheel,” “chain,”
and “chain-wheel” conspiracies.
6. Objectives of a Conspiracy
Since the gist of a conspiracy is an agreement, what if the parties
to the agreement intend to commit more than one offense? Is this
one conspiracy or more? Quite simply, there are as many (or as
few) conspiracies as there are agreements made.
53

7. Special Defense: Wharton’s Rule
a. Rule
If a crime by definition requires two or more persons as
willing participants, there can be no conspiracy to commit
that offense if the only parties to the agreement are those who
are necessary to the commission of the underlying offense.
This is Wharton’s Rule, a common law defense to conspiracy.
b. Wharton’s Rule Exceptions
There are two major exceptions: (1) Wharton’s Rule does not
apply if the two conspirators are not the parties necessary to
commission of the offense; and (2) Wharton’s Rule does not
apply if more persons than are necessary to commit the crime
are involved in the agreement to commit the crime. The Main
Outline provides examples.
c. Breakdown of the Rule
Wharton’s Rule is increasingly disliked by courts. The
Supreme Court has stated that in federal courts the doctrine is
no more than a judicially-created rebuttable presumption. If
there is evidence that the legislature intended to reject
Wharton’s Rule, then the doctrine will not be enforced.
8. Special Defense: Legislative-Exemption Rule
A person may not be prosecuted for conspiracy to commit a
crime that is intended to protect that person.
9. Special Defense?: Impossibility
Case law here is particularly thin, but it has been stated that
neither factual impossibility nor legal impossibility is a defense
to a criminal conspiracy.
10. Special Defense?: Abandonment
a. No Defense to Crime of Conspiracy
At common law, the crime of conspiracy is complete as soon
as the agreement is formed by two or more culpable persons.

There is no turning back from that. Once the offense of
conspiracy is complete, abandonment of the criminal plan by
one of the parties is not a defense to the crime of conspiracy.
b. Relevance of Abandonment
Although abandonment, or withdrawal, from a conspiracy is
not a defense to prosecution of the crime of conspiracy, a
person who withdraws from a conspiracy may avoid
conviction for subsequent offenses committed in furtherance
of the conspiracy by other members of the conspiracy, if the
abandoning party communicates his withdrawal to every
other member of the conspiracy (a near impossibility in
many-member conspiracies).
54
B.

Model Penal Code
1. General Principles
a. Definition
The MPC provides that “a person is guilty of conspiracy with
another person or persons to commit a crime” if that person,
“with the purpose of promoting or facilitating” commission
of the crime, “agrees with such other person or persons that
they or one or more of them will engage in conduct that
constitutes such crime or an attempt or solicitation to commit
such crime,” or if that person agrees to aid the other person or
persons in commission of the offense or of an attempt or
solicitation to commit such crime.
b. Grading
A conspiracy to commit any offense other than a felony of the
first degree is graded the same as the crime that is the object
of the conspiracy.
c. Merger

Unlike the common law, a conspirator may not be convicted
of both conspiracy and the target offense(s), unless the
conspiracy involves a continuing course of conduct.
2. Actus Reus: How It Differs from Common Law
a. Overt Act
In contrast to the common law, an overt act is required except
for felonies of the first and second degree.
b. Nature of Agreement
In contrast to the common law, the object of the agreement
must be a crime, and not merely an “unlawful” act.
3. Mens Rea
A person is not guilty of conspiracy unless she acts with the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of the
conduct that constitutes a crime. One who furnishes a service or
instrumentality with mere knowledge of another’s criminal
activities is not guilty of conspiracy.
4. Plurality Rule
The most influential feature of the MPC is its rejection of the
common law plurality requirement. The Code defines the offense
in unilateral terms: “A person is guilty of conspiracy with
another person … [if he] agrees with such other person….” It
takes two people to agree, but it takes only one person to be
guilty of conspiracy.
5. Parties to Agreement
Two aspects of the Code need to be kept in mind in determining
the parties to a conspiracy. First, conspiracy is a unilateral
offense, as discussed above. Second, the MPC provides that if a
person guilty of
55

conspiracy knows that the person with whom he has conspired
has, in turn, conspired with another person or persons to commit
the same crime, the first person is also guilty of conspiring with
the other persons or person, whether or not he knows their
identity. See the Main Outline for a discussion of how these
complicated provisions work to determine whether a person is
party of an existing conspiracy.
6. Objectives of a Conspiracy
The Code provides that there is only one conspiracy between
parties, even if they have multiple criminal objectives, as long as
the multiple objectives are part of the same agreement or of a
“continuous conspiratorial relationship.”
7. Special Defenses
The MPC does not recognize Wharton’s Rule, nor any
impossibility defense.
a. Legislative-Exemption Rule
The Code provides that it is a defense to a charge of
conspiracy “that if the criminal object were achieved, the
actor would not be guilty of a crime under the law defining
the offense or as an accomplice.” The effect of this language
is to permit a defense if enforcement of the conspiracy law
would frustrate a legislative intention to exempt that party
from prosecution.
b. Renunciation of Criminal Purpose
A person is not guilty of conspiracy under the Code if he
renounces his criminal purpose, and then thwarts the success
of the conspiracy “under circumstances manifesting a
complete and voluntary renunciation of his criminal
purpose.”
III. SOLICITATION
A.

General Principles

1. Definition
At common law, a person is guilty of solicitation if she
intentionally invites, requests, commands, or encourages another
person to engage in conduct constituting a felony or a
misdemeanor involving a breach of the peace or obstruction of
justice.
a. Model Penal Code
The Code definition of “solicitation” is broader than the
common law in that it applies to solicitation to commit any
misdemeanor (as well as all felonies).
2. Grading
At common law, a criminal solicitation was a misdemeanor, even
when the offense solicited was a felony. Today, a solicitation to
commit a felony is usually treated as a felony, but of a lesser
degree than the felony solicited.
56
a. Model Penal Code
As with other inchoate offenses, the MPC treats a solicitation
to commit any offense other than a felony of the first degree
as an offense of equal grade as the target offense.
3. Merger
The concept of merger applies to the crime of solicitation, just as
it does to the offense of attempt.
B. Actus Reus
1. General Rule
The actus reus of a solicitation is consummated when the actor
communicates the words or performs the physical act that
constitutes the invitation, request, command, or encouragement
of the other person to commit an offense.

2. Unsuccessful Communications
At common law, a solicitation does not occur unless the words or
conduct of the solicitor are successfully communicated to the
solicited party. In contrast, the Model Penal Code provides that
one who unsuccessfully attempts to communicate a solicitation
is guilty of solicitation.
3. Relationship of Solicitor to Solicited Party
At common law, a person is not guilty of solicitation if she
merely asks another person to assist in the crime, that is, requests
that the other person serve as an accomplice in the crime. To be
guilty, a solicitor must ask the other person to actually perpetrate
the offense herself. In contrast, the MPC provides that a person
is guilty of solicitation if she requests the other person to do
some act that would establish the latter person’s complicity as an
accomplice in the offense.
C. Mens Rea
1. Common Law
Solicitation is a specific-intent offense at common law. The
solicitor must intentionally commit the actus reus (request,
encourage, etc., another to commit the crime) with the specific
intent that the person solicited commit the target offense.
2. Model Penal Code
The Model Penal Code does not deal in concepts of “specific
intent” and “general intent.” However, the analysis is the same: a
person is not guilty of solicitation unless she acts with the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the commission of the
solicited offense.
D.

Defense: Renunciation
The Model Penal Code—but not the common law—provides a
defense to the crime of solicitation if the soliciting party: (1)
completely and voluntarily renounces her criminal intent; and (2)

persuades the solicited party not to commit the offense or otherwise
prevents her from committing the crime.
57
IV. OTHER INCHOATE OFFENSES
A. Assault
1. Common Law Definition
A common law assault is an attempted battery. (A battery is
unlawful application of force to the person of another.) However,
the common law recognized “assault” as an offense before
criminal attempt law developed, so attempt doctrines do not
apply to it. To be guilty of assault, a person must engage in
conduct that is in closer proximity to completion than is
generally required for other attempt offenses.
2. Modern Statutes
Nearly all states have broadened the definition of assault to
include the tort definition of assault: intentionally placing
another person in reasonable apprehension of an imminent
battery.
B.

Inchoate Offenses in Disguise
1. Burglary
Common law burglary involves “breaking and entering the
dwelling house of another at night with the intent to commit a
felony therein.” Thus, burglary only occurs if a person not only
breaks into another person’s dwelling at night, but has the further
specific intention to commit a serious crime inside the dwelling.
The latter felony is inchoate at the time that the actus reus of
burglary (breaking and entering) occurs.
2. Larceny
Common law larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away
of the personal property of another with the intent to steal the

property, i.e. permanently deprive the other of the property. The
ultimate harm of theft comes when the wrongdoer permanently
deprives the person of the property. That harm has not occurred
at the moment when the thief nonconsensually “takes and carries
away” the personal property.

PART NINE: COMPLICITY
I. ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY: COMMON LAW
A.

General Principles
1. General Rule
Subject to substantial clarification below, a person is an
accomplice in the commission of an offense if she intentionally
assists another person to engage in the conduct that constitutes
the offense.
2. Accomplice Liability as Derivative Liability
Accomplice liability is derivative in nature. That is, an
accomplice’s liability derives from the primary party to whom
she provided assistance.
58
The accomplice is ordinarily convicted of the offense committed
by the primary party.
3. Justification for Derivative Liability
Accomplice liability is loosely based on the civil concept of
agency. That is, when a person intentionally assists another
person in the commission of an offense, she manifests thereby
her willingness to be held accountable for the conduct of the
other person, i.e., she allows the perpetrator of the crime to serve
as her agent. Essentially, “your acts are my acts.”
4. Common Law Terminology

There are four common law categories of parties to criminal
offenses.
a. Principal in the First Degree
This is the person who, with the requisite mens rea,
personally commits the offense, or who uses an innocent
human instrumentality to commit it. The “innocent
instrumentality doctrine” provides that a person is a principal
in the first degree if she dupes or coerces an innocent human
being to perform the acts that constitute an offense.
b. Principal in the Second Degree
This is the person who intentionally assists the principal in
the first degree to commit the offense, and who is actually or
constructively present during its commission. A person is
“constructively” present if she is close enough to assist the
principal in the first degree during the crime.
c. Accessory Before the Fact
This is the person who intentionally assists in the commission
of the offense, but who is not actually or constructively
present during its commission.
d. Accessory After the Fact
This is the person who knowingly assists a felon to avoid
arrest, trial, or conviction.
B. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Assistance
A person “assists” in an offense, and thus may be an accomplice in
its commission, if she solicits or encourages another person to
commit the crime, or if she aids in its commission.
1. If No Assistance
A person is not an accomplice unless her conduct in fact assists
in commission of the crime.
2. Trivial Assistance

If a person intentionally aids in the commission of an offense,
she is liable as an accomplice, although her assistance was
trivial. Indeed, an accomplice is liable even if the crime would
have occurred without her assistance, i.e., she is guilty although
her assistance did not cause the
59
commission of the offense. Because any actual assistance, no
matter how trivial, qualifies, a person may be an accomplice
merely by providing psychological encouragement to the
perpetrator.
3. Presence at the Scene
A person who is present at the scene of a crime, even if she is
present in order to aid in commission of the offense, is not an
accomplice unless she in fact assists in the crime. Although
“mere presence” does not constitute assistance, it does not take
much to convert presence into trivial assistance. In some
circumstances, a person’s presence could provide psychological
encouragement to the principal, which is enough to trigger
accomplice liability.
4. Omissions
Although a person is not generally an accomplice if she simply
permits a crime to occur, one may be an accomplice by failing to
act to prevent a crime when she has a duty to so act.
C. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Mens Rea
1. Rule
A person is an accomplice in the commission of an offense if she
possesses two mental states. She must: (1) intentionally engage
in the acts of assistance; and (2) act with the level of culpability
required in the definition of the offense in which she assisted.
2. Crimes of Recklessness or Negligence

The prosecutor does not have to prove that the accomplice
intended a crime of recklessness to occur: it is enough that she
was reckless in regard to the ensuing harm; as for a crime of
negligence, it is enough to show that the would-be accomplice
was negligent in regard to the ensuring harm.
3. Natural-and-Probable-Consequences Doctrine
An accomplice is guilty not only of the offense she intended to
facilitate or encourage, but also of any reasonably foreseeable
(that is, foreseeable) offense committed by the person whom she
aided. That is, once the prosecutor proves that A was an
accomplice of P in the commission of Crime 1 (using the
analysis discussed so far), A is also responsible for any other
offense committed by P that was a natural and probable
consequence of Crime 1.
D. Accomplice Liability: If the Perpetrator Is Acquitted
1. If No Crime Occurred
If a jury finds that the alleged crime never occurred and,
therefore, acquits the principal in the first degree, it logically
follows that any accomplice must be acquitted as well, as there is
no guilt to derive one cannot be an accomplice to a nonexistent
crime.
60
2. If Perpetrator Is Acquitted on Grounds of a Defense
If a jury acquits the alleged perpetrator of a crime on the ground
that he was justified in his actions, then the accomplice should
also be acquitted, as this means she aided in a justified (proper)
act. But, if the jury acquits the perpetrator on the ground of an
excuse, the jury has determined that a crime has occurred. The
perpetrator’s excuse claim is personal to him, and should not
protect the accomplice.
E.

Perpetrator and Accomplice: Degrees of Guilt

The common law rule used to be that an accessory before the fact
could not be convicted of a more serious offense, or a higher degree
of an offense, than that for which the principal was convicted. This
rule is breaking down. Even in an earlier era, however, most courts
treated criminal homicides differently: on the proper facts, courts
were and are prepared to convict an accomplice of a higher degree
of criminal homicide than the perpetrator.
F.

Special Defense: Legislative-Exemption Rule
A person may not be convicted as an accomplice in her own
victimization.

II.

CONSPIRACY LIABILITY
A. The Pinkerton Doctrine
At common law, a person may be held accountable for the actions of
others either as an accomplice, discussed above, or as a conspirator.
A controversial feature of conspiracy law in many jurisdictions is
the Pinkerton doctrine, named after the Supreme Court ruling in
Pinkerton v. United States. This doctrine provides that a conspirator
is responsible for any crime committed by any other member of the
conspiracy, whether or not he assisted, if the offense falls within the
scope of the conspiracy or a reasonably foreseeable consequence
thereof.

III. MODEL PENAL CODE
A.

Forms of Complicity Liability
1. Innocent-Instrumentality Doctrine
A person is guilty of an offense that she did not personally
commit if, acting with the requisite mens rea, she “causes an
innocent or irresponsible person” to commit the crime. This is
equivalent to the common law innocent-instrumentality rule
discussed earlier.
2. Accomplice Liability

A person is guilty of an offense that she did not personally
commit if she is an accomplice of another person in the
commission of the offense.
3. Pinkerton Rule
The Pinkerton conspiracy doctrine discussed above is not
recognized in the Code.
61
B. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Assistance
1. Rule
To be an accomplice in the commission of an offense, the person
must: (a) solicit the offense; (b) aid, agree to aid, or attempt to
aid in its commission; or (c) fail to make a proper effort to
prevent commission of the offense (assuming that she has a legal
duty to act). See the Main Outline for a comparison of the MPC
to the common law.
C. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Mens Rea
1. Rule
To be an accomplice, the person must act “with the purpose of
promoting or facilitating the commission of the offense.”
2. Exception to the Requirement of Purpose
The MPC handles the issue of accomplice liability for a crime of
recklessness or negligence with the following provision: A
person who is an accomplice in the commission of conduct that
causes a criminal result, is also an accomplice in the result
thereof, if she has the level of culpability regarding the result
required in the definition of the offense. See the Main Outline
for an example of how this provision works.
D. Accomplice Liability: If the Perpetrator Is Acquitted

The Code provides that an accomplice in the commission of an
offense may be convicted of that offense, even if the alleged
perpetrator “has been convicted of a different offense or degree of
offense or … or has been acquitted.” One must be very careful in
reading this provision: if there has been no offense, then one is not
an accomplice “in the commission of the offense.”
E.

Special Defenses
1. Legislative-Exemption Rule
Like the common law, the MPC applies the legislativeexemption rule.
2. Inevitable Incidence
An accomplice is not guilty of an offense if her conduct is an
inevitable incident to the commission of the offense, such as a
customer in the act of prostitution.
3. Abandonment
A person is not an accomplice in the commission of a crime if
she terminates her participation before the crime is committed,
and if she either neutralizes her assistance, gives timely warning
to the police of the impending offense, or in some other manner
prevents commission of the crime.

F.

Special Provision to Consider: Relationship of Accomplice
Liability to Criminal Attempts
The Code goes well beyond the common law by permitting an
accomplice to be convicted of a criminal attempt, if she attempts to
aid in commission of an
62
offense, although the other person never commits or even attempts
to commit the offense.

PART TEN: CRIMINAL HOMICIDE

I.

CRIMINAL HOMICIDE: OVERVIEW
A.

“Homicide”
1. Definition
The English common law defined “homicide” as “the killing of a
human being by a human being.” In American common law, it is
“the killing of a human being by another human being.”
2. “Criminal Homicide”
A criminal homicide is a homicide committed without
justification (e.g., in self-defense) or excuse (e.g., as the result of
insanity).

B.

“Human Being”
1. At the Start of Life
The common law provides that a fetus is not a human being until
it is born alive.
2. At the End of Life
At common law, a person is legally dead (and, therefore, ceases
to be a “human being”) when there is a total stoppage of the
circulation of the blood and a permanent cessation of the
functions of respiration and heart pulsation. Today, virtually
every state provides that a person may be deemed legally dead if
he experiences an irreversible cessation of breathing and
heartbeat (the common law definition), or suffers from “brain
death syndrome,” which occurs when the whole brain (not just
one portion of it) permanently loses the capacity to function.

C. Year-and-a-Day Rule
At common law, a homicide prosecution may only be brought if the
victim dies within one year and a day of the injury inflicted by the
accused. Today, in light of medical advances and life-support
machinery, many states have abolished this rule.
II.

COMMON LAW: MURDER

A.

Definition of “Murder”
Common law murder is a killing of a human being by another
human being with malice aforethought.
1. “Malice”
A person acts with “malice” if she unjustifiably, inexcusably, and
in the absence of any mitigating circumstance, kills a person
with any one of the following four mental states: (a) the intention
to kill a human being; (b)
63
the intention to inflict grievous bodily injury on another; (c) an
extremely reckless disregard for the value of human life (often
called “depraved heart” at common law); or (d) the intention to
commit a felony during the commission or attempted
commission of which a death accidentally occurs (the “felonymurder rule”). The first form of malice (“intent to kill”) is often
called “express malice”; the other three versions of malice are
called “implied malice.” These four categories of malice are
considered below.
2. “Aforethought”
Originally, the term “aforethought” meant that the actor thought
about the killing beforehand, i.e., that he premeditated the
killing. Over time, the term lost significance.

B.

Murder: Intent to Kill
1. General Rule
In view of the definition of “malice aforethought” set out above,
an intentional killing that is unjustifiable (e.g., not committed in
self-defense), inexcusable (e.g., not committed by an insane
person), and unmitigated (e.g., not the result of sudden heat of
passion) constitutes common law murder.
2. Proving Intent

The prosecutor must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
killer purposely or knowingly took another’s life. For a long
time, juries were instructed in murder prosecutions that “the law
presumes that a person intends the natural and probable
consequences of his voluntary acts.” However, this instruction
violates the Due Process Clause of the United States
Constitution, because it improperly shifts the burden of proof
regarding an element of the offense (malice aforethought, via a
finding of intent-to-kill) from the prosecutor to the defendant.
Nonetheless, the jury instruction simply points out the obvious.
Therefore, even without an instruction, a jury may infer (but not
presume) intent in such circumstances.
3.

Statutory Reform: “Wilful, Deliberate, Premeditated”
Formula
In many states that by statute divide murder into degrees, a
“wilful, deliberate, premeditated” killing is first-degree murder.
a. Wilful
In the context of murder statutes, this term means, simply,
“intentional.”
b. Premeditated
To “premeditate” is “to think about beforehand.” Some courts
state that “no time is too short” for a person to premeditate. In
contrast, others courts more properly require proof that the
actor thought about the killing “some appreciable time.”
64
c. Deliberate
Unfortunately, courts often fail to distinguish “premeditation”
from “deliberation”—they treat it as a single entity. When
courts do draw a distinction, as they should, the latter term
means “to measure and evaluate the major facets of a choice
or problem.”

d. What If …
If a jury concludes that the defendant acted wilfully—
intended to kill—but did not premeditate and/or deliberate,
the defendant is guilty of second-degree murder in states with
murder statutes of the sort being considered here. It is murder
because the killing was intentional; since the killing was not
premeditated and/or deliberate, it is not first-degree murder.
So, by matter of elimination, it drops to second-degree.
C.

Murder: Intent to Inflict Grievous Bodily Injury
A person acts with malice aforethought if she intends to inflict
grievous bodily injury on another human being. Therefore, if a
death results from her conduct, she is guilty of murder.
1. “Grievous Bodily Injury”
This term has been variously defined as injury “that imperils
life,” “is likely to be attended with dangerous or fatal
consequences,” or is an injury that “gives rise to the
apprehension of danger to life, health, or limb.”
2. Statutory Approach
In states that distinguish between degrees of murder, one who
kills another person with this state of mind is usually guilty of
second-degree murder.

D.

Murder: “Depraved Heart” (Extreme Recklessness)
1. General Rule
A person who acts with what the common law colorfully
described as a “depraved heart” or an “abandoned and malignant
heart” is one who acts with malice aforethought. If a person dies
as a result of such conduct, the actor is guilty of murder,
although the death was unintended.
2. What Is “Depraved Heart”/“Extreme Recklessness”?

Common law judges did not provide a clear definition of
“depraved heart” or “abandoned and malignant heart” behavior.
In general terms, it is conduct that manifests an extreme
indifference to the value of human life. Although no single
definition of such extreme indifference can explain all of the
common law decisions, today most courts would probably agree
that an actor manifests an extreme indifference to the value of
human life if he consciously takes a substantial and unjustifiable
foreseeable risk of causing human death. In short, “depraved
heart” equals “extreme recklessness.”
65
3. Statutory Approach
In states that divide murder into degrees pursuant to the
traditional model, a depraved-heart homicide ordinarily is
second-degree murder.
E.

Felony-Murder Rule
1. General Rule
At common law, a person is guilty of murder if she kills another
person, even accidentally, during the commission or attempted
commission of any felony.
a. Statutory Approach
Many states that divide murder into degrees have a dual
approach to felony-murder. The murder statute will often
provide that a killing that occurs during the commission of
certain specifically listed felonies (most commonly: arson,
robbery, rape, and burglary) is first-degree murder; a death
during the commission of any non-listed felony constitutes
murder of the second-degree.
2. Rationale of the Rule
The most plausible deterrence argument—the one that is used
most often to defend felony-murder—is that the harshness of the

rule will cause felons to commit their crimes in a less dangerous
manner, thereby decreasing the risk that deaths will ensue.
3. Limitations on Felony-Murder Rule
Because the felony-murder rule is unpopular, many courts have
limited its scope.
a. Inherently-Dangerous-Felony Limitation
Many states limit the felony-murder rule to killings that arise
during the commission of “inherently dangerous” felonies.
Courts disagree, however, on how to determine whether a
felony is inherently dangerous. Some courts consider the
felony in the abstract: they look at the definition of the crime
and ask whether the offense could be committed without
creating a substantial risk of loss of life. Other courts consider
a felony inherently dangerous if it is dangerous in the abstract
or in light of the circumstances surrounding the particular
case. See the Main Outline for examples of each approach.
b. Independent-Felony Limitation
Some courts require that the felony that serves as the
predicate for the felony-murder rule be “independent” of the
homicide. A felony that is not independent “merges” with the
homicide. The most obvious and least controversial example
of a felony that merges is assault with a deadly weapon.
i.

The Difficult Cases
Many violent offenses include assaultive conduct. For
example, armed robbery basically consists of the offense
of larceny +
66
assault with a deadly weapon; rape involves assaultive
conduct; etc. In order that the “independent
felony/merger” limitation does not entirely eat up the
felony-murder rule, courts have followed either of two

approaches: some only apply the merger principle to
crimes of assault; some courts define a felony as
independent—thus, a felony that will support the felonymurder rule, even if it is assaultive—if it involves an
“independent felonious purpose.” See the Main Outline
for examples.
c. Res Gestae Limitation
Many courts provide that the mere fact that a death occurs, in
a temporal sense, “during” the commission of a felony, is
insufficient to trigger the felony-murder rule. There must also
be a causal connection between the felony and the death.
However, a death that occurs after the felony is committed,
but during the escape from the site of the crime, falls within
the “res gestae” of the felony.
d. Killing by a Non-Felon
Some jurisdictions provide that the felony-murder rule does
not apply if the person who commits the homicide is a nonfelon resisting the felony.
i.

Judicial Approach to Issue
Many courts apply the “agency” theory of felony-murder.
That is, a felon is only responsible for homicides
committed in furtherance of the felony, thus by a person
acting as the felon’s “agent.” Therefore, a homicide
committed by a police officer, the victim of the felony, or
a bystander, falls outside the felony-murder rule. After
all, they are antagonists of the felon, not his agent. In
contrast, some court apply a “proximate causation” rule,
which holds that a felon may be held responsible for a
homicide perpetrated by a non-felon if the felon
proximately caused the shooting. See the Main Outline
for example of this difficult concept.

III. COMMON LAW: MANSLAUGHTER
A.

Manslaughter: General Principles

1. Definition of “Manslaughter”
Common law manslaughter is an unlawful killing of a human
being by another human being without malice aforethought.
2. Categories of Manslaughter
The common law recognized two type of manslaughter,
“voluntary” and “involuntary.” Once punished alike, today
voluntary manslaughter is the more serious offense.
67
B. Voluntary Manslaughter: Provocation (“Heat-of-Passion”)
1. General Rule
An intentional, unjustified, inexcusable killing, which ordinarily
is murder, constitutes manslaughter (or “voluntary
manslaughter”) if it is committed in sudden heat of passion, as
the result of adequate provocation. Thus, the provocation
doctrine functions as a full defense to murder, and as a partial
defense overall (as the defendant is guilty of manslaughter).
2. Rationale of the Provocation Doctrine
Courts and commentators disagree regarding why an intentional
killing in heat of passion is reduced to manslaughter.
a. Partial Justification
Currently the minority view, some courts in the past seemed
to believe—and some scholars have expressly argued—that
the provocation doctrine functions as a partial justification for
a killing, i.e., that the death of the provoker-victim constitutes
less of a social harm than the killing of an entirely “innocent”
person.
b. Partial Excuse
Most commentators today now characterize the defense as a
partial excuse, as a concession to normal human frailty: the
social harm is unmitigated, but the culpability of the actor is

reduced because of the provocation. Why is this so? If the
provocation is serious enough (what the common law calls
“adequate provocation”), “we are prepared to say that an
ordinary person in the actor’s circumstances, even an
ordinarily law-abiding person …, might become sufficiently
upset by the provocation to experience substantial impairment
of his capacity for self-control and, as a consequence, to act
violently.” See the Main Outline for discussion of criticisms
of the provocation defense.
3. Elements of the Defense
a. Adequate Provocation
A person may not claim the defense simply because he was
provoked. The provocation must be such that it might
“inflame the passion of a reasonable man and tend to cause
him to act for the moment from passion rather than reason.”
Or, the provocation must be such that it “might render
ordinary men, of fair average disposition, liable to act rashly
or without due deliberation or reflection, and from passion,
rather than judgment.”
i.

Fixed Categories
At original common law, the judge, rather than the jury,
determined the adequacy of the provocation. Only a few
types of provocation were considered adequate. The most
common were: a serious battery; mutual combat; and
observation by the husband of his wife in an act of
adultery. “Adequate provocation” was not
68
proved if the husband was informed of the adultery but
did not see it. And, a rigid rule existed: words alone, no
matter how insulting, were insufficient grounds for
reducing a homicide to manslaughter.

ii. Modern Trend

Today, most jurisdictions go beyond the limited
categories of “adequate provocation” of the original
common law. The issue is now typically left to juries to
decide whether the alleged provocation would render an
ordinary or reasonable person liable to act rashly.
(However, most jurisdictions continue to hold that words
alone are not adequate provocation for a homicide.) An
increasingly critical legal issue in this context is the
nature of the “reasonable person” or “ordinary person”
mentioned in judicial instructions to juries. See the Main
Outline for discussion.
b. State of Passion
For the provocation doctrine to apply, the defendant must kill
the victim while in a state of passion, not after he has cooled
off. Although the typical “passion” is anger, any overwrought emotional state, including fear, jealousy, or even
deep depression, may qualify.
c. Suddenness
The killing must occur in sudden heat of passion. That is, the
defendant must not have had reasonable time to cool off.
d. Causal Connection
A causal link between the provocation, the passion, and the
fatal act must be proved.
C.

Involuntary Manslaughter: Criminal Negligence
1. General Rule
A person who kills another person in a criminally negligent
manner is guilty of involuntary manslaughter. This offense often
blurs into the depraved-heart version of reckless murder.

D.

Involuntary Manslaughter: Unlawful-Act Doctrine
1. General Rule

In an analogue to the felony-murder rule, a person is guilty of
involuntary manslaughter if she kills another person during the
commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act that
does not otherwise trigger the felony-murder rule.
2. Scope of the Rule
a. Broad Version
Some states apply the doctrine to all misdemeanors, as well
as to any felony that is excluded from the felony-murder rule
due to a limitation on the felony-murder rule. A few
jurisdictions go so far as
69
to apply the doctrine if the conduct that causes the death is
wrongful (immoral), albeit not illegal.
b. Limitations
Some jurisdictions limit the rule to mala in se misdemeanors,
such as petty theft, or to “dangerous” misdemeanors, i.e.,
offenses entailing “a reasonably foreseeable risk of
appreciable physical injury.”
IV. MODEL PENAL CODE
A.

Criminal Homicide: Overview
The MPC provides that a person is guilty of criminal homicide if
she takes the life of another human being purposely, knowingly,
recklessly, or negligently. Unlike the common law, the Code divides
criminal homicide into three, rather than two, offenses: murder,
manslaughter, and negligent homicide.

B.

Murder
1. Rule
In general, a homicide constitutes murder if the killing is
committed: (a) purposely; (b) knowingly; or (c) “recklessly
under circumstances manifesting an extreme indifference to the

value of human life.” Unlike many modern statutes, the MPC
does not divide murder into degrees.
2. Common Law Versus MPC
a. Types of Murder
The common law term “malice aforethought” is abandoned.
What about the underlying concept of malice aforethought?
Consider the four common law forms:
i.

Intent to Kill
This form is recognized under the MPC: as noted above,
a criminal homicide is murder under the Code if the
killing is committed purposely or knowingly. In essence,
this is equivalent to the common law “intent to kill” form
of mens rea.

ii. Intent to Commit Grievous Bodily Injury
Virtually any case that would qualify as common law
murder according to this form of malice, will fit under the
MPC “extreme recklessness” umbrella.
iii. Depraved Heart
The MPC extreme recklessness provision is similar to the
depraved heart form of common law murder, except that
it is explicit in requiring proof of advertent risk-taking,
and that the risk-taking be “substantial and unjustifiable.”
iv. Felony-Murder
The Code abandons the felony-murder rule. As a
compromise, the Code provides that reckless indifference
to human life may
70
be presumed if the person causes the death during
commission of one of the felonies enumerated in the
Code (robbery, arson, burglary, kidnapping, felonious

escape, or rape or deviate sexual intercourse by force or
threat of force). This presumption is rebuttable.
C.

Manslaughter
Criminal homicide constitutes manslaughter in two circumstances.
1. Recklessness
A homicide committed recklessly constitutes manslaughter. The
difference between reckless manslaughter and reckless murder is
that here the conduct, although reckless, does not manifest an
extreme indifference to human life.
2. Extreme Mental or Emotional Disturbance
The Code recognizes a much broader version of the common law
provocation doctrine, and also allows states to recognize a
“partial responsibility” diminished capacity defense, if they wish
to do so. The Code provides that a murder constitutes
manslaughter if the actor kills under the influence of an “extreme
mental or emotional disturbance” (EMED), for which there is a
“reasonable explanation or excuse.”
a. Comparison to Common Law
i.

Common Law Rigidity/Narrowness Rejected
The EMED provision is wide open: The MPC permits a
jury, if it chooses to do so, to reduce the offense to
manslaughter without considering the rigid common law
categories of adequate provocation; also, “words alone”
can qualify. Indeed, the defense applies even if there is no
provocation at all, as long as the jury concludes that there
is a reasonable explanation or excuse for the actor’s
EMED. There is also no “reasonable cooling off”
requirement.

ii. Mixed Subjectivity and Objectivity
The Code provides that the reasonableness of the
defendant’s explanation or excuse for the EMED should

be determined from the perspective of a person “in the
actor’s situation under the circumstances as he believes
them to be.” This allows for considerable subjectivization
of the objective standard, although the Commentary to
the Code concedes that the words “in the actor’s
situation” are “designedly ambiguous,” so as to permit
common law development of the subjective/objective
issue.
3. What Is “Missing”
There is no “unlawful-act” manslaughter provision under the
MPC. As for criminally negligent homicides, they represent a
reduced offense, discussed immediately below.
71
D.

Negligent Homicide
A criminally negligent killing—involuntary manslaughter at
common law—is the lesser offense of “negligent homicide” under
the Code.

PART ELEVEN: RAPE
I.

COMMON LAW: FORCIBLE RAPE
A.

In General
Blackstone defined rape as “carnal knowledge of a woman forcibly
and against her will.” Today, it is more accurate to characterize this
as forcible rape. Rape is a general-intent offense.
1. Statutory Law
The traditional rape statute is apt to provide that forcible rape is
sexual intercourse by a male, with a female not his wife, by
means of force or threat of force, against her will, and without
her consent.

B. Actus Reus in Detail

1. “Sexual Intercourse by a Male with a Female …”
The common law offense was not complete in the absence of
penetration by a male of the female’s vagina. Nonconsensual
oral and anal sexual penetration constituted the separate offense
of sodomy.
a. Modern Reform Statutes
Many states that have reformed their law have re-named the
offense “sexual assault” or “sexual battery.” These offenses
typically prohibit all forms of forcible sexual penetration, and
not simply vaginal intercourse. They also tend to be genderneutral: male-on-male and female-on-female sexual
penetration is included, as is nonconsensual female-on-male
sexual penetration. Also, some states prohibit “sexual
contact”—undesired contact that does not result in
penetration—as a lesser degree of the offense.
2. “… Not His Wife” (Marital Immunity)
At original common law, a husband was not guilty of personally
raping his own wife. He could be convicted as an accomplice in
the rape of his wife (e.g., he assists X to rape the husband’s
wife), but he could not convicted for personally committing the
crime. See the Main Outline for a critique of this rule.
3. Nonconsent
The essence of rape is the nonconsensual nature of the sexual
intercourse. “Nonconsent” is an element of the crime, rather than
consent being a defense. This means that the prosecutor must
prove nonconsent beyond a reasonable doubt.
72
4. Force
a. General Rule
The crime of forcible rape is not complete simply upon proof
that the intercourse was nonconsensual. It must also be shown

that the male acted forcibly or by threat of physical force.
Nonconsent and force are separate elements.
b. How Much Force
Originally, the prosecutor had to prove that the male used or
threatened substantial force upon the female in order for a
forcible rape prosecution to succeed. In this regard, the
common law developed a resistance requirement. Essentially,
the rule was: if the male uses or threatens to use force likely
to cause death or serious bodily injury to the female, the
female is not required to resist. If the male uses so-called
“moderate” force, the female is required to resist the rapist
“to the utmost,” or “until exhausted or overpowered.”
c. Moving Away from Force
i.

Requiring Less Force
Some states have begun to reshape forcible rape law by
requiring far less proof of force, at least in cases
involving atypical facts. See the Main Outline for an
example.

ii. Changing the Resistance Requirement
A few states have abolished the resistance requirement
outright. Most states, however, still retain the
requirement, but only require “reasonable resistance,”
which leaves it to the jury to determine the sufficiency of
the female’s resistance.
iii. Abandoning the Force Requirement Altogether
One state has gone so far as to hold that the force
inherently involved in the sexual act itself is sufficient
proof of “force” to permit a forcible rape conviction. The
effect of this decision is to make all cases of sexual
intercourse “forcible.” The only remaining issue is
whether the intercourse was nonconsensual. Furthermore,
this court has held that forcible rape is proved upon
evidence of sexual intercourse, unless the complainant,

by words or conduct, reasonably appears to give
permission for the intercourse.
C. Mens Rea
1. General Rule
Rape is a general-intent offense. Therefore, most jurisdictions
provide that a person is not guilty of rape if, at the time of
intercourse, he entertained a genuine and reasonable belief that
the female voluntarily consented.
73
2. Minority Rules
a. No Mistake-of-Fact “Defense”
A very few states provide that even a defendant’s reasonable
mistake of fact is not a defense.
b. Unreasonable Mistake-of-Fact as a “Defense”
At the other end of the spectrum, the English House of Lords
ruled that even an unreasonable mistake of fact is a defense
to rape. No American state has adopted this reasoning.
Moreover, in light of public upset, the Parliament redrafted its
rape statute to permit conviction for rape if the male was at
least reckless in regard to the female’s lack of consent.
II.

COMMON LAW: RAPE BY NONFORCIBLE MEANS
A.

Statutory Rape
1. Statutory Background
All states provide that intercourse by a male with an underage
female to whom he is not married constitutes rape. Neither force
nor the underage female’s lack of consent is an element of the
offense. The definition of “underage” varies by jurisdiction.
Today, many states divide statutory rape into degrees of offense,
based on the age of the female and, often, on the basis of the
difference of age between the female and the male. The most

severe penalties are imposed when the male is an adult and the
female is pre-pubescent.
2. Rationale
An early rationale of statutory rape laws, especially in the
Victorian era, was that such laws were needed to protect “chaste
maidens” from becoming “fallen women.” In recent years,
statutory rape laws have been defended on a different ground:
recent studies reveal that there is a high pregnancy rate among
underage females as a result of sexual relations with adult males.
At least in these cases, prosecution of statutory rape laws
arguably might serve as a deterrent against adult exploitation and
resulting pregnancies of young females.
3. Mistake of Fact Regarding Age
Nearly all jurisdictions treat statutory rape as a strict-liability
offense. Therefore, the defendant is guilty of the offense, even if
he reasonably believed that the victim was old enough to
consent.
B.

Rape by Fraud
1. Fraud-in-the-Inducement
At common law, a seducer is not a rapist. More specifically, a
male is not guilty of rape even if he fraudulently induces the
female to consent to intercourse with him.
74
2. Fraud-in-the-Factum
In contrast to fraud-in-the-inducement, consent to engage in
sexual intercourse is invalid if, as the result of fraud, the victim
is unaware that she has consented to an act of sexual intercourse.
Therefore, in these so-called fraud-in-the-factum cases, consent
is vitiated and a rape prosecution will lie.

III. MODEL PENAL CODE

A.

Forcible Rape
1. Definition
“A male who has sexual intercourse with a female not his wife is
guilty if … he compels her to submit by force or by threat of
imminent death, serious bodily injury, extreme pain or
kidnapping, to be inflicted on anyone.” As this definition shows,
the Code is gender-specific and recognizes the marital immunity
rule. The term “sexual intercourse,” however, is defined
elsewhere to include oral and anal sexual relations, which is
broader than the common law.
2. Looking a Little Deeper
Notice that the Code does not use the term “nonconsent.”
Instead, it uses the word “compels.” Although, of course,
compulsion by the male implies nonconsent by the female, the
drafters believed that, as with other violent crimes, attention
should be focused on the alleged perpetrator’s actions—his acts
of compulsion—and not on how the alleged victim responded.
Thus, the MPC does not include a resistance requirement.
3. Grading Rape
The Code grades rape as a felony of the second degree except in
two circumstances, in which it is aggravated to a felony of the
first degree. It is first degree if: (1) the male actually inflicts
serious bodily injury upon anyone during the course of the rape;
or, very controversially today, (2) the female was not a
“voluntary social companion of the actor upon the occasion of
the crime and had not previously permitted him sexual liberties.”

B.

Other Forms of Rape
The Code also prohibits nonforcible sexual intercourse by a male
with a female not his wife in other circumstances: (1) if he
“substantially impaired her power to appraise or control her conduct
by administering or employing without her knowledge drugs,
intoxicants, or other means for the purpose of preventing

resistance”; (2) if she was unconscious at the time of the
intercourse; or (3) if she is under ten years of age. In the latter case,
it is no defense that the male reasonably believed “the child to be
older than 10.”
C.

Gross Sexual Imposition
The MPC drafters defined a new sexual offense, less serious than
rape, to deal with three circumstances in which a male secures
sexual intercourse with a female not his wife: (1) if “he compels her
to submit by any threat that would prevent resistance by a woman of
ordinary resolution”; (2) if he knows that she
75
suffers from mental disease “which renders her incapable of
appraising the nature of her conduct”; or (3) if “he knows that she is
unaware that a sexual act is being committed upon her or that she
submits because she mistakenly supposed that he is her husband.”
1. Clarification
The first version of gross sexual imposition set out above is
intended to criminalize less serious bodily threats than are
encompassed under the rape statute as well as non-bodily threats
—economic, reputational, and the like. The limitation—that the
threat would prevent resistance by a “woman of ordinary
resolution”—is intended to reduce the risk that criminal
prosecutions will be brought in cases of relatively trivial threats.
The third form above covers cases of fraud-in-the-factum and
one specific issue that bedeviled common law courts: cases in
which a female has intercourse with a man whom she incorrectly
believes is her husband.

PART TWELVE: THEFT
I.

LARCENY
A.

General Principles

1. Common Law Definition
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the
personal property of another with the intent to permanently
deprive the other person of the property. For shorthand, lawyers
often describe the mens rea as the “intent to steal” the property.
a. Possession
Larceny is a crime of possession not of title. If a wrongdoer
wrongfully obtains title to another person’s property, the
offense of false pretenses, discussed later, may be implicated.
b. Mens Rea
Larceny is a specific-intent offense. The defendant is not
guilty of the crime unless he commits the actus reus with the
specific intent to steal the property.
2. Grade of the Offense
Common law larceny was a felony. However, the crime was
divided up between “grand” and “petty” larceny. The death
penalty applied to grand larceny. In modern statutes, petty
larceny is a misdemeanor; grand theft is a non-capital felony.
B. Actus Reus in Detail
1. Trespass
The taking of another person’s personal property is not larceny
unless the taking is trespassory in nature. A trespass occurs if the
defendant takes possession of the personal property of another,
i.e., she dispossesses
76
another person, without the latter’s consent or in the absence of a
justification for the nonconsensual taking.
a. Taking Possession by Fraud
A person who secures property deceitfully acts trespassorily,
i.e., the fraud vitiates the consent of the original possessor of

the property. Larceny by fraud is sometimes called larceny by
trick.
2. Taking Possession (“Caption”)
Larceny implicates the trespassory taking of personal property.
More specifically, a “taking” involves the wrongful taking of
possession, rather than mere custody, of property. This
distinction—possession versus custody—is critical to
understanding larceny law.
a. Possession Versus Custody: Drawing the Distinction
i.

Possession
A person is in “possession” of property if she has
sufficient control over it to use it in a generally
unrestricted manner. Possession may be actual or
constructive. It is “actual” if a person has physical control
over the property. It is “constructive” if she does not have
physical control over it, but nobody else is in actual
possession of it.

ii. Custody
A person is in “custody” of property if she has physical
control of the property, but her right to use it is
substantially restricted. In the ordinary situation, a person
has custody rather than possession of property if she has
temporary and limited right to use the property in the
possessor’s presence.
b.

Special Possession/Custody Rules in Employment
Relationship
i.

Employer to Employee
When an employer (the “master”) furnishes his personal
property to his employee (the “servant”) for use in the
employment relationship, the common law ruled that the
employer retains constructive possession of the property.
The employee has mere custody.

ii. Third Person to Employee for Employer
When a person furnishes personal property to another
person’s employee, in order that it will be delivered to the
employer, he transfers possession of the property to the
employee.
c. Bailments: The Breaking Bulk Doctrine
When a bailee is entrusted by the bailor with a container for
delivery to another person, the bailee receives possession of
the container, but mere custody of its contents. Therefore, if
the bailee wrongfully opens the container and removes its
contents, i.e., “breaks bulk,” he takes
77
possession of the contents at that moment. As with other
areas of theft law, the precise facts of the case can turn a
larceny into a non-larceny, or vice-versa. See the Main
Outline for examples.
3. Carrying Away (“Asportation”)
A person is not guilty of larceny unless he carries away the
property. Virtually any movement of property away from the
place where possession was taken constitutes asportation.
However, the asportation must consist of “carrying away”
movement.
4. Personal Property of Another
a. “Personal Property”
i.

Personal Versus Real Property
Larceny is not committed if a person takes property
attached to the land, such as trees and crops, because such
property is real rather than personal in nature. When real
property is severed from the land, however, it becomes
personal property, and the first person to take possession
of it in that form is in lawful possession of it.

ii. Animals
At common law, domestic animals were protected by
larceny law; animals in the state of nature (ferae
naturae), such as wild deer and birds, were not
considered to be personal property belonging to another.
iii. Intangible Property
Intangible personal property—property that, by
definition, cannot be taken and carried away—is not
protected by the common law of larceny, but is covered in
most modern statutes.
b. “Of Another”
Larceny involves the taking of another person’s personal
property. For purposes of larceny law, the “another” is the
person who has lawful possession of the property. Ownership
is not the key.
C. Mens Rea: “Intent to Steal”
1. General Rule
A person is not guilty of larceny when he wrongfully takes and
carries away another person’s personal property, unless he
possesses the specific intent to permanently deprive the other
person of the property.
a. Recklessness
Often, a court will find that the requisite intent is proven if
the actor takes property, and then abandons it under
circumstances in which he knows that the property will
probably not be returned to its owner. In such circumstances,
it is more accurate to describe the actor’s mens rea as
“reckless deprivation of another person’s property.”
78
2. Concurrence Requirement

In general, the intent to steal must concur with the taking of the
property.
a. “Continuing Trespass” Doctrine
The concurrence requirement is subject to the “continuing
trespass” doctrine. This legal fiction provides that when a
person trespassorily takes possession of property, she
commits a new trespass every moment that she retains
wrongful possession of it. Therefore, even if the wrongdoer
does not have the intent to steal the property when she
originally takes property trespassorily, the concurrence
requirement is met if she later decides to steal the property.
D.

Special Problem: Lost or Mislaid Property
1. Lost Property
The rights of a finder of lost property depend on two factors: the
possessory interest of the person who lost the property at the
time the property is discovered by the finder; and the finder’s
state of mind when he retrieves the lost property.
a. Possessory Interest of the Owner
A person retains constructive possession of his lost property
if there is a reasonable clue to ownership of it when it is
discovered. A reasonable clue to ownership exists if the
finder: (1) knows to whom the lost property belongs; or (2)
has reasonable ground to believe, from the nature of the
property or the circumstances under which it is found, that the
party to whom it belongs can reasonably be ascertained.
b. State of Mind of the Finder
As with other larceny cases, it is important to determine the
finder’s state of mind when he takes possession of the lost
property. See the Example in the Main Outline for
clarification.
2. Mislaid Property

An object is “mislaid” if it is intentionally put in a certain place
for a temporary purpose, and then accidentally it is left there
when the owner leaves. The two factors just discussed regarding
lost property also apply to mislaid property. However, in regard
to the “reasonable clue to ownership” factor, the common law is
more protective of the owner of mislaid property than of lost
property: The common law provides that there is always a clue
to ownership of mislaid property.
II.

EMBEZZLEMENT
A.

Elements of the Offense
Today, embezzlement is a felony or a misdemeanor, depending on
the value of the property embezzled. Because the offense is
statutory in nature, and differs from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, the
precise contours of the offense cannot be stated. However, in
general the offense requires proof of two or three elements:
79
1. Manner of Obtaining Possession
Embezzlement occurs when the actor takes possession of the
personal property of another in a lawful—nontrespassory—
manner.
2. Conversion
After securing lawful possession of the property, the actor
converts the property to his own use, i.e., he uses the property in
a manner that manifests his intention to deprive another person
of the property permanently.
3. Entrustment
Many embezzlement statutes provide that the actor must have
obtained possession as a result of entrustment by another person.

B.

Larceny Versus Embezzlement

The line between these two offenses is very thin, and depends in
large part on the state of mind of the actor at the time he takes
possession of property. See the Examples in the Main Outline for
clarification.
III. FALSE PRETENSES
A.

Elements of the Offense
The crime of “obtaining property by false pretense” is a felony or
misdemeanor, depending on the value of the property taken. As with
embezzlement, the statutory nature of the crime allows for only
general description of the offense.
1. Title
With false pretenses, the victim transfers title, rather than mere
possession, to the wrongdoer. This is the key difference between
false pretenses, on the one hand, and larceny and embezzlement,
on the other.
2. Nature of Fraud
False pretenses involves a false representation of an existing
fact.
a. How the Misrepresentation Occurs
The misrepresentation may be in written or oral form, or can
be the result of misleading conduct. Silence—nondisclosure
of a fact—does not usually constitute false pretenses, even if
D knowingly takes advantage of V’s false impressions.
b. Fact Versus Opinion
The misrepresentation must be of a fact and not of opinion.
c. Existing Fact Versus a Promise of Future Conduct
The majority rule is that, to constitute false pretenses, a
factual misrepresentation must pertain to an existing fact, and
not involve a promise of future conduct. The minority rule,
led by the Model Penal Code, is that a prosecution is

permitted, even if the misrepresentation is in the form of a
promise of future conduct. However, the intention
80
to deceive cannot be proved solely on the basis of the
promisor’s failure to live up to his promise.
3. Mens Rea
The deceiver must make the false representation “knowingly”
and with “the intent to defraud.” That is, the actor must know
that the representation is false; and he must make the false
statement with the specific intent of defrauding the other person.
This approximates the “intent to steal” concept in larceny.

81

PART ONE

Introductory Principles
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

II.

Criminal Law Overview
A.

“Criminal” Versus “Civil”

B.

Sources of the Criminal Law

C.

Limits on the Criminal Law

D.

Burden of Proof: Basics

E.

Judge Versus Jury

“Tools” of the Criminal Law
A.

Overview

B. Theories of Punishment
C.

Proportionality of Punishment

D.

Legality

E.

Burden of Proof

Conversation with Students
III. Review Questions

82

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
There is a lot of important material in Part One. I will start by giving you an
overview of the criminal law—a brief sketch of what matters in the study of
the criminal law. I will then turn in Section II to the “tools” of the criminal

law, by which I mean the overarching principles or concepts that you are apt
to need all semester to help understand and evaluate the criminal law
doctrine you are learning. If one thinks of the criminal law as if it were a
house, these are the tools one needs to construct that house and evaluate its
worth.

I.

Criminal Law Overview

A.

“Criminal” Versus “Civil”
1. The Problem
What distinguishes a “crime” from, for example, a “tort” or “breach
of contract”? In other words, what distinguishes the “criminal law”
from “civil” areas of the law, such as Torts and Contracts?

2.

Definition of “Crime”
According to two criminal law scholars, a “crime” is “any social
harm defined and made punishable by law.” Rollin M. Perkins &
Ronald N. Boyce, Criminal Law 12 (3rd ed. 1982). But this is a
nearly useless definition because it means that anything that is
called a crime by lawmakers (and put in the penal code rather than
in a civil code) is a crime. What if lawmakers say sneezing is a
crime? What if they say being left-handed is a crime? And, what
distinguishes the “crime” of (for example) battery from the “tort” of
battery, other than the label?

3. The Essence of the Criminal Law: A Preliminary Start
It is commonly pointed out that what distinguishes the criminal law
from civil law is that punishment flows from violation of a crime,
whereas those who commit a tort or breach a contract pay money
damages. This is an imperfect way of distinguishing the criminal
from the civil law, since one form of “punishment” for violation of a
“crime” can be a payment of a fine; and in limited circumstances, a
person who violates a civil obligation may temporarily be jailed
(held in contempt, for example), and yet this is not called
“punishment.” So, we must look further.

4. The Essence of the Criminal Law: A Better Answer
“What distinguishes a criminal from a civil sanction and all that
distinguishes it, it is ventured, is the judgment of community
condemnation which accompanies and justifies its imposition.”
Henry M. Hart, The Aims of the Criminal Law, 23 Law & Contemp.
Probs. 401 (1958). A “crime,” therefore, is (or, at least should be)
limited to conduct that “if duly shown to have taken place, will
incur a formal and solemn pronouncement of the moral
condemnation of the community.” Id. Think of it this way: people
who are said to be criminal wrongdoers generally are stigmatized by
the community for violating of society’s laws; people who commit a
tort or breach a contract are not. Thus, the criminal conviction itself
is a form of punishment!
83

B.

Sources of the Criminal Law
1.

Common Law
American criminal law finds its origins in British “common law.” In
this context, “common law” means, simply, judge-made law.
Contrary to lawmaking today, judges—not legislators—in England
defined the crimes, formulated the defenses to those crimes, and
developed all of the relevant doctrines relating to the field.
Actually, the judges of the time did not claim they were defining and
formulating the criminal law. They said they were discovering the
law, which implied that there was pre-existent criminal law. The
criminal law was understood to derive from basic, moral principles
that existed independent of the judges, perhaps from God. For our
purposes, however, we can say that the roots of American law are
found in the judge-made law of English soil. For the most part,
British common law became American common law.

2.

Statutes
a. A New Source

Judicial lawmaking (or law-discovering, if you wish) has given
way to legislative lawmaking, both in England (where the
Parliament enacts criminal laws) and in the United States (by
Congress at the federal level, and legislatures at the state level).
This process culminated at different times in different
jurisdictions in the United States, but mostly in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century. Today, all criminal
lawyers in this country turn first to a book—often characterized
as a “penal code”—that contains the legislatively drafted
definitions of crimes, defenses to crimes, and other relevant
doctrines of criminal law, which apply in that lawyer’s
jurisdiction. Therefore, when you read cases in your class, pay
careful attention to any statute set out in the judicial opinion.

b. Common Law: Continuing Relevance
Although criminal codes, enacted by legislators, are the primary
source of law today, there are two reasons why modern lawyers
(and, therefore, law students) still need to understand the
common law.

i.

Gaps
Unfortunately, some legislatures have enacted penal codes
containing significant gaps. For example, a particular penal
code might define the relevant crimes and defenses, but fail
to deal with other critical doctrines, such as accomplice
liability. Where gaps exist, courts often turn to the common
law to fill the holes.

ii.

Statutory Interpretation
When a statute needs clarification in some manner, one
source of guidance is the common law, particularly if the
statute is itself a codification of the common law.
84
Example: The California legislature defined “murder” in
much the same way that the crime was defined at

common law, as the unlawful killing of a “human
being” by another human being with malice
aforethought. The term “human being” was not
defined in the California murder statute. In Keeler
v. Superior Court, 2 Cal.3d 619, 87 Cal.Rptr. 481,
470 P.2d 617 (1970), K purposely kicked his
estranged and pregnant wife in the abdomen,
causing the immediate death of the fetus. K was
charged with murder of the fetus. The state
supreme court had to determine whether a fetus is a
“human being.” The court held that, in the absence
of a statutory definition, the term should be defined
as it was at common law; at common law, only a
viable fetus born alive constituted a “human
being.” Therefore, K could not be prosecuted for
murder.

3.

Model Penal Code
a. What Is It?
The Model Penal Code (typically abbreviated as “MPC”) is a
code drafted in the 1950s and adopted in 1962 by the American
Law Institute (ALI), a prestigious organization composed of top
judges, scholars, and lawyers.

b. Why Was It Created?
Many state legislatures enacted imperfect penal codes: leaving
gaps in the law; sometimes adopting conflicting or overlapping
statutes; providing ambiguous definitions (or no definition) to
critical terms; and/or enacting laws without serious
consideration of the underlying purposes of the criminal law.
The hope of the ALI was that the MPC would serve as a model
for better penal code legislation.

c. Why Learn It?

Most criminal law casebooks include, and many professors
emphasize, the Model Penal Code, even as you also learn the
common law and perhaps become familiar with one or another
state penal code. You are likely to find major portions of the
MPC in the appendix of your casebook or interspersed
throughout the book. The MPC, therefore, is likely to be a very
important part of your course in Criminal Law. There are two
major reasons for this: many states have adopted portions of the
MPC; and the MPC serves as a useful device for thinking about
and critiquing common law and existing non-MPC statutory law.
Unless your professor indicates otherwise, be attentive to the
MPC.

C.

Limits on the Criminal Law
Legislatures have very broad discretion in defining crimes, identifying
and defining defenses to crimes (or, for that matter, deciding not to
recognize defenses), enacting general criminal law doctrine, and setting
punishment for violations of criminal laws. This discretion is not
unlimited, however. State and federal legislation is
85
subject to the strictures of the United States Constitution (and, with state
laws, the constitution of the relevant state).
Examples:
The federal Constitution prohibits ex post facto
legislation. As well, the First Amendment to the Constitution,
which guarantees freedom of speech, assembly and religion,
bars a state from making it a crime for a person to deface an
American flag knowing that it “will seriously offend” others.
Texas v. Johnson, 491 U.S. 397, 109 S.Ct. 2533, 105 L.Ed.2d
342 (1989). The Due Process Clause prohibits a state from
criminalizing private adult consensual homosexual conduct.
Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 123 S.Ct. 2472, 156
L.Ed.2d 508 (2003). A state is also not permitted to make the
status of drug addiction (as distinguished from the use or
possession of drugs) a criminal offense. Robinson v.

California, 370 U.S. 660, 82 S.Ct. 1417, 8 L.Ed.2d 758
(1962) (applying the Eighth Amendment bar on cruel and
unusual punishment).

D.

Burden of Proof: Basics
Much more will be said on this subject (see II.E. below), but it is a basic
American principle of criminal law that a defendant is presumed
innocent. The Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments have been interpreted to require that, to convict a
defendant, the government must persuade the factfinder “beyond a
reasonable doubt of every fact necessary to constitute the crime
charged.” In re Winship, 397 U.S. 358, 90 S.Ct. 1068, 25 L.Ed.2d 368
(1970). This “bedrock ‘axiomatic and elementary’ principle” is
“indispensable to commanding the respect and confidence of the
community” in the criminal justice system; as Justice Harlan stated in
Winship, “we do not view the social disutility of convicting an innocent
man as equivalent to the disutility of acquitting someone who is guilty.”

E.

Judge Versus Jury
1.

Constitutional Law
a.

Rule
The Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution
provides that “in all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall
enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury.”
Despite the phrase “in all criminal prosecutions,” the Supreme
Court has generally limited the right to a jury trial to
prosecutions of crimes for which the maximum potential
punishment exceeds incarceration of six months. Sullivan v.
Louisiana, 508 U.S. 275, 113 S.Ct. 2078, 124 L.Ed.2d 182
(1993). A defendant may waive his right to trial by jury and
have his case decided by a judge (a “bench trial”).

b. Rationale for Jury Trial Right
Conviction of a crime involves the moral condemnation of the
community (see I.A.4. above). It is appropriate, therefore, that

the determination of innocence or guilt be determined by jurors,
rather than a judge, since jurors serve as representatives of the
community—the defendant’s peers. The Supreme Court has also
explained the jury-trial right in historical and political terms: “A
right to jury trial is granted to criminal defendants
86
in order to prevent oppression by the Government. Those who
wrote our constitutions knew from history and experience that it
was necessary to protect against unfounded criminal charges
brought to eliminate enemies and against judges too
unresponsive to the voice of higher authority.” So, “[i]f the
defendant preferred the common-sense judgment of a jury to the
more tutored but perhaps less sympathetic reaction of the single
judge, he was to have it.” Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 145, 88
S.Ct. 1444, 20 L.Ed.2d 491 (1968).

2.

Jury Nullification
a. What Is It?
Although a defendant is entitled to trial by jury, the judge
remains the authority on the law. Before jury deliberation,
therefore, the judge instructs the jury on the relevant law. Jury
nullification occurs when the jury decides that the prosecution
has proven its case beyond a reasonable doubt, but for reasons of
conscience it disregards the facts and/or the law, and acquits the
defendant. Typically, nullification occurs when the jury feels
particularly sympathetic to the defendant, believes that the
victim was significantly at fault for the events, or disagrees with
the wisdom of the law that they are instructed to apply.

b. The Law
The Fifth Amendment Double Jeopardy Clause provides that a
defendant may not be reprosecuted after an acquittal. This rule
applies even if the acquittal was the result of jury nullification.
Thus, it is said that a jury has the power to nullify, but not the

right to do so. That is, jurors take an oath to obey the judge’s
instructions on the law; jury nullification, therefore, constitutes a
violation of the juror’s oath. Because jurors do not have the right
to nullify—only the naked power to do so—a defendant is not
entitled to have the jury instructed that it may nullify the law if it
chooses to do so.

II.

“Tools” of the Criminal Law

A.

Overview
As noted in my “conversation” at the start of Part One, there are various
important overarching principles that you will need in your class to
better understand and evaluate the law you are learning. These are, if
you will, the “tools” for building the “criminal law house.”

B. Theories of Punishment
1.

Different Theories
Two broad theories of punishment exist: utilitarianism and
retribution. Each theory has its adherents and critics. These theories
help to explain why a society creates a criminal justice system; and,
at least as importantly, these theories should guide lawmakers in
developing general principles of criminal responsibility—the rules
you will be learning in class—and in setting the penalties for
violations of the criminal laws.
87

2.

Principles of Utilitarianism
a. Augmenting Happiness
Utilitarianism holds that the general object of all laws is to
augment the total happiness of the community by excluding, as
much as possible, everything that subtracts from that happiness,
i.e., everything that causes “mischief” (pain).

b. Role of Punishment

Critical to appreciating utilitarianism is the point that both crime
and punishment are (to utilitarians) bad, because they both result
in pain to individuals and to society as a whole. Therefore, the
pain of punishment is undesirable unless its infliction is likely to
prevent a greater amount of pain in the form of future crime.
Notice that utilitarianism looks to the future: punishment is not
inflicted for the prior wrongdoing, as such, but in order to
prevent future crime (pain). If punishment is unnecessary to
prevent future crime, a utilitarian will let the wrongdoer go
unpunished!

c.

Forms of Utilitarianism
i.

General Deterrence
Here, a person (call her D) is punished in order to send a
message to others (the general society and, especially, those
persons contemplating criminal conduct) that crime does not
pay.

ii.

Specific Deterrence
With specific deterrence, D is punished in order to deter D—
this specific person—from future criminal activity. This is
done in either of two ways: by incapacitation (incarceration
of D prevents her from committing additional crimes in the
general community for the duration of her sentence); and/or
by intimidation (D’s punishment serves as a painful
reminder, so that upon release D will be deterred from future
criminal conduct).

iii. Rehabilitation
Advocates of this form of utilitarianism believe that the
criminal law can prevent future crime by reforming an
individual, by providing her with employment skills,
psychological aid, freedom from addiction, etc., so that she
will not want or need to commit offenses in the future.

d. Underlying Premises

Utilitarianism—at least the deterrence versions—is founded on
the belief that humans are hedonistic, in the sense that people
ordinarily seek to augment their personal pleasure and avoid
pain. Another critical premise is that human beings, as a species,
generally are capable of rational calculation. Therefore, a
potential wrongdoer will weigh the benefits (pleasure) she
expects to receive from committing a crime against its
88
“down-side” in the form of punishment. If the rational calculator
believes that the risks of arrest, conviction and punishment
outweigh the likely benefits of the proposed action, she will not
commit the crime.

3.

Principles of Retribution
a.

Just Deserts
Retributivism is sometimes called the “just deserts” theory. (Be
sure you spell it properly! It is “deserts” [as in “he deserved this
punishment”] and not “desserts” [as in, “boy I sure love this
chocolate éclair!]) Punishment of a wrongdoer is justified as a
deserved response to wrongdoing. That is, unlike utilitarianism,
which does not punish because of prior wrongdoing but
punishes instead in order to prevent future wrongdoing,
retributivists punish because of the wrongdoing—the criminal
gets his just deserts—regardless of whether such punishment
will deter future crime. (Of course, the retributivist will be
happy if the punishment deters future crime, but that is not why
the punishment is imposed.)

b. Rationale
One frequently stated justification for retribution is that
wrongdoing creates a moral disequilibrium in society. This is
because the wrongdoer obtains the benefits of the law (namely,
that other people have respected his rights), even as does not
accept the law’s burdens (respecting others’ rights). Proportional

punishment of the wrongdoer—“paying his debt”—brings him
back into moral equilibrium. Another justification is based on
the idea that both crime and punishment are forms of
communication: one who commits a crime sends an implicit
message to the victim (and society as a whole) that the
wrongdoer’s rights are more important than others’ rights;
punishment is a symbolic way of showing the criminal—and
reaffirming for victims—that this message was wrong.
Punishment proportional to the offense defeats the offender: it
brings him down to his proper place in relation to others.

c.

Underlying Premise
Critical to retributive theory is the belief that humans possess
free will. As long as a person has freely chosen to commit an
offense, punishment is justified. To the extent that a person lacks
free choice, punishment is morally wrong.

4.

Mixing the Theories: Hybrid Approach
a.

Overview
Retributive and utilitarian theories sometimes will result in the
same outcome, albeit for different reasons. Frequently, however,
these theories will lead lawmakers or judges in different, even
opposite, directions. Some people advocate one theory at the
exclusion of the other, but many people have sought to find a
coherent way to combine the theories.
89

b. One Hybrid Approach
Some people distinguish between the general justifying aim of
the criminal law (why we have a criminal justice system) and
distributive justice (determining who should be punished, and
how much punishment is proper). These hybrid advocates argue
that one can be a utilitarian as to one issue, and a retributivist as
to the other. For example, one might be a utilitarian as to the
general justifying aim—we created a justice system to try to

deter crime—and retributivist in determining who should be
punished in the justice system we have created, and in
calculating the proper punishment to impose.

c.

“Limiting Retributivism”
Another hybrid approach, although one limited to sentencing
matters, starts from a retributivist perspective: lawmakers should
make a rough determination of the proper retributive punishment
for an offense by coming up with a sentencing range (identifying
at what level punishment is disproportionately high, and another
level that is deemed disproportionately low), and then setting the
actual punishment within the proportional range based on
utilitarian considerations.

C.

Proportionality of Punishment
1.

General Principle
A general principle of criminal law is that punishment should be
proportional to the offense committed. The difficulty lies in
determining the meaning of the term “proportional.”

2.

Utilitarian Meaning
In a utilitarian system of criminal justice, punishment is
proportional if it involves the infliction of no more pain than
necessary to fulfill the law’s deterrent goal of reducing a greater
amount of crime.
Example:
Assume that based on a utilitarian calculus it is
determined that 6 units of punishment will deter 10 units
of crime. If the 10 units could be deterred by 5 (or fewer)
units of punishment, then 6 units is excessive, i.e.,
disproportionate.

3.

Retributive Meaning
Proportionality of punishment is an especially critical concept in
retributive theory. To retributivists, punishment should be

proportional to the harm caused on the present occasion, taking into
consideration the actor’s degree of culpability for causing the harm.
Example:
A murderer should be punished more than a robber,
because murder causes more harm than robbery. But, as
well, a person who kills another person negligently should
be punished less severely than one who takes a life
intentionally, because a negligent wrongdoer is less
morally culpable in causing the harm—and, therefore, less
deserving of punishment—than an intentional wrongdoer.
90

4.

Difference in Outcome: An Example
Utilitarians and retributivists may reach different results in
determining how much punishment is proportional to an offense.
For example, in most states, a repeat offender (“recidivist”) is
punished more severely for an offense than a first-time violator.
Thus, a third-time thief might be sentenced to 25-years-to-life
imprisonment, although a first-time thief would receive a much
more lenient sentence.

a.

Utilitarian Analysis
The preceding example of a recidivist law might be valid: the
threat of very long imprisonment may be necessary to deter a
recidivist, who has been undeterred by lesser punishment in the
past; in addition, a third-time felon—a person who has proven
that he is likely to continue to transgress if allowed to do so—
may need to be incapacitated for a longer period of time.
However, it should be kept in mind that a utilitarian will only
inflict this heightened pain if there is a reliable reason to believe
that it is necessary for general or specific deterrent purposes.

b. Retributive Analysis
A wrongdoer should receive punishment proportional to the
crime just committed, taking into consideration both the harm
caused and the actor’s culpability. The criminal paid his debt to

society for his earlier offenses, so these crimes are irrelevant to
the present punishment; and a retributivist would not punish a
person for predicted future crimes. Therefore, it is unlikely that
one can justify a sentence of 25-years-to-life for theft, even for a
recidivist.

5.

Constitutional Law
The Eighth Amendment Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause
prohibits grossly disproportional punishment.

a.

Death Penalty Cases
The Supreme Court has held that death is grossly
disproportional punishment for the crime of rape, because the
latter offense does not involve the taking of human life. Coker v.
Georgia, 433 U.S. 584, 97 S.Ct. 2861, 53 L.Ed.2d 982 (1977)
(death penalty for the rape of an adult woman is
unconstitutional); Kennedy v. Louisiana, 554 U.S. 407, 128 S.Ct.
2641, 171 L.Ed.2d 525 (2008) (death penalty for the rape of an
eight-year-old is unconstitutional). Notice that this result is
consistent with retributive theory: since the offender took no
life, his life should not be taken. However, the rapist in Coker
had previously killed one, and raped two, young women, and he
had escaped prison while serving a life sentence. Therefore,
based on concepts of specific deterrence, the death penalty
might have been justified on the basis of the defendant’s
personal dangerousness. Retributive theory, however, won out.
91

b. Imprisonment Cases
There is only a very “narrow proportionality principle” outside
the context of the death penalty. As explained by Justice
Kennedy in Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U.S. 957, 111 S.Ct.
2680, 115 L.Ed.2d 836 (1991) (concurring opinion), and later
reaffirmed as guiding principles in Ewing v. California, 538 U.S.
11, 123 S.Ct. 1179, 155 L.Ed.2d 108 (2003), the legislature (not

the judiciary) has primary authority in setting punishments,
particularly because it is the role of the legislature to determine
whether to apply utilitarian, retributive, or hybrid penological
goals. No non-capital incarcerative punishment will be declared
unconstitutional, therefore, unless there are objective grounds—
not simply a judge’s own subjective views of the propriety of the
punishment—for determining that the punishment is grossly
disproportionate to the crime.
Example:
In Ewing, supra, the Supreme Court had to
determine whether California’s “three strikes”
recidivist law was unconstitutional because it resulted
in E’s sentence of 25-years-to-life after he was
convicted of shoplifting three golf clubs. E had
previously been convicted and punished for various
offenses, including theft, burglary, and unlawful
possession of a firearm. By a vote of 5–4, the Court
held that in light of E’s prior criminal conduct, and the
legislature’s primacy in setting penalties, and in further
view of the right of California, if it chooses, to apply
specific deterrence utilitarian principles in recidivist
cases, E’s sentence was not grossly disproportionate.

D.

Legality
1.

Requirement of Previously Defined Conduct
a.

General Principle
The so-called “principle of legality” is nullem sine lege; nulla
poena sine lege or “no crime without (pre-existent) law, no
punishment without (pre-existent) law.” Quite simply, if a
person does x, an act that is not a crime at the time it is
committed, then the person may not be punished for doing x
even if it is subsequently made a crime. This principle has been
characterized as “the first principle”—the most basic principle—
of American law. Herbert L. Packer, The Limits of the Criminal
Sanction 79–80 (1968).

b. Rationale
It is morally unjust to punish a person whose conduct was lawful
when she acted because, in such circumstances, she did not
choose to violate the law. Furthermore, a law cannot have its
desired deterrent effect unless people are put on notice of the
illegality of their contemplated conduct. Also, from a political
theory perspective, retroactive prosecution, conviction, and
punishment of a person permit a government to punish its
enemies, and is antithetical to a system of limited government.
92

c.

Constitutional Law
The principle of legality not only is a common law doctrine, but
has deep constitutional roots.

i.

Ex Post Facto
Legislatures are prohibited by the Ex Post Facto Clause of
the United States Constitution from enacting laws that
punish conduct that was lawful at the time of its commission,
or that increases the punishment for an act committed before
the law took effect. (U.S. Constitution, Article I §§ 9, 10.)
Examples: D does legal act X on January 1. On January 2,
the legislature prohibits X. It would violate the Ex
Post Facto Clause to prosecute D for her January 1
conduct.
D commits murder, an offense punishable by life
imprisonment, on January 1. On January 2, the
legislature enacts a death penalty for the offense of
murder. It would violate the Ex Post Facto Clause
to sentence D to death for her offense.

ii.

Due Process
Courts are prohibited from enlarging the scope of a criminal
statute. To do so violates two aspects of the principle of

legality: it results in retroactive criminalization and
punishment; and, because it is the modern role of
legislatures to enact criminal laws, the enlargement exceeds
the modern authority of the judiciary.
Example: D struck V, a pregnant woman, in the abdomen
with his knee in order to kill the viable fetus. The
fetus was delivered stillborn. D was prosecuted for
murder, statutorily defined as the “killing of a
human being by another human being.” The
statutory term “human being” was interpreted to
apply only to fetuses born alive. (See I.B.2.b.ii.,
supra.) The state supreme court refused to expand
the definition of “human being” to include viable
fetuses born dead: to do so would result in
retroactive criminalization, a violation of the Due
Process Clause; furthermore, even if it wanted to
expand the definition prospectively only, the court
stated it lacked jurisdiction to change the law, a
matter left to the legislature. Keeler v. Superior
Court, 2 Cal.3d 619, 87 Cal.Rptr. 481, 470 P.2d
617 (1970).

2.

Fair Notice
A corollary of the legality principle is that a person may not be
punished for an offense unless the statute is sufficiently clear that a
person of ordinary intelligence can understand its meaning. See
MPC § 1.02 (1)(d). This is a fundamental common law concept, In
re Banks, 295 N.C. 236, 244 S.E.2d 386 (1978), with constitutional
roots as well.
93

a.

Constitutional Law
An unduly vague statute violates the Due Process Clause.
Warning: The void-for-vagueness doctrine ordinarily is not

applied strictly. There is no way to capture through words
precisely what a lawmaking body intends to prohibit;
uncertainties lurk among all words and phrases. Furthermore,
lawmakers need flexibility to draft laws to deal with novel forms
of criminal activity. Therefore, courts hesitate to declare statutes
unconstitutionally vague. However, if the law impinges on a
highly valued right, such as freedom of speech, a court will
demand greater-than-ordinary legislative clarity.

i.

General Rule
A person has sufficient notice as to the meaning of a statute
if its wording would put an ordinary law-abiding person on
notice that her conduct comes near the proscribed area. (In
essence, if a person wants to skate on thin ice, she has no
reason to complain if the ice breaks and she falls in!) If the
statute meets this test, the law-abiding person is responsible
to seek out further information to determine the meaning of
the statute, including whether the statute has been previously
clarified by a court.
Example:
S was prosecuted under a Florida statute that
prohibited, without defining, “the abominable and
detestable crime against nature, either with
mankind or beast.” The Supreme Court held that
the statute was not unconstitutionally vague, in part
because Florida courts had previously held that the
sexual act that S had committed fell within the
meaning of the term “crime against nature.”
Wainwright v. Stone, 414 U.S. 21, 94 S.Ct. 190, 38
L.Ed.2d 179 (1973).

3.

Nondiscriminatory Enforcement
Another corollary of the legality principle is that a criminal statute
should not be so broadly worded that it is susceptible to
discriminatory enforcement by law enforcement officers, thereby
giving the government undue power.

Example: The City of Chicago enacted an ordinance prohibiting
“criminal street gang members” from “loitering” with one
another or other persons in any public place. In turn,
“loitering” was defined as “remaining in one place with no
apparent purpose.” The law required loiterers to disperse
“from the area” upon police order. The Supreme Court in
City of Chicago v. Morales, 527 U.S. 41, 119 S.Ct. 1849,
144 L.Ed.2d 67 (1999), ruled that the ordinance violated
the Due Process Clause. It determined that the ordinance
was “vague and standardless” and, as a result, “affords too
much discretion to the police and too little notice to
citizens who wish to use the public streets.” Among other
problems: the language “no apparent purpose” was too
subjective and, thus, left too much to the discretion of
individual police officers; the ordinance was too broad (it
94
seemingly would apply to innocent behavior, such as a
gang member and his father “loiter[ing] … just to get a
glimpse of Sammy Sosa leaving the ballpark”); and the
dispersal requirement was vague (what constitutes leaving
“the area,” and how long before dispersed parties may
return?).

E.

Burden of Proof
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

Many (perhaps most) professors will not cover this topic or will cover it
only sparingly (perhaps by lecture). It is a difficult topic anytime, but one
that is especially hard to grasp if you are a first-year student (and even more
so if you are a first semester student). A few professors (perhaps yours?)
will cover this topic in considerable detail, but even if this occurs, you may
find that the topic is broken up into parts, covered a bit early in the
semester, and more so when you reach discussion of criminal homicide
and/or some of the criminal law defenses. There is no perfect place to cover
the subject. (Notice that I have already divided up the discussion myself—

look back to Section I.D., earlier in this Part of the Outline.) I urge you to
return to these materials later in the semester. It will probably make more
sense then. But, give it a try now.

1.

Burden of Production
“Burden of proof” involves two different burdens, the first of which
is “burden of production” (or “burden of producing evidence”). This
speaks to the question of which party—the defendant or the
government—has the obligation to introduce evidence on a given
issue. The party with this obligation who fails to satisfy this burden
loses on the issue. Usually, the party with the burden of production
on an issue is only required to introduce “some evidence” on the
issue to meet the burden. In general, the government has the burden
of producing evidence regarding the elements of a crime, and the
defendant has the burden of producing evidence regarding
affirmative defenses, as these italicized terms are explained later in
this Outline.
Examples: D is prosecuted for Crime X, defined as “intentionally
doing X.” “Intent” is an element of this offense.
Therefore, the prosecutor has the burden of introducing
evidence on the issue of intent. If the prosecutor fails to
introduce “some evidence” that D did do X
“intentionally,” then the government has not satisfied its
obligation in regard to this issue and, therefore, loses on
the issue. And, since the prosecutor must prove (beyond a
reasonable doubt) every element of a crime, and the
prosecutor has failed to prove one element of Crime X,
the defendant must be acquitted.
On the other hand, assume that the government does
satisfy its burden of production above. Now assume D
wants to show that he was insane—a legal defense—when
he intentionally did X. As insanity is an affirmative
defense, the burden is on D to introduce some evidence of
his legal insanity. If he fails to satisfy his burden of

production on this issue, the insanity claim drops out of
the case.
95

2.

Burden of Persuasion
Once the burden of production has been satisfied—and, thus, an
issue has been properly raised—the next question becomes: who has
the burden of persuading the factfinder regarding the particular
issue? The party with the burden of production may not necessarily
have the burden of persuasion.
Example:
In the example above, although D had the burden of
production on the issue of insanity, the legislature, if it
chooses to do so, could place the burden of persuasion on
the issue of sanity on the government.

a.

Degree of Burden
i.

Elements of a Crime
As noted earlier in this Outline, the Due Process Clause of
the Constitution requires that the government carry the
burden of persuasion, beyond a reasonable doubt, as to
“every fact necessary to constitute the crime charged.” The
Supreme Court has struggled to determine what “fact”
means in this context. At one time it defined the term
broadly, apparently to include at least some criminal law
defenses and factors that have a substantial mitigating effect
on a defendant’s punishment. Mullaney v. Wilbur, 421 U.S.
684, 95 S.Ct. 1881, 44 L.Ed.2d 508 (1975). Later, the Court
limited the word “fact” to expressed or implicit elements of
an offense (as “elements” are discussed in this Outline), and
not to defenses and mitigating factors. Patterson v. New
York, 432 U.S. 197, 97 S.Ct. 2319, 53 L.Ed.2d 281 (1977).
Therefore, today, the government must prove every element
of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. If it fails to satisfy

that burden as to each element of the crime charged, the
government loses: the defendant must be acquitted.

ii.

Defenses to Crimes
Because defenses to crimes fall outside the Patterson
principle stated above, a legislature is free to place the
burden of persuasion regarding a criminal law defense on
either party—the defendant or government—and to set the
burden as it chooses: very high (proof beyond a reasonable
doubt), somewhat high (clear and convincing evidence), or
low (proof by preponderance of the evidence).
Example:
The government might place the burden of
persuasion of the issue of sanity/insanity on the
defendant or on the prosecutor, and then require the
party to whom the burden has been allocated to
prove its side of the case by any one of the three
burden-levels noted above.

iii. Sentencing Facts
The Supreme Court has decided a complicated line of cases
relating to the sentencing phase of a trial, i.e., after the
defendant has already been convicted of a crime. The Court
has held that the government is constitutionally required at
the sentencing stage to prove beyond a
96
reasonable doubt any fact (with one exception) that increases
the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed statutory
maximum. (The one exception to this rule is that the burden
of persuasion can be lower if the fact to be proven is that the
defendant was previously convicted of an offense, that is,
that the defendant is subject to a recidivist sentencing law.)
Example:
D is convicted of Crime X, which carries a
maximum sentence of five years’ imprisonment. At
sentencing, D is shown to have possessed a

weapon during the commission of Crime X.
Assume that state law provides that any person
convicted of Crime X who is also found to have
been in possession of a weapon during commission
of the offense, must receive a 10-year prison
sentence. Since the fact at issue here—whether was
D in possession of a weapon—will increase the
defendant’s penalty for crime X beyond the
prescribed statutory maximum (instead of 5 years,
D will get 10 years), this fact must be proven by
the government beyond a reasonable doubt.
Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466, 120 S.Ct.
2348, 147 L.Ed.2d 435 (2000).

III.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, page 293]

1. What is the definition of a “crime”?
2. T or F. Jurors have the legal right to ignore a judge’s legal instructions
if they morally disagree with the law.
3. “We should punish Albert for raping Betty in order to send a message
to other would-be rapists of what will happen to them if they get caught.”
This is a statement that would mostly like be made by an advocate of:
a. Retribution;
b. General deterrence;
c. Specific deterrence; or
d. Rehabilitation.
4. T or F. Recidivist laws are more easily defended in a jurisdiction that
applies retributivist principles than one that applies utilitarianism.
5. What is the principle of legality?
6. Which one or more of the following statements is inaccurate?
a.

The prosecutor (government) has the burden of producing evidence
regarding the elements of a crime;

b.

The prosecutor (government) is constitutionally required to carry
the burden of persuasion, beyond a reasonable doubt, of every
element of a crime charged;

c.

The defendant is constitutionally required to carry the burden of
persuasion regarding affirmative defenses; and/or
97

d.

At sentencing, the prosecutor has the constitutional burden of
persuasion, by clear and convincing evidence, to prove any fact that
will increase the defendant’s punishment beyond the statutory
maximum.

99

PART TWO

Actus Reus
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

Actus Reus: Overview
A.

Definition

B. Two Elements
II. Voluntary Act
A.

General Rule

B.

Rationale of Voluntary Act Requirement

III. Omissions

IV.

A.

General Rule

B.

Rationale for the General Rule

C.

Exceptions to the General Rule

Social Harm
Conversation with Students

V.

A.

Definition

B.

Identifying the Social Harm

C.

Breaking Down the Social Harm into Categories

Review Questions

100

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

We begin now to build the “criminal law house.” In this and the next three
Parts of this outline, we will talk about the “elements”—or, ingredients—of
a crime. In other words, subject to a few exceptions that will be noted, there
are certain basic elements of all crimes, and this is what we will focus on
now.
To begin with, all crimes contain an “actus reus.” Unfortunately, lawyers
(and, therefore, law professors) use this Latin term in various ways. Don’t
be worried, but be conscious of the definitional problem.

I.

Actus Reus: Overview

A.

Definition
The “actus reus” of an offense is the physical, or external, component of
a crime—what society does not want to occur. It must be distinguished
from the mental, or internal, component of the crime—the state of mind
of the actor, which is called the “mens rea,” and which is the subject of
Part Three of this outline.
Examples:
The actus reus of the crime of murder is the killing of
another person. The actus reus of the crime of larceny is the
trespassory (non-consensual) taking and carrying away of the
personal property of another. The actus reus of common law
forcible rape is sexual intercourse by a male with a female
not his wife without her consent by force or threat of force.

B. Two Elements
As defined here, the actus reus of a crime consists of two components,
both of which must be proved by the prosecutor. Thus, we can say that
these are the first two elements of an offense.

1. Voluntary Act or Legal Omission
Generally speaking, there can be no crime in the absence of
conduct. However, only a certain type of conduct qualifies for
criminal liability, namely, conduct that includes a voluntary act. In
rare (stress, rare) circumstances, however, a person may be
prosecuted because of what he or she did not do—an absence of

conduct. An “omission” substitutes for a voluntary act when the
defendant has a legal duty to act.

2.

Social Harm
People are not punished for conduct (or omissions), but rather for
conduct (or omissions) that result in “social harm.” This term has a
specialized meaning, as discussed below.

II. Voluntary Act
A.

General Rule
A person is not ordinarily guilty of a criminal offense unless his conduct
includes a voluntary act. This is a common law principle, and it is also
the position of the Model Penal Code, which first codified the common
law principle. MPC § 2.01(1).
101

1.

Conduct
The preceding rule starts from the proposition that there ordinarily
must be conduct. A person is never prosecuted solely for her
thoughts, no matter now evil her ideas or dangerous her mental
plans. There must be some externality of those thoughts.

2.

Common Law Definition of Voluntary Act
A “voluntary act” is a willed muscular contraction or bodily
movement by the actor.

a.

Degree of Movement Required
The slightest muscular contraction or bodily movement
constitutes an act.
Examples: A slight movement of a finger (as in pulling the
trigger of a gun in a homicide prosecution) is
sufficient. Even the movement of a person’s tongue
(e.g., the uttering of words in a prosecution for
making a terrorist threat) is enough.

b. Meaning of “Willed”
An act is “willed” if the bodily movement was controlled by the
mind of the actor.

i.

Unwilled Acts
Some bodily movements are the result of impulses from the
brain that direct the person’s bodily movements. But, the
brain may send out “unwilled” impulses, as when a person
suffers from an epileptic seizure. Such acts are controlled by
the brain, but not by the mind, and thus are “involuntary.”

ii.

Drawing the Line
The difference between a willed/voluntary act and an
unwilled/involuntary act may be sensed if you consider the
difference between the statements: “I raised my hand” and
“My hand came up.” In the first case, the speaker is
suggesting that she chose to raise her hand; it was a decision
she made. In the second case, the speaker implies that the
hand rose without her volition, perhaps as the result of a
seizure.

3.

Model Penal Code
The MPC does not provide a definition of “voluntary act.” It defines
an “act” (“a bodily movement whether voluntary or involuntary”).
MPC § 1.13(2). The Code provides that “ ‘voluntary’ has the
meaning specified in Section 2.01.” MPC § 1.13(3). But, Section
2.01 never defines “voluntary,” except by providing examples of
involuntary actions: a reflex or convulsion; bodily movement while
unconscious or asleep; conduct during hypnosis or as a result of
hypnotic suggestion; and/or “a bodily movement that otherwise is
not a product of the effort or determination of the actor, either
conscious or habitual.” MPC § 2.01(2).
102

4.

Constitutional Law

The Supreme Court has never expressly held that punishment of an
involuntary actor is unconstitutional. However, it has invalidated
statutes that criminalize a “status” or “condition,” rather than
conduct.

a.

Punishment of Drug Addiction
It constitutes cruel and unusual punishment, in violation of the
Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution, for a state
to make it a crime to be addicted to the use of narcotics.
Robinson v. California, 370 U.S. 660, 82 S.Ct. 1417, 8 L.Ed.2d
758 (1962). According to the Supreme Court, a state lacks
constitutional authority to punish a person for the illness of
narcotics addiction, just as “even one day in prison would be
cruel and unusual punishment for the ‘crime’ of having a
common cold.”

b. Punishment for Public Drunkenness
In contrast, in Powell v. Texas, 392 U.S. 514, 88 S.Ct. 2145, 20
L.Ed.2d 1254 (1968), the Supreme Court upheld the conviction
of a person charged with the crime of being found in a state of
intoxication in a public place. Although P asserted that he was
an alcoholic and, therefore, should not be punished under the
principles of Robinson, the Court distinguished Robinson on the
ground that P was not prosecuted for the status or condition of
his alcoholism, but rather for the act of getting intoxicated and
going into a public place. Furthermore, the evidence in the case
indicated that P’s first drink of the day was voluntary, so the
voluntary act requirement was satisfied.

5. Avoiding Confusion
a.

Coerced Acts
An act is not “involuntary,” in the sense described above, merely
because an individual is compelled to perform the act.
Example: C points a loaded gun at D and orders her to steal
V’s watch. D does as she is ordered. Despite the deadly

threat, the law treats the theft as a result of a voluntary
act by D. Although D acted under extreme pressure,
the muscular contractions that went in to stealing the
watch were willed, in the sense that her mind told her
that it was preferable to steal the watch than to die. D
will likely be acquitted of the theft on the ground of
duress, a criminal law defense, but the “voluntary act”
requirement (which, again, is an element of an offense)
is satisfied.

b. Crimes of Possession
Every penal code prohibits possession of certain articles, such as
illegal drugs or obscene materials for dissemination. On its face,
these statutes do not require proof of any act by the defendant.
103
Example:
X plants an illegal drug on D’s person. D is in
possession of the illegal drug. Where is the voluntary
act by D?

i.

Solution
Penal codes define “possession” for current purposes as
occurring if the possessor knowingly procures the article in
question or fails to dispossess himself of it after he is made
aware of its presence. MPC § 2.01(4). Thus, “possession” so
defined only arises if the person voluntarily takes control of
the object (a voluntary act); or, alternatively, “possession”
can be explained in terms of an omission, in which the
person omits his duty to dispossess himself of the contraband
once he is aware of its presence. “Omissions” are discussed
infra.

6.

Important Study Point
Keep in mind that to be guilty of an offense, it is sufficient that the
person’s conduct included a voluntary act. It is not necessary that
all aspects of his conduct be voluntary.

Example:
D knew that he was an epileptic subject to sudden
uncontrollable seizures. Nonetheless, he drove his
automobile and killed pedestrians while suffering from a
seizure. D was charged with the offense of “negligently
driving a vehicle, so as to cause the death of a human
being.” (Assume for current purposes that D’s conduct was
negligent, the “mens rea” of the crime.) Although the
deaths occurred during an involuntary act (the seizure), he
may be convicted of the offense. The actus reus of the
crime for which he was charged (remember, the “actus
reus” is the external aspect of the crime—what society
does not want to occur) was “driving a vehicle so as to
cause the death of a human being.” Therefore, D’s relevant
conduct included the voluntary acts of turning on the
ignition, and driving the vehicle. People v. Decina, 2
N.Y.2d 133, 157 N.Y.S.2d 558, 138 N.E.2d 799 (1956).

B.

Rationale of Voluntary Act Requirement
1.

Utilitarian
A person who acts involuntarily cannot be deterred. Therefore, it is
useless to punish the involuntary actor. It results in pain without the
benefit of crime reduction.

a.

Competing Argument
It is true that persons cannot be deterred during their involuntary
conduct, but the threat of punishment might deter persons from
placing themselves in situations in which their involuntary
conduct can cause harm to others, such as in Decina, supra.
104

2.

Retribution
A more persuasive justification for the voluntary act requirement is
that blame and punishment presuppose free will: a person does not

deserve to be punished unless she chooses to put her bad thoughts
into action.

III. Omissions
A.

General Rule
Ordinarily, a person is not guilty of a crime for failing to act, even if
such failure permits harm to occur to another, and even if the person
could have acted at no risk to her personal safety. This is also the Model
Penal Code position. MPC § 2.01(3).
Example: D, an Olympic swimmer, stands by and watches V, a small
child he does not know, drown in a wading pool. D’s criminal
responsibility, if any, for V’s death would have to be grounded
on the theory that he did not come to V’s aid, an omission.
Although D almost certainly had a moral duty to act, he is not
guilty of any crime because he lacked a legal duty to act.

B.

Rationale for the General Rule
1.

Proving the Omitter’s State of Mind
Criminal conduct requires a guilty state of mind (mens rea). It is
often too difficult to determine the state of mind of one who fails to
act.
Example:
We can reasonably infer an intention to kill when D
puts a loaded gun to the head of another person and
voluntarily pulls the trigger. However, if D fails to come to
another’s aid, it is difficult to know why he stood by. We
run a significant risk of punishing an innocent person (a
person without a mens rea).

2.

Line-Drawing Problems
Difficult line-drawing problems arise in omission cases.
Examples:
Fifty strangers stand by silently while X attacks V.
Difficult questions would arise if omitters could be held
responsible: Should all fifty persons be held responsible?

If not, how do we sensibly draw the line: only those who
had the physical capacity to stop the assault; only those
who fully understood the seriousness of the situation?
A homeless person dies of starvation on the street. Is
everyone who walked by criminally responsible? Only
those who walked by on the day he actually died, or also
those who observed his plight on earlier days?

3.

Promoting Individual Liberty
In a society such as ours, premised on individual liberties and
limited government, the criminal law should be used to prevent
persons from causing positive harm to others, but it should not be
used to coerce people to act to benefit others. Put another way, the
criminal law—as distinguished from our
105
religious and moral teachings—should be limited only to punishing
the most serious moral wrongdoings, and not non-doings. The
criminal law is not intended to punish people for not being virtuous.

C.

Exceptions to the General Rule
Notwithstanding the general rule, a person has a legal duty to act in
limited circumstances, if he is physically capable of doing so. MPC §
2.01(1).

1.

Crimes of Omission: Statutory Duty
Some statutes expressly require a person to perform specified acts.
Failure to perform those acts constitutes an offense. Such an offense
may be characterized as a “crime of omission.”
Examples: States commonly require parents to provide food and
shelter for their minor children. Failure to do so is a
crime. MPC § 230.4. The federal government makes it an
offense not to pay federal taxes. Failure to do so is a
crime.

2.

Crimes of Commission
As distinguished from crimes of omission (statutes that by definition
prohibit certain failures to act), the criminal law sometimes permits
prosecution for a crime of commission (an offense that, by
definition, appears to require proof of conduct, rather than an
omission), although the basis of the prosecution is an omission.
Thus, we have a case of what might be characterized as
commission-by-omission.
Example:
The actus reus of criminal homicide involves the
“killing of a human being by another human being.” The
word “killing” would seem to require conduct on the part
of the person charged with such an offense. However, in
limited cases, discussed below, a person might be
prosecuted for a crime-of-commission by way of omission.

a.

Duty by Status
A person has a common law duty to protect another with whom
he has a special status relationship, typically, one based on
dependency or interdependency, such as parent-to-child, spouseto-spouse, and master-to-servant.
Example: Father fails to obtain needed medical attention for
Sick Child. Sick Child dies. Parent may be prosecuted
for some form of criminal homicide as a result of this
omission. State v. Williams, 4 Wash.App. 908, 484 P.2d
1167 (1971).

b. Duty by Contract
A person may have an express contract to come to the aid of
another, or such a contract may be implied-in-law (e.g., a baby
sitter has an implied contract to protect his ward).
106

c.

Duty by Voluntary Assumption

One who voluntarily assumes the care of another must continue
to assist if a subsequent omission would place the victim in a
worse position than if the Good Samaritan had not assumed care
at all.
Example: D takes V, a stranger, into her home to provide care.
V becomes critically ill. D does not aid V (for example,
by calling a physician), who dies. By assuming care
and secluding V in her home so that V could not get
other help, D had a duty to assist. See Cornell v. State,
159 Fla. 687, 32 So.2d 610 (1947).

d. Duty by Risk Creation
One who creates a risk of harm to another must thereafter act to
prevent subsequent harm.
Example:
Driver D strikes V, a pedestrian, causing minor
injury. D now has a duty to come to V’s aid. If he does
not, and V’s injuries are aggravated (or if V dies) as the
result of the delay in obtaining medical care, D may be
held criminally responsible for the ensuing harm, even
if he was not criminally responsible for the original
injury.

IV.

Social Harm
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

The criminal law does not punish people for conduct or omissions. It
punishes people for conduct or omissions that result in social harm. After
all, it is the harm to society that the criminal law seeks to deter and/or
deserves retributive redress by way of punishment. The voluntary act is the
actus in “actus reus.” The social harm is the “reus.”
Notice, we call this social harm, because this is the criminal law. Although
an individual may be the direct victim of the harm, it is society that brings
the prosecution because it is the community as a whole that is considered
harmed by crime, and thus it is the society as a whole that condemns the
wrongdoer for the social harm. (The harmed person or her family, of course,

may also bring a civil action in tort for the direct harm that occurred.) But,
as we will see below, the term “social harm” has an unusual and broad
meaning.

A.

Definition
“Social harm” may be defined as the destruction of, injury to, or
endangerment of, some socially valuable interest.

1.

Breadth of Definition
Notice that under this broad definition there is social harm simply
from endangering a socially valuable interest.
Example: If Alice tries to shoot Bob while he is asleep, but the
pistol fails to discharge, Bob may suffer no physical or
mental injury, but a socially valuable interest—human life
—was endangered, so there is social harm according to
this broad definition.
107

B.

Identifying the Social Harm
You can determine the “social harm” of an offense simply by looking at
the definition of the crime—the words in the statute or common law—
and identifying the elements of it that describe the external conduct that
constitutes the crime.
Examples:
Common law burglary is defined as the “breaking and
entering of the dwelling house of another at night, with the
intent to commit a felony therein.” The social harm of
burglary occurs when a person “breaks and enters the
dwelling house of another at night.” If he does so as the
result of conduct that includes a voluntary act, the actus reus
of burglary is proved. (As is discussed in the next Part,
“intent to commit a felony therein” is the culpable state of
mind (the mens rea) that must be proven.)
Assume that a rape statute provides that a person is guilty of
a felony if “he intentionally has sexual intercourse with a

female, not his wife, without her consent.” Here, the
prohibited social harm occurs when a male has
nonconsensual sexual intercourse with a female who is not
his wife. Again, the actus reus is proven if this social harm
occurs as the result of conduct that includes a voluntary act.

C.

Breaking Down the Social Harm into Categories
It is sometimes essential for a lawyer (especially in jurisdictions that
follow the Model Penal Code) to be able to look at the definition of a
crime—more specifically at the actus reus portion—and divide up the
“social harm” elements into one or more of the following three
categories.

1.

“Result” Elements (or Crimes)
Some crimes prohibit a specific result.
Example:
The social harm of murder is the “death of another
human being,” i.e., a harmful result.

2.

“Conduct” Elements (or Crimes)
Some crimes prohibit specific conduct, whether or not tangible
harm results thereby.
Example:
A statute prohibiting “driving while intoxicated” fits
this category, as it punishes a certain type of driving
(driving while intoxicated), even in the absence of a
harmful tangible result from that driving (such as death of
another person or injury to property).

3.

“Attendant Circumstance” Elements
A “result” or “conduct” is not an offense unless certain “attendant
circumstances” exist. An “attendant circumstance” is a fact that
exists at the time of the actor’s conduct, or at the time of a particular
result, and which is required to be proven in the definition of the
offense.
Examples: In the “murder” example above in subsection 1., there
is an attendant circumstance: the result (death) must be of

“another human being.” Thus, it is not murder to kill a
dog or a cat; it is
108
murder to cause the death of “another human being.” The
“fact”—attendant circumstance—that must be proven is
that the victim is “another human being.”
In subsection 2., above, the conduct that is prohibited is
not driving, but driving while intoxicated. The italicized
language constitutes the “attendant circumstance” element
of this offense.
Sexual intercourse by a man with a woman does not
constitute common law rape unless certain attendant
circumstances exist: (1) the victim is a woman; (2) the
victim is not the defendant’s wife; and (3) the victim did
not consent.

V.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, page 294]

1. What are the two basic components of the actus reus of an offense?
2. What is the definition of a “voluntary act”?
3.
Alex is employed as a lifeguard. Alex observes Bob in peril in the
water, but Alex prefers to stay out of the water and chat with Carla. Bob
drowns.
T or F. Alex may properly be prosecuted for Bob’s death in a common
law jurisdiction.
4. “Any person who intentionally kills another human being by means of
poison is guilty of murder.” Take the preceding definition and: (a) identify
the words in it that represent the actus reus of the offense; (b) identify the
social harm of the offense; and (c) break down the social harm into its
subcategories (result; conduct; attendant circumstances).

109

PART THREE

Mens Rea
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

II.

Mens Rea: General Principles
A.

Meaning of “Mens Rea”

B.

Rationale of the Mens Rea Requirement

Common Law
A.

“Intentionally”

B.

“Knowledge” or “Knowingly”

C.

Risk-Taking: “Recklessness” and “Criminal Negligence”

D.

“Malice”

E.

“Specific Intent” and “General Intent”

F.

Statutory Construction

III. Model Penal Code
Conversation with Students

IV.

A.

Section 2.02, Subsection 1

B.

Culpability Terms Defined

C.

Interpretative Rules

Strict Liability
A.

Nature of a Strict Liability Offense

B.

Public Welfare Offenses

C.

Non-Public Welfare Offenses

D.

Constitutionality of Strict Liability Offenses

110
E.
V.

Model Penal Code

Review Questions

111

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
You have now considered the first ingredient of a crime, the physical or
external component: the actus reus. (Actually, as you learned, this “first”
component consists of two elements: (1) a voluntary act (or, rarely, an
omission when there is a duty to act); and (2) the resulting social harm.)
Now we turn to the mental component: mens rea. There is no topic you will
consider more often during the semester than mens rea.
In studying mens rea, you should focus on the subject both from a distance
and up close. There are certain questions you can answer only by looking at
the concept from afar, so that you can see its place in the larger picture.
Specifically, try to understand why the Supreme Court has said that mens
rea “is no provincial or transient notion.” Morissette v. United States, 342
U.S. 246, 72 S.Ct. 240, 96 L.Ed. 288 (1952). What purpose does mens rea
play in a just system of punishment? Are there any good reasons to dispense
with the mens rea requirement?
You must also consider “mens rea” up close. There are a number of very
important “mens rea” terms, the precise definitions with which you should
be familiar by the end of the semester. Here, it is critical to separate out the
common law of mens rea from the Model Penal Code, which not only
greatly diverges from the common law, but has also had considerable
influence on statutory and judicial reform.

I. Mens Rea: General Principles
A.

Meaning of “Mens Rea”
The term “mens rea” has a general and a specific meaning. Both usages
of the term are important.

1.

Broad (“Culpability”) Meaning
A person has acted with “mens rea” in the broad sense of the term if
she committed the actus reus of an offense with a “vicious will,”
“evil mind,” “morally blameworthy” or “culpable” state of mind.
Example:
D has nonconsensual sexual intercourse with V, a
woman not his wife (the actus reus of common law rape).
He genuinely but negligently (i.e., unreasonably) believed
that she consented to the sexual act. On these facts, D
committed the actus reus of rape with “mens rea” in the
broad sense of the term: it does not matter that D did not
intend to act without V’s consent; his belief regarding V’s
consent was negligent, so he possessed a culpable or
morally blameworthy state of mind.

2.

Narrow (“Elemental”) Meaning
“Mens rea” exists in the narrow sense of the term if, but only if, a
person commits the actus reus of an offense with the particular
mental state set out expressly in the definition of that offense. This
may be called the “elemental” definition of mens rea.
Example:
Assume that rape is defined in State X as “sexual
intercourse by a male, with a female not his wife, with
knowledge that she did not consent.” Assume further the
facts set out in the Example immediately above. Under the
narrow meaning of “mens rea,” D lacks the requisite mens
rea of rape: this statute
112
requires proof that the actor had knowledge that the female
did not consent. As he did not act with this particular state
of mind, he lacks mens rea in this narrower, elemental,
sense. Notice, however, that he committed the actus reus
of rape in a morally culpable manner (he unreasonably—
foolishly—believed she consented), so he possessed mens
rea in the broader, culpability, meaning of the term.

3.

Practice Point
As you will see as you proceed through the semester, courts use the
term “mens rea” in both senses of the term, so be careful! Also, you
should expect your professor to use the term both ways, unless told
otherwise. The narrow approach—or what I am calling “elemental”
sense of the term—is gaining prominence, especially as the result of
the influence of the Model Penal Code.

B.

Rationale of the Mens Rea Requirement
1.

Utilitarian Argument
It is frequently asserted that a person who commits the actus reus of
an offense without a mens rea is not dangerous, could not have been
deterred, and is not in need of reform. Therefore, her punishment
would be counter-utilitarian.

a.

Contrary Argument
Although the preceding argument is accurate in many
circumstances, it overstates the case slightly. Some persons may
be accident prone; although they cannot help what they do, they
represent a danger to the community that may merit the
application of the criminal law.
Furthermore, there may be deterrence value in punishing a
person who innocently commits the actus reus of an offense as
an object lesson to others who might believe that they could
otherwise avoid punishment by fraudulently claiming a lack of
mens rea. And, abandonment of the mens rea requirement could
create an incentive for people to act with the greatest possible
care, thereby possibly reducing the overall harm to society.

2.

Retributive Argument
The mens rea requirement is solidly supported by the retributive
principle of just deserts. A person who commits the actus reus of an
offense in a morally innocent manner, i.e., accidentally and non-

negligently, does not deserve to be punished, as she did not choose
to act unlawfully.

a. The Supreme Court Speaks
According to the Court, the requirement of mens rea “is as
universal and persistent in mature systems of law as belief in
freedom of the human will and a consequent ability and duty of
the normal individual to choose between good and evil.”
Morissette v. United States, supra. Nonetheless, as discussed
later in this Part, the United State Constitution does not
generally require proof of a mens rea, if a legislature wishes to
forgo this doctrine.
113

II.

Common Law

A.

“Intentionally”
A frequently used common law mens rea term is “intentionally” or
some variation of it (e.g., “intent” or “intentional”). Typically, this term
is used to describe a defendant’s state of mind in relation to a socially
harmful result, such as the death of another person (criminal homicide)
or the destruction of a dwelling house (arson).

1.

Definition
A person commits the social harm of an offense “intentionally” if:
(1) it was her conscious object to cause the result; or (2) if she knew
that the harm was virtually certain to occur as the result of her
conduct.
Example: D plants a bomb in a room in order to kill V. D realizes
that the explosion will almost certainly kill not only V but
the five other persons in the room. D does not want to kill
these bystanders. The bomb explodes, killing all six
persons. On these facts, D has intentionally killed all six
people: he killed V “intentionally” because V’s death was
D’s conscious object; D killed the other five persons

“intentionally” because he knew that their death was
virtually certain to occur from his conduct.

a.

Study Point
Notice in the definition above that the “intent” pertains to the
social harm—the unwanted result—and not to the act that
causes the result. A person may “intend” an act, but for purposes
of analyzing mens rea, the issue is whether the person intended
the social harm that results from the act.
Example: A goes to a target range to practice firing a weapon.
She aims at a target and intentionally pulls the trigger.
To A’s surprise, V jumps in front of the target and is
killed by a bullet from A’s gun. Here, A has caused the
social harm of homicide—the death of another human
being. But, A did not cause this result intentionally. It
was not her conscious object to kill V, nor did she
know when she fired the gun that it would almost
certainly result in a death. We would characterize the
pulling of the trigger as a voluntary act, a part of the
actus reus, but for purposes of determining A’s mens
rea, we focus on her state of mind in relation to the
social harm (here, the death). A may have some mens
rea as to this death, but on these facts, it is not an
“intentional” killing.

2.

Subjective Fault
The mens rea term of “intent” describes what may be characterized
as subjective fault: the fault is “subjective” in that it describes the
actor’s actual morally blameworthy state of mind—what the actor
wants to happen or is consciously aware is practically certain to
happen.
114

3. Transferred Intent Doctrine

Courts frequently speak of a “transferred intent” doctrine: A person
acts “intentionally” as the term is defined above if the result of her
conduct differs from that which she desired only in respect to the
identity of the victim.
Example: D’s conscious object is to kill V. With that purpose in
mind, D fires a gun at V, but the bullet strikes and kills X
instead. The intent to kill V is said to “transfer” to the
actual victim, X. “The intent follows the bullet” it is
sometimes said.

a.

Criticism of Doctrine
The doctrine is unnecessary. The actus reus of murder, for
example, is the killing of a human being by another human
being. In the example above, D intended to cause the death of a
human being (V), and he did cause the death of a human being
(X). The identity of the victim is not part of the definition of the
offense, so there is no need to “transfer” victims. If the law
mindlessly accepts the transferred-intent doctrine, it can lead to
improper results.
Example: A law makes it an offense to “intentionally kill the
President of the United States.” Assume D’s conscious
object is to kill the President’s wife, but she misfires
and kills the President instead. On these facts, she is
not guilty of this offense. Here, the statute specifically
identifies the victim—the President—and it was not
her intention to kill the President. Therefore, D lacks
the specified mens rea in this offense (the intent to kill
the President). The intent can’t follow the bullet here!

B.

“Knowledge” or “Knowingly”
1.

Definition
Some offenses require proof that the actor had knowledge of an
attendant circumstance. At common law, a person acts “knowingly”
regarding an existing fact (an “attendant circumstance”) if she

either: (1) is aware of the fact; (2) correctly believes that it exists; or
(3) suspects that it exists and purposely avoids learning if her
suspicion is correct. The latter (third) form of “knowledge” is
sometimes called “wilful blindness.”
Example: It is a crime to “receive property with knowledge that it
was stolen.” This offense requires proof that the actor has
“knowledge” of an attendant circumstance, namely, that
the property received was stolen. D would have the
requisite “knowledge” if, for example: (1) she was aware
that the received property was stolen, because she saw it
being stolen; or (2) she correctly believed that the property
was stolen, because she paid an extremely low price for it;
or (3) she accurately suspects (although her suspicion is
not strong enough to constitute a “belief”) that the property
was stolen, because she bought it from a known purveyor
of stolen goods, and she told the seller,
115
“Don’t tell me where you got the property.” The third
example constitutes “wilful blindness.”

a.

Criticism of “Wilful Blindness” Doctrine
Notice in the definition above, it is accurate to characterize the
actor as having “knowledge” in the first two cases—D
subjectively knew or correctly believed the property was stolen.
In the third case, with “wilful blindness,” D only suspected it
was stolen and purposely avoided knowledge, so how can it be
said that she actually had such knowledge? She clearly has a
culpable state of mind—some mens rea (perhaps recklessness,
as that concept is defined below)—but critics say that it is
stretching to characterize it as “knowledge.” Nonetheless, most
jurisdictions accept the “willful blindness” doctrine as a form of
“knowledge.”

C.

Risk-Taking: “Recklessness” and “Criminal Negligence”

1.

Overview
The criminal law punishes some forms of risk-taking. But, it is
important to keep in mind that life is filled with risks, and we all
must (and in some cases, wisely) take risks in our lives: to drive on
the freeway or fly in an airplane, to go to law school, to undergo
surgery; and so on. But, our risk-taking may also jeopardize others.
Therefore, risk-taking is properly divisible into various types:
justifiable risk-taking; unjustifiable risk-taking that may properly
result in tort damages; and unjustifiable risk-taking that may also
result in criminal punishment. The latter form of risk-taking is itself
divisible into two: “negligent” risk-taking and “reckless” risktaking.

2.

Unjustified Risk-Taking
In order to determine whether risk-taking is justifiable or not, one
must look at three factors: the gravity of harm that a reasonable
person would foresee might occur as the result of the risk-taking
conduct; the probability that this harm will occur; and the reason for
the proposed conduct, i.e., the benefit to the individual or society of
taking the risk. A risk is unjustifiable if the gravity of the
foreseeable harm, multiplied by the probability of its occurrence,
outweighs the foreseeable benefit from the conduct. United States v.
Carroll Towing Co., 159 F.2d 169 (2d Cir.1947).
Examples: As a practical joke, D takes a pistol and places a single
bullet in the six-chamber gun. He points the gun at V, a
friend, spins the cylinder, and pulls the trigger once. To
D’s horror, he kills V. D took an unjustifiable risk. The
gravity of harm risked: death of one human being. The
probability of the harm occurring: one chance in six. The
reason for taking the risk—the social benefit—is virtually
nil.
A surgeon (with consent) conducts experimental brain
surgery on a 30-year-old patient who will die within six
months without the surgery. The surgeon estimates that

there is a 50% chance that the patient will die during
surgery, but if successful, the patient will live a healthy
life. This may be a justifiable risk:
116
the gravity of harm is high (immediate death of the
patient, but who would otherwise die in six months
anyway); the probability of the harm occurring is 50%;
the benefit from the risky conduct is that a patient who
would die in six months may live a long life. Notice: the
risks here are greater than in the first example, but here
the benefit of the risk-taking is much greater.

3.

Drawing Lines
Once ones determines that the risk-taking is unjustified, a matter
that in an actual trial will be determined by the jury as factfinder, the
analytical issue that remains is whether the risk-taking constitutes
civil-level negligence; criminal-level negligence; or criminal-level
recklessness. Unfortunately, there are no bright lines to separate
these three categories. Even worse, there is no single accepted
common law definition of “criminal negligence” and
“recklessness.” Indeed, unfortunately some courts, especially long
ago, use(d) the latter two terms interchangeably.

4.

“Criminal Negligence”
A person acts in a “criminally negligent” manner if she should be
aware (but isn’t) that her conduct creates a substantial and
unjustifiable risk of social harm. Modern synonyms for “criminal
negligence,” include “gross negligence” and “culpable negligence.”

a.

Degree of Risk
Because a criminal conviction typically results in loss of liberty
and stigmatization of the wrongdoer, a higher level of
culpability is typically required to convict a person of a crime on
the basis of negligence than is necessary to prove civil (tort)

negligence. The added culpability exists if the risk taken is a
substantial and unjustifiable risk.

b. Objective Fault
Negligence constitutes objective fault. That is, a negligent actor
is not blamed because he possessed a wrongful state of mind,
but because he failed to live up to the objective standard of
conduct of a reasonable person. To say that a person was
negligent is to say that, by taking a substantial and unjustifiable
risk, the defendant has failed to act like a reasonable person.

i.

Subjectivizing the “Reasonable Person”
Courts have been reluctant to infuse the defendant’s personal
characteristics into the hypothetical “reasonable person” (or,
as the term originally was stated, “reasonable man”)
standard. In general, courts are willing to consider an actor’s
unusual physical characteristics, e.g., her blindness (so that
the issue would be whether a reasonable blind person would
have acted as D did). However, other factors, such as the
actor’s lack of education, economic status, and mental
disabilities, are frequently not considered, but you should be
aware that there is substantial modern debate about this.
117

c.

Debate Regarding Punishment for Negligence
i.

Critique
The criminal law should not punish people for negligence.
One who acts negligently does not choose to cause harm, so
she does not deserve punishment—sue her in torts, but do
not stigmatize and condemn her as a criminal wrongdoer.
And, if a person does not intend to cause harm and is
unaware of the riskiness of her conduct, she probably cannot
be deterred; moreover, she certainly cannot be deterred if,
due to mental incapacity, she is incapable of living up to the
objective standard.

ii.

Rebuttal
Punishment for negligence makes people act more carefully,
therefore reducing future harm. As for the undeterrable
person, she may be dangerous, so use of the law to
incapacitate her may be beneficial. As for retribution, people
who act negligently demonstrate by their unjustifiably risky
conduct an indifference to the rights of others that morally
justifies punishment.

5.

“Recklessness”
Common law jurists were not of one mind as to the definition of
“recklessness.”

a.

Holmes’s View
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr., believed that a person acts
“recklessly” if she should be aware that she is taking a very
substantial and unjustifiable risk. This is simply a heightened
version of “criminal negligence.” Notice, under this view: “civil
negligence” involves unjustifiable risk-taking; “criminal
negligence” is substantial and unjustifiable risk-taking; and
“recklessness” (as defined here) is very substantial and
unjustifiable risk-taking.

b. Modern Definition
Most courts or statutes now provide that a person acts
“recklessly” if she consciously disregards a substantial and
unjustifiable risk that her conduct will cause the social harm of
the offense. Under this definition, “recklessness” differs from
“criminal negligence” in that it requires that the actor
subjectively be aware that she is taking a substantial and
unjustifiable risk, whereas the negligent actor is unaware of the
risk but should be.

D.

“Malice”
A person acts with “malice” if she intentionally or recklessly causes the
social harm of an offense, as the latter mens rea terms are defined

above.
Example: P throws a stone at V. The stone misses V, but breaks a
window behind V. P is charged with the offense of “malicious
damage to property.” Regina v. Pembliton, 12 Cox C.C. 607
(Eng. 1874). To prove P’s guilt, the prosecutor must show that
P either intended to damage
118
the property (the actus reus of the offense charged) or that P
recklessly damaged it.

1.

Special Definition
“Malice” has a specialized definition in the context of common law
murder, the mens rea of which is “malice aforethought.” This
special definition is considered later in this Outline.

E.

“Specific Intent” and “General Intent”
The common law distinguishes between “general intent” and “specific
intent” crimes. The distinction is critical, because some defenses apply
only, or more broadly, in the case of so-called “specific intent” offenses.

1. Terminological Confusion
Unfortunately, courts and lawyers use the terms “general intent” and
“specific intent” in many different ways. Obviously, use whatever
definitions your professor prefers. What follows is probably the
most common way to distinguish between “general intent” and
“specific intent” offenses.

2.

“Specific Intent” Offenses
In most cases, a “specific intent” offense is one that expressly
contains one of the following mens rea elements in its definition: (1)
the intent to commit some act over and beyond the actus reus of the
offense; (2) a special motive for committing the actus reus of the
offense; or (3) awareness of a particular attendant circumstance.

Examples: “Burglary” is a specific-intent offense of the first type.
The offense is defined at common law as “breaking and
entering the dwelling house of another at night, with the
intent to commit a felony therein.” The actus reus is
“breaking and entering the dwelling house of another at
night.” The mens rea—“intent to commit a felony
therein”—is a mental state pertaining to an act
(commission of a felony) that is not part of the actus reus
of the offense. That is, the crime of burglary is complete
whether or not D ever commits a felony inside the house;
but it is incomplete unless D has this “specific intent” of
further conduct upon entering.
Common law larceny is an example of the second type of
specific-intent offense. Larceny is the “trespassory
(nonconsensual) taking and carrying away of the personal
property of another with the intent to permanently deprive
the owner of the property.” It is a “specific intent” offense
because the actus reus (trespassorily taking and carrying
away the personal property of another) must occur with a
specific motive—not simply to temporarily dispossess the
other person of the property, but to permanently deprive
her of it.
An example of the third variety of specific intent would
be the offense, “receiving stolen property with knowledge
it is stolen.” The specific intent of this offense is that the
actor must be
119
aware (have knowledge) of the attendant circumstance
that the property was stolen.

3.

“General Intent” Offenses
Any offense that requires proof of a culpable mental state, but
which does not contain a specific intent, is a “general intent”
offense. Sometimes, such an offense will have no explicit mens rea

term in the definition of the crime; it is enough that the defendant
committed the actus reus with a culpable state of mind.
Examples:
Common law battery is an “unlawful application of
force upon the person of another.” In this context,
“unlawful” means that the actor “wrongfully” committed
the actus reus of the offense. This means that the actus
reus (application of the force upon the person of another)
must be committed in a morally blameworthy (wrongful)
manner. This is the “general intent” of the offense.
Today, “battery” might be defined with a particular mental
state in its definition: e.g., “intentional application of
force to the person of another.” This definitional change
should not affect its characterization as a general-intent
offense, because this mens rea term does not fit any of the
three types of “specific intent” noted above.

F.

Statutory Construction
A common issue in criminal law litigation is whether a mens rea term in
the definition of an offense applies to all or only some of the actus reus
elements in the definition of the crime. In the absence of explicit rules,
courts have struggled to interpret modern statutes.
Example: Assume that a state defines “rape” as “intentional sexual
intercourse by a male with a female not his wife, without her
consent.” In this definition, the actus reus may be divided up
as follows: “sexual intercourse” (element A); “by a male”
(element B); “with a female” (element C); “not one’s wife”
(element D); and “without her consent” (element E). The
question is: Does the word “intent” in this definition modify
each of these elements? In rape prosecutions, X may
intentionally have sexual intercourse (element A). Suppose,
however, although X intended to have sexual intercourse, he
believed that he had the female’s consent and, indeed, he did
not intend to do it without her consent. In this case X lacked
“intent” regarding element E. But, is such an intent required?
That depends on how the statute is interpreted.

1.

Common Law Interpretive Rules of Thumb
a.

Legislative Intent
The ultimate issue for any court today—always—is to determine
what the legislature intended. A court will try to resolve
interpretive problems by ascertaining the intention of the
drafters of the law, sometimes by looking
120
through legislative history. Often, however, evidence regarding
legislative intent is non-existent or ambiguous, so courts must
look elsewhere.

b. Position of the Mens Rea Term in Definition of Offense
Courts often look at the placement of the mens rea term in the
definition of the offense, in order to ascertain legislative intent.
Example:
A federal statute provides that “whoever, in any
matter within the jurisdiction of a federal agency,
knowingly makes any false statement is guilty of an
offense.” Y knowingly made a false statement, but he
did not know that his statement related to “any matter
within the jurisdiction of a federal agency.” The issue
was whether such knowledge was required under the
statute. Notice that the word “knowingly” in the statute
above follows, rather than precedes, the critical phrase
“in any matter within the jurisdiction of a federal
agency.” The implication is that “knowingly” does not
modify the earlier phrase. United States v. Yermian,
468 U.S. 63, 104 S.Ct. 2936, 82 L.Ed.2d 53 (1984).
The interpretation of this statute might have been
different if the word “knowingly” had been placed at
the beginning of the statute.

c.

Punctuation

Sometimes punctuation is relied upon to determine that a phrase
set off by commas is independent of the language that precedes
or follows it.
Example:
A statute provides that “any person who
intentionally confines another, without authority of
law, in a state prison is guilty of false imprisonment.”
A punctuation-based reading of this statute would be
that the term “intentionally” modifies the words
“confines another … in a state prison”; according to
this interpretation, “intent” does not modify the phrase
“without authority of law” because the latter words are
set off by commas—it is as if the word “intent” flies
over that phrase, skipping it. Thus, according to this
reading, D is guilty if she intentionally confines
another in a state prison under circumstances in which
such confinement, in fact, is without authority of law;
it is not necessary to show that D intended to act
without authority of law.

d. Attendant Circumstances
Courts sometimes assume that, absent evidence to the contrary,
mens rea terms in the definitions of offenses do not apply to
“attendant circumstance” elements of the crime.
Example: Reconsider the rape Example above (beginning of
subsection F.). In the Example, elements B, C, D, and
E are “attendant circumstance” elements. Therefore,
under the rule described here, the “intent” in the
definition of the
121
offense would not apply to those elements: a person
could be convicted of rape although, for example, he
did not intend that V not consent.

III. Model Penal Code

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
The most influential feature of the Model Penal Code is Section 2.02,
“General Requirements of Culpability.” If your professor has you study the
MPC in your class, this will be the most important section you study. Learn
it well, because you will need to use the concepts and provisions of § 2.02
throughout the semester, whenever you apply the Code to a particular
crime.

A.

Section 2.02, Subsection 1
1.

Language
“Except as provided in Section 2.05, a person is not guilty of an
offense unless he acted purposely, knowingly, recklessly, or
negligently, as the law may require, with respect to each material
element of the offense.”

a.

Study Point
Students often ignore language in the Code, such as you have
here, where it says “[e]xcept as provided in Section …” Some
students skip right by it. But, why? It is there for a reason!
Essentially, the other section noted here is incorporated by
reference into the present section. So, § 2.05 is a part of §
2.02(1) (representing an exception to it). Don’t ignore it.
(Section 2.05 is discussed in the Strict Liability section below.)

2.

Significance of Subsection
a.

Role of Mens Rea
Except when § 2.05 applies, the MPC requires proof of mens
rea. More significantly, it requires proof of some particular mens
rea—purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence—as to
each material element of the offense. This contrasts with the
common law, where there might be a mens rea requirement as to
one element but no mens rea required as to one or more other
elements. In other words, with the MPC, each actus reus

element should be “covered” by some mens rea requirement.
None are left naked!
Example: Consider a hypothetical statute in which there are
four actus reus elements, call them A, B, C, and D.
Under § 2.02(1), the statute will contain a mens rea
requirement as to each of these elements. It might be,
for example, that the prosecutor must prove that the
defendant purposely did A, B, C and D; or maybe the
statute will be defined with different mens rea
requirements as to each element. The point is: there is
some culpability requirement as to each element.
122

b. Elemental Approach
Look back at pp. 111 of this Outline, which notes the difference
between the “culpability” and “elemental” approaches to mens
rea. Section 2.02(1) demonstrates that the MPC uses the
elemental approach. A person is not convicted simply because
he committed the actus reus in a morally culpable manner: the
prosecutor must instead prove that the defendant committed the
actus reus with whatever specific state(s) of mind—purpose,
knowledge, recklessness, and/or negligence—are set out in the
definition of the crime.

c.

Fewer Mens Rea Terms
The common law and non-MPC statutes are replete with mens
rea terms. Under the MPC, there are only the four terms set out
here. Not only does this mean that there are fewer terms to learn,
but there are definitions set out for each.

B.

Culpability Terms Defined
Subsection 2 of Section 2.02 of the Code provides definitions of the
four culpability terms. But, be aware that it provides different
definitions depending on whether the actus reus element under
consideration involves a result (e.g., death of a person, or damage or

destruction of property), conduct (e.g., driving a vehicle), or an
attendant circumstance. What follows are some of the definitions, but
you should look at the Code language more fully in your casebook.

1.

Purposely
The common law term “intentionally” is not used in the Model
Penal Code. Instead, the MPC subdivides common law “intent” into
its two alternative components, and calls them “purposely” and
“knowingly.” A person causes a result “purposely” if it is her
conscious object to cause the result. MPC § 2.02(2)(a)(1).

2.

Knowingly
a.

Results
A person “knowingly” causes a result if she is aware that the
result is “practically certain” to result from her conduct. MPC §
2.02(2)(b)(ii).
Example:
Reconsider the bomb Example on page 113.
Whereas all six killings at common law were deemed
“intentional,” under the Code, D purposely killed V,
but knowingly killed the others.

b. Attendant Circumstances
A person acts “knowingly” as to an attendant circumstance if he
is aware that the circumstance exists (MPC § 2.02(2)(b)(i)), or if
he is aware “of a high probability of its existence, unless he
actually believes that it does not exist.” MPC § 2.02(7). The
latter provision is the Code version of the common law “wilful
blindness” doctrine discussed earlier.
123

3.

Recklessly
a.

Basic Definition
A person is said to have acted recklessly if “he consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that the material

element exists or will result from his conduct.” Notice that this
definition conforms with the modern common law definition of
the term.

b. Standard for Evaluating Conduct
The Code basically provides that the standard discussed earlier
—measuring the gravity of foreseeable harm, the probability of
its occurrence, and the reasons for taking the risk—should be
applied. One is reckless when the conscious risk-taking
“involves a gross deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would observe in the actor’s situation.”

i.

“In the Actor’s Situation”
This phrase is intended to permit courts to incorporate some
subjectivity into the objective standard, more than is
permitted at common law. However, the Commentary to the
Code indicates that the phrase is intentionally ambiguous, so
that courts may determine for themselves which
characteristics of the defendant (or “the defendant’s
situation”) should be incorporated into the reasonable
person.

4.

Negligently
The Model Code definition of “negligence” generally conforms
with the common law definition (see II.C.4.): a person acts
negligently when he should be aware of a “substantial and
unjustifiable risk.” This is a risk that constitutes “a gross deviation
from the standard of care that a reasonable person would observe in
the actor’s situation.” MPC § 2.02(2)(d). Notice that the critical
difference between recklessness and negligence under the Code is
that, in the former case, the actor is consciously aware of the
substantial and unjustifiable risk, but proceeds anyway; in the case
of negligence, the actor is not aware of the risk, but should be.

C.

Interpretative Rules

The Code avoids some of the interpretative problems confronting courts
and lawyers (and students!) when dealing with common law and nonMPC statutes, which were discussed earlier.

1.

Default Position
As stated above, the MPC requires some mens rea term for each
element of an offense (§ 2.05 aside). If the statute defining an
offense is silent regarding the issue of mens rea as to one or more of
the material elements, the Code provides that “such element is
established if a person acts purposely, knowingly, or recklessly with
respect thereto.” MPC § 2.02(3). In essence, you fill in the blank
with the words “purposely, knowingly, or recklessly.”
124
Examples:
Hypothetical Statute 1: “A person is guilty of an
offense if he purposely restrains another [call this actus
reus element A], thereby knowingly exposing the other to
the risk of bodily injury [actus reus element B], and
causing mental distress to the victim [actus reus element
C].” Notice that this statute is structured this way:
“purposely A, knowingly B, and C.” In light of § 2.02(3),
this statute really reads: “Purposely A, Knowingly B, and
Purposely or Knowingly or Recklessly C.” That is, the
prosecutor must prove that the defendant purposely
restrained the victim, knowingly put the victim at risk of
bodily injury, and purposely, knowingly, or recklessly (but
not negligently) caused mental distress to the victim.
Hypothetical Statute 2: “A person is guilty if he
restrains another, thereby exposing the other to the risk of
bodily injury, and causing mental distress.” This is the
same actus reus as in Statute 1, but no mens rea terms are
set out at all. But, under the Model Penal Code, there must
be some mens rea term as to each material element of this
crime, so this statute would be read as requiring proof that

each element
recklessly.

occurred

purposely,

knowingly,

or

2. When Just One Mens Rea Term Is Mentioned
If the definition of a MPC statute only sets out a single mens rea
element in the definition of the offense, that mens rea term applies
to every material element of the offense, unless a contrary
legislative intent “plainly appears.” MPC § 2.02(4).
Examples: MPC § 212.3 defines the crime of false imprisonment,
basically as follows: “knowingly restraining another so as
to interfere substantially with his liberty.” Thus, the
material elements here are: restraining another; and
substantially interfering with the other’s liberty. One mens
rea term is set out (“knowingly”), but there is a
requirement of proof of mens rea as to each material
element of an offense, so we know here that the Code
requires the prosecutor to prove that the defendant
knowingly restrained the victim, and knowingly
interfered substantially with the victim’s liberty.
Suppose a statute is structured this way: “Anyone who
does A, B, and knowingly does C is guilty of an offense.”
In this case, “knowingly” is not set out at the start of the
statute but near the end. Therefore, this may be a case
where a contrary legislative intent “plainly appears.” That
is, the legislature probably intends that the word
“knowingly” modify C, but not A and B. (Otherwise, why
didn’t the drafters of the statute put “knowingly” at the
start of the sentence?) If so, then what do we do about
elements A and B? We return to the default position
discussed in subsection 1.: as to elements A and B, the
prosecutor would need to prove that these elements
occurred purposely, knowingly, or recklessly!
125

IV.

Strict Liability

A.

Nature of a Strict Liability Offense
Notwithstanding the general rule that a person is not guilty of an offense
in the absence of mens rea, some crimes are denominated as “strict
liability.” An offense is “strict liability” in nature if commission of the
actus reus of the offense, without proof of a mens rea, is sufficient to
convict the actor.
Example: It is an offense for a driver of a motor vehicle to exceed the
speed limit on a highway. No mens rea is required. Assume
that D exceeds the speed limit because her speedometer is
slightly inaccurate. Even if D had no reason to know that the
speedometer was inaccurate, she is guilty of this strict liability
offense.

1.

Clarification
An offense is sometimes misleadingly characterized as strict
liability in nature if a single, critical element of the offense does not
require proof of any mens rea.
Example: So-called “statutory rape”—sexual intercourse with an
underage female (what constitutes being “underage” varies
by statute)—is often denominated as “strict liability” in
nature. This is a correct description in the sense that, in
most jurisdictions, a person may be convicted of this
offense even if he lacks a culpable state of mind regarding
the female’s age (e.g., he reasonably believed that she was
old enough to consent to intercourse). The fact that the
male intentionally had sexual intercourse is not the key:
what makes the conduct wrongful is the female’s underage
status and, as to this attendant circumstance, a person may
be convicted even if he has no mens rea. Thus, this is
characterized as a “strict liability” offense.

B.

Public Welfare Offenses

Because “mens rea” is deeply embedded in the law, strict liability
offenses are uncommon. The most common type of strict liability
offense is a so-called “public welfare” offense.

1.

Characteristics of Most Public Welfare Offenses
a.

Nature of the Conduct
Such offenses typically involve malum prohibitum conduct, i.e.,
conduct that is wrongful only because it is prohibited (e.g.,
motor vehicle laws), as distinguished from malum in se conduct,
i.e., inherently wrongful conduct (e.g., murder).

b. Punishment
The penalty for violation of a public welfare offense is usually
minor, such as a monetary fine or a short jail sentence.
126

c.

Degree of Social Danger
A single violation of a public welfare offense often threatens the
safety of many persons, e.g., transportation of explosives on a
highway not designated for such use.

C.

Non-Public Welfare Offenses
On rare occasion, non-public welfare offenses are considered strict
liability in nature. Statutory rape is the most common example of such
an offense.

D.

Constitutionality of Strict Liability Offenses
Strict liability offenses are not per se unconstitutional. According to the
Supreme Court, “the state may in the maintenance of a public policy
provide ‘that he who shall do [acts] shall do them at his peril.’ ” United
States v. Balint, 258 U.S. 250, 42 S.Ct. 301, 66 L.Ed. 604 (1922).

1.

Presumption Against Strict Liability
Although strict liability statutes are not unconstitutional per se,
there is a strong presumption against strict liability as to offenses

that have their roots in the common law (i.e. non-public-welfare
offenses). In such circumstances, a court will not assume (absent
evidence to the contrary) that the legislature intended to abandon a
mens rea requirement, even if the statute is silent regarding this
element. Morissette v. United States, 342 U.S. 246, 72 S.Ct. 240, 96
L.Ed. 288 (1952).
Example: In Morissette, M converted government property to his
own use. M believed that the property had been
abandoned. Therefore, he had no intention to steal the
property. On its face, the offense did not require such an
intent. The Court held, however, that the statutory offense
of conversion was a variation on the common law crime of
larceny, which does require a specific intent to steal.
Consequently, the Court held that a specific intent to steal
was an element of the offense, although it was not
expressed in the statute.

E.

Model Penal Code
The MPC abolishes strict criminal liability except as to so-called
“violations.” MPC § 2.05. A “violation” under the Code is an “offense”
(not a “crime”), the violation of which involves “no other sentence than
a fine, or fine and forfeiture or other civil penalty.” MPC § 1.04(5).

1.

Statutes That Are Silent Regarding Mens Rea
As discussed earlier (III.C.1.), a crime (as distinguished from a
“violation”) that does not expressly include a mens rea term in its
definition still has a mens rea requirement: the prosecutor must
prove that the defendant acted purposely, knowingly, or recklessly
as to each material element of the offense.
127

V.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, pages 294–295]

1. What is the “culpability” meaning of mens rea?

2. If Albert “intentionally” kills Bob, what does “intentionally” mean in
this context?
3. T or F. “Rape with intent to kill” is a general-intent offense.
4. Which is the difference between criminal negligence and recklessness?
5.

Does the Model Penal Code recognize strict liability for any crimes?

6. “A person is guilty of an offense if she purposely does X, Y, and Z.” In
order to convict a defendant of this statute under the Model Penal Code, the
prosecutor must prove:
a.

The defendant purposely did X, purposely did Y, and purposely did
Z;

b.

The defendant purposely did X, and purposely, knowingly, or
recklessly did Y and Z;

c.

The defendant purposely did X, and did Y and Z with any culpable
state of mind; or

d. The defendant purposely did X; as for Y and Z, there is no mens rea
requirement.
7. T or F. Strict liability offenses are unconstitutional.

129

PART FOUR

Mens Rea and Mistakes of Fact or
Law
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

II.

Mistake of Fact
A.

Common Law

B.

Model Penal Code

Mistake of Law
Conversation with Students
A.

General Principles

B.

Exceptions to the General Rule

III. Review Questions

130

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
In Part Two of this Outline we studied the external component of a crime,
the actus reus. We saw that there are two components to the actus reus: (1)
conduct that includes a voluntary act (although, on rare occasion, a failure
to act may substitute for the voluntary act); and (2) the social harm that
results from the voluntary conduct. Then, in Part Three, we looked at the
mental element of most offenses, the mens rea.
We are not done with mens rea. Frequently, defendants will claim that they
should not be convicted of an offense because they made a mistake. They
may have been mistaken about some fact (attendant circumstance) or about

the law (either the criminal law for which they have been charged, or some
other law relevant to the prosecution).
Why would a mistake exculpate the actor? The answer is that a mistake of
fact or law sometimes negates the requisite mens rea for the crime. Put
another way, one who acts on the basis of incorrect factual or legal
information sometimes lacks the mens rea for the crime because of the
mistake of fact or law. So understood, courts frequently characterize
“mistake” as a potential “defense” to a crime. It is a defense in one sense—
it is up to the defendant to raise the issue of mistake. But, the ultimate issue
is: Did the defendant possess the mens rea set out in the definition of the
crime? And, remember: “mens rea” is an element of the offense, and the
burden of persuasion is on the prosecutor to prove every element of a
crime. So, the burden is actually on the government to convince the
factfinder beyond a reasonable doubt that, notwithstanding any
mistake of fact or law, the defendant possessed the requisite mens rea.
One final point: in order to understand common law “mistake” doctrine,
you need to be able to distinguish between “specific intent” and “general
intent” offenses. You should also review the distinction between the
“culpability” and “elemental” meanings of the term “mens rea.” So, you
may want to review these concepts from Part Three before proceeding.

I.

Mistake of Fact

A.

Common Law
1.

Overview and Study Point
A defendant is not guilty of a crime if her mistake of fact negates
the mens rea of the offense charged. Although this rule is simple to
state, application of the rule can prove difficult because it is
necessary at common law to distinguish between “specific intent”
and “general intent” offenses. Indeed, whenever a mistake-of-fact
claim is raised in the common law context, the first question you
should ask yourself is: “Is the offense for which the defendant is
charged one of ‘specific intent’ or ‘general intent’?” Once you
answer that question, you will know which rules to apply.

2.

Specific-Intent Offenses
a.

Rule
A defendant is not guilty of a specific-intent crime if her mistake
of fact negates the specific-intent element of the offense. Even
an unreasonable mistake of fact—a mistake that a reasonable
person would not make—will
131
exculpate the actor if the mistake negatives the mens rea
required for the offense.
Examples: N picked up wooden beams from a construction
site, incorrectly believing that they had been
abandoned by the original owner. In short, N
mistakenly believed that the beams no longer
belonged to anyone. N was charged with larceny of
V’s property. People v. Navarro, 160 Cal.Rptr. 692, 99
Cal.App.3d Supp. 1 (1979). Larceny, a specific-intent
offense, is defined as the trespassory (nonconsensual)
taking of the personal property of another with the
intent to steal. On these facts, N is not guilty of
larceny. His mistaken belief that the beams had been
abandoned negates the specific intent of larceny, i.e.,
the intent to steal. N is not guilty regardless of
whether his mistake was reasonable or unreasonable;
in either case, he did not intend to steal. At most, he
acted recklessly or negligently in regard to V’s
property.
D obtains cocaine from V, mistakenly believing that
she is receiving heroin. D is charged with the specificintent offense of “receiving property, knowing that it
is contraband.” D is guilty of this offense,
notwithstanding her mistake: she knew that she was
receiving contraband, the specific intent of the

offense. Her mistake related only to the nature of the
contraband.

b. Study Point
With specific-intent offenses, the common law uses an
“elemental” meaning of the term “mens rea.” Either a defendant
has, or doesn’t have, the specific-intent required in the definition
of the offense. Notice in the first Example above: N may have
been negligent or reckless in his belief that the beams had been
abandoned. If so, he had “mens rea” in the broader,
“culpability,” sense of the term. But, N is acquitted because he
lacked the mens rea in the “elemental” sense. For specific-intent
offenses, that is the key.

3.

General-Intent Offenses
A defendant is not guilty of a general-intent offense if, as the result
of her mistake of fact, she committed the actus reus of the offense
with a morally blameless state of mind, i.e., if she acted without a
“mens rea” in the broad “culpability” sense of the latter term.

a.

Ordinary Rule
A defendant is not guilty of a general-intent offense if her
mistake of fact was reasonable. An unreasonable mistake of fact
does not exculpate.
Example: D drives V’s car without V’s consent. D is charged
with “unauthorized use of a vehicle belonging to
another,” a general-intent offense. D claims, however,
that she mistakenly believed that she had V’s consent.
Based on the
132
rule under discussion, D should be acquitted if her
mistake was reasonable, but convicted if her mistake
was unreasonable. This follows from the fact that if her
mistake was unreasonable (i.e., she was negligent or

reckless in her belief), then she acted with a culpable
state of mind (with mens rea). If her mistake was
reasonable, she acted without mens rea.

b. Exception: “Moral Wrong” Doctrine
Although the rule stated above is the general rule, on rare
occasion a court will convict a defendant of an offense although
her mistake of fact was reasonable, if her conduct violates the
“moral wrong” doctrine. This doctrine provides that there should
be no exculpation for a mistake where, if the facts had been as
the actor believed them to be, her conduct would be immoral,
albeit non-criminal. By knowingly committing a morally
wrongful act, the actor assumes the risk that the facts are not as
she believed them to be, i.e., that her actions are not just morally
wrong, but also legally wrong.
Example:
Consider this classic old English case, Regina v.
Prince, L.R. 2 Crim. Cas. Res. 154 (1875): P took an
unmarried 14-year-old girl out of the possession and
against the will of her parents, in violation of a
general-intent statute that made it an offense to “take
or cause an unmarried girl, under the age of sixteen
years, out of the possession and against the will of her
father or mother.” As it turns out, P thought this 14year-old girl was eighteen years old, and the jury found
that his mistake as to her age was reasonable! Under
the usual rule discussed above, therefore, he would be
found not guilty of the offense because his mistake was
reasonable. However, the court applied the moralwrong doctrine. It concluded that it “is wrong to take
[from her parents] a female of such tender years [as
18] that she is properly called a girl, and can be said to
be in another’s possession.” Therefore, by acting
immorally, P assumed the risk that he might be
mistaken, even reasonably, as to her age!

i.

How to Apply the Doctrine

The moral-wrong doctrine involves a two-step process. First,
the facts: look at the facts from the mistaken actor’s
perspective. That is, we assume the facts were as the
defendant reasonably believed them to be. Second, the moral
judgment: Looking at the facts as the defendant understood
them to be, was the defendant’s conduct morally wrong? In
this context, the issue is not whether the actor believes that
his or her actions were morally wrong, but how society
would answer that question.
Comment:
Notice the unfairness of the moral-wrong
doctrine: In a culturally and socially
heterogeneous society, there will be differences of
opinion on moral issues. Depending merely on the
composition of a jury, D’s conduct might
133
be treated as morally acceptable conduct or,
instead, as immoral behavior. This is one reason
why the moral-wrong doctrine is rarely applied in
the United States today.

c. Alternative Exception: “Legal Wrong” Doctrine
Occasionally, a court will convict a defendant of an offense,
although her mistake of fact was reasonable, if her conduct
violates the “legal wrong” doctrine. This rule substitutes the
word “illegal” for “immoral” in the description of the moralwrong doctrine, but is otherwise applied in the same manner.
Thus, a person is guilty of criminal offense X, despite a
reasonable mistake of fact, if she would be guilty of a different,
albeit lesser, crime Y, if the factual situation were as she
supposed.
Example: Suppose Federal Statute 1 provides that it is a felony
to take a minor (under age 18) from one state to
another in order to perform prostitution. Federal
Statute 2 makes it a misdemeanor to take a non-minor

across state lines for the same purpose. Assume that D
takes X, a 17-year-old female, across state lines to
perform prostitution. D reasonably believed she was
over eighteen years of age. Under the “legal wrong”
doctrine, although D reasonably believed he was
violating State 2 (the misdemeanor), he will be
convicted of State 1 (the felony).

4.

Strict-Liability Offenses
A mistake of fact, whether reasonable or unreasonable, is never a
defense to a strict-liability offense. This rule is logical: a strictliability offense is one that requires no proof of mens rea. Therefore,
there is no mens rea to negate. A defendant’s mistake of fact is
legally irrelevant.

B.

Model Penal Code
1.

General Rule
Subject to the one exception noted below, a mistake of fact is a
defense to a crime if the mistake negates the mental state element
required in the definition of the offense. MPC § 2.04(1)(a). The
Code dispenses with the common law distinction between “general
intent” and “specific intent” offenses: the mistake-of-fact rule
applies to all offenses in the same manner. Either the defendant has
the mens rea set out in the definition of the offense, or he doesn’t. It
is as simple as that!
Example: D has sexual intercourse with V, unreasonably believing
that she consented. He is prosecuted under the following
statute: “A male is guilty of rape if he recklessly compels a
female not his wife to have sexual intercourse with him.”
Based on this statute, D is guilty of rape if his mistake
regarding her lack of consent constituted recklessness
(because, in such a case, he “recklessly compelled” her to
have intercourse with him); he would not be guilty of rape
if his mistake was negligent

134
(because, in these circumstances, he does not have the
requisite mens rea of recklessness).

2.

Exception to the General Rule
In a variation on the common law legal-wrong doctrine, the defense
of mistake-of-fact is inapplicable if the defendant would be guilty of
a lesser offense had the facts been as he believed them to be.
However, under such circumstances, unlike the common law, the
defendant will be punished at the level of the lesser, rather than the
greater, offense. MPC § 2.04(2).
Example:
D has sexual intercourse with an 11-year-old girl,
although he believed that the girl was 14. Assume that
under state law, D is guilty of first-degree statutory rape if
he purposely or knowingly has sexual intercourse with a
girl under the age of 12; D is guilty of second-degree
statutory rape if he purposely or knowingly has sexual
intercourse with a girl between the ages of 12 and 16.
Under MPC § 2.04, D will be punished as if he had
committed second-degree statutory rape, the crime he
believed that he was factually committing. In contrast,
under the common law “legal wrong” doctrine, D would
be convicted of first-degree statutory rape.

II.

Mistake of Law
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

Every schoolchild has heard the refrain, “Ignorance of the law is no
excuse.” For once, a shibboleth is correct or, at least, nearly so. As you will
see, there are only two common law exceptions, and one constitutional
limitation, to this rule. The Model Penal Code differs only marginally from
the common law, so they are discussed together.
One other point before we proceed: the law treats ignorance of the law, and
mistakes regarding the meaning of the law, interchangeably. Therefore,

whenever the term “mistake” is used, the comments apply as well to claims
of ignorance.

A.

General Principles
1.

General Rule
In general, knowledge of the law is not an element of an offense.
MPC § 2.02(9). Moreover, a mistake of law—even a reasonable
one!—does not ordinarily relieve an actor of liability for the
commission of a criminal offense. Thus, this is a much tougher rule
than the mistake-of-fact rules considered above.

2.

Purported Justifications for the Rule
a.

Certainty of the Law
The law is definite. Therefore, any mistake of law is inherently
unreasonable.
135

i.

Rebuttal
Perhaps this rationale was accurate at original common law
when there were few crimes and all of them involved malum
in se (morally wrongful) conduct. Today, however, there are
countless criminal statutes, many of which involve malum
prohibitum (wrong only because it is prohibited) conduct,
and some of which are exceedingly complex. It is perfectly
reasonable today to be unaware of some laws or to be
confused as to their meaning.

b. Concern About Fraud
If a mistake-of-law defense were recognized, it would invite
fraud. Every defendant would assert ignorance or mistake of
law, and it would be nearly impossible to disprove the claim.

i.

Rebuttal

The risk of fraud exists in many aspects of civil and criminal
litigation. For example, the doctrines of mens rea and
insanity are susceptible to fraudulent claims, but we trust
juries to determine which claims are fraudulent.

c.

Promoting Knowledge of the Law
We want people to learn the law. To promote education—to
deter ignorance—the law must apply strict liability principles.
As Holmes put it, “justice to the individual is rightly outweighed
by the larger interests on the other side of the scales.” O.
Holmes, THE COMMON LAW 48 (1881).

i.

Rebuttal
The strict liability rule, although it is utilitarian in character,
may, in fact, be counter-utilitarian. If citizens knew that they
could avoid punishment if they made reasonable efforts to
learn the law, but that they would be punished for
unreasonable mistakes of law, they would have an incentive
to learn the law. But, under current law, they are punished
even for reasonable mistakes of law, so they may not make a
full-fledged effort to educate themselves. Beyond this,
retributivists would argue that unless a person chooses to do
wrong, he should not be punished; if a person does not
knowingly commit a wrong (or, at least, act unreasonably in
learning the law), society has no basis for exacting
retribution.

B.

Exceptions to the General Rule
1.

Mistakes That Negate the Mens Rea
A defendant is not guilty of an offense if his mistake of law, whether
reasonable or unreasonable, negates an element of the crime
charged. See MPC § 2.04(1)(a).
Examples: D1, an airline pilot, was charged with multiple counts
of “willfully” failing to file a federal income tax return

(and pay taxes!). Under federal criminal tax laws,
“willfulness” was
136
defined as an “intentional violation of a known legal
duty.” Thus, to be convicted, the prosecutor had to prove
that D1 intentionally violated a known legal duty to file a
federal income tax return. D1 testified at trial that he
believed that his wages were not “income” within the
meaning of the Internal Revenue Code and, therefore, he
claimed he did not realize that he had a duty to report his
wages. Cheek v. United States, 498 U.S. 192, 111 S.Ct.
604, 112 L.Ed.2d 617 (1991). The Supreme Court held
that D1 was entitled to have the jury instructed that, if D1
genuinely (albeit quite unreasonably) believed that wages
were not income, D1 was not guilty of the offense
charged. In such circumstances, D1’s mistake regarding
the legal meaning of the term “income” would negate the
element of “willfulness,” in that he did not intentionally
violate a known legal duty.
D2, an apartment tenant, installed floor boards in his
home with the landlord’s permission. When D2 moved
out, he tore out the boards, believing that he had a legal
right to do so. However, under his jurisdiction’s landlordtenant law, the floor boards, although constructed by D2,
legally belonged to the landlord. D2 was prosecuted for
“purposely, knowingly, or recklessly destroying the
property of another.” If D2’s mistake regarding property
law (i.e., regarding who owned the floor boards) was a
reasonable mistake or, at most, a negligent mistake, he
should be acquitted. In such circumstances, his mistake of
property law proves that D2 did not purposely, knowingly,
or recklessly destroy the “property of another”—he
innocently or negligently believed he was destroying his
own property!

a.

Rationale
Either a person has, or does not have, the requisite mens rea of
an offense. It is rare that knowledge of some law is an element
of an offense, but when it is, the prosecutor must prove such
knowledge!

2. Authorized-Reliance Doctrine
A person is not guilty of a criminal offense if, at the time of the
offense, he reasonably relied on an official statement of the law,
later determined to be erroneous, obtained from a person or public
body with responsibility for the interpretation, administration, or
enforcement of the law defining the offense. MPC § 2.04(3)(b);
Commonwealth v. Twitchell, 416 Mass. 114, 617 N.E.2d 609 (1993).

a.

On Whom or What Body Is Reliance Reasonable
Although the common law is less clear than the Model Penal
Code in this regard, apparently a defendant may reasonably rely
on an official statement of the law found in a statute, a judicial
opinion, an administrative ruling, or an official interpretation of
the law provided by
137
one who is responsible for the law’s enforcement or
interpretation, such as the United States or State Attorney
General.
Examples:
On January 2, 2014, a state supreme court rules
that a statute prohibiting conduct X is
unconstitutional. In reliance on that opinion, On
January 3, 2014, D1 performs conduct X. Later, the
court overrules itself and concludes that the statute is
constitutional, i.e., that conduct X is unlawful. D1 is
prosecuted for his January 3, 2014 conduct under the
now valid statute. State v. O’Neil, 147 Iowa 513, 126
N.W. 454 (1910). Because D1 reasonably relied on

the court’s original interpretation of the law (that the
statute was invalid), D1 is entitled to acquittal.
D2 requests an official opinion of the State Attorney
General regarding whether it is lawful to commit act
X. The Attorney General furnishes D2 with an official
“opinion letter” stating that it is legal to do X. D2 acts
on the basis of this letter. Subsequently, a court rules
that the Attorney General’s legal interpretation was
incorrect, i.e., that conduct X is unlawful. If
prosecuted for committing act X, D2 should be
acquitted: she acted on the basis of an official
interpretation of the law issued by a person with
authority to render such an opinion.
In Hopkins v. State, 193 Md. 489, 69 A.2d 456 (1949),
a local prosecutor informed D3 that it was lawful to
erect a particular sign. In reliance, D3 erected the
sign. Thereafter, the prosecutor charged D3 with
violation of the law. The court held that D3 was not
entitled to a mistake-of-law defense. Unlike D2’s
case, there was no evidence here that the local
prosecutor provided D3 with a formal, or official,
interpretation of the law. The prosecutor may have
provided an off-the-cuff informal interpretation,
which is insufficient.

3.

Due Process Clause
In extremely rare circumstances, it offends due process to punish a
person for a crime of which she was unaware at the time of her
conduct. Lambert v. California, 355 U.S. 225, 78 S.Ct. 240, 2
L.Ed.2d 228 (1957).

a.

Facts of Lambert
L, a Los Angeles resident, had previously been convicted of a
felony while she lived in the city. She was unaware of an
ordinance that required ex-felons residing in the city to register

with the police. She failed to register and was prosecuted under
the ordinance.

b. Holding
The Supreme Court agreed that the ordinary ignorance-of-thelaw-is-no-excuse rule is “deep in our law,” but it warned that the
Due Process Clause occasionally limits its application. In this
case, the Court concluded that it violated due process to convict
L in the absence of “actual
138
knowledge of the duty to register or proof of the probability of
such knowledge.”

c.

Scope of the Holding
The scope of the Lambert principle is uncertain. However, due
process probably is not violated unless three factors co-exist: (1)
the “unknown” offense criminalizes an omission (here, the
failure to register); (2) the duty to act is based on a status
condition rather than conduct (here, mere presence of an exfelon in Los Angeles triggered the duty); and (3) the offense is
malum prohibitum in nature.

III. Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, page 295]
1. Dennis breaks and enters Barbara’s home at night believing that it is his
own home. (“Gee, I wonder why my keys don’t work. I will have to break
in.”) Dennis is charged with burglary (“breaking and entering a dwelling
house of another at night with the purpose to commit a felony therein”). At
common law, Dennis is:
a.

Not guilty, if his mistake is reasonable; guilty if his mistake is
unreasonable;

b.

Not guilty, regardless of whether his mistake is reasonable or
unreasonable; or

c.

Guilty, regardless of whether his mistake is reasonable or
unreasonable.

2. Answer question 1 under the Model Penal Code.
3. T or F. D has sexual intercourse with V, a woman to whom he is not
married, honestly but incorrectly believing she consented. If he is negligent
in his belief, he is guilty of rape (defined for current purposes as “sexual
intercourse by a male with a female not his wife without her consent”).
4.
When will an unreasonable mistake of law exculpate an actor at
common law or under the Model Penal Code?

139

PART FIVE

Causation
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

II.

Actual Cause (Cause-in-Fact)
A.

General Principles

B.

Steps for Determining the “Actual Cause”

C.

Multiple Actual Causes

D.

Concurrent Sufficient Causes

Proximate Cause (Legal Cause)
A.

General Principles

B.

Direct Cause

C.

Intervening Cause

III. Review Questions

140

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
Previously you learned that a crime is composed of an “actus reus” and, in
nearly all circumstances, a “mens rea.” In turn, you learned that the “actus
reus” of an offense includes two elements: a “voluntary act” (or, in limited
circumstances, an “omission”) and “social harm.” But, these latter two
elements—“voluntary act” and “social harm”—do not exist independently
of each other: it is not enough for the prosecutor to prove that a defendant
committed a voluntary act and that social harm occurred. For the defendant
to be convicted, there must be a link between his voluntary act and the
social harm. Put differently, the defendant’s voluntary act must have caused

the prohibited social harm. That link—causation—is the subject at hand. In
turn, as discussed below, “causation” is divisible into two elements, “actual
cause” and “proximate cause.”
Once we have completed this Part, you will have all of the basic
components—elements—of a crime: (1) voluntary act (or, rarely, omission);
(2) social harm; (3) mens rea; (4) actual causation; and (5) proximate
causation.
One important point: Although “causation” can be said to be an element of
all offenses (since all offenses require some form of social harm, even if
such social harm is merely the endangerment of some socially valuable
interest), as a practical matter “causation” is only an issue when a person is
charged with a “result” crime, most especially criminal homicide (the
“result” being the death of another human being).

I.

Actual Cause (Cause-in-Fact)

A.

General Principles
1.

Rule
A person is not guilty of an offense unless she is an actual cause of
the ensuing harm. Both the common law and the Model Penal Code
provide that conduct is the “actual cause” of the prohibited result if
the result would not have occurred but for the actor’s conduct. MPC
§ 2.03(1)(a). This is the so-called “but for” or “sine qua non” test of
causation.

2.

Study Point
“Actual cause” (or “cause-in-fact”—perhaps a more useful, but less
often stated, way of describing this element) is an empirical matter.
That is, we are looking in the real world to identify which person (or
persons) or natural forces were necessary for the result to occur (for
example, the death of a human being). Frequently, the answer comes
from experts—a medical examiner, for example, who can provide
the “cause of death.”

B.

Steps for Determining the “Actual Cause”

1.

Identifying the Relevant Conduct
Determine what is (are) the relevant voluntary act(s) committed by
D. If the case is based on an omission, determine what the omission
is, and substitute that for the “voluntary act” in the following
discussion.

2.

Frame the Question Properly
Ask the question: “But for D’s voluntary act(s) [omission] would
the social harm have occurred when it did?”
141

a.

Significance of “Yes”
If the social harm would have occurred when it did even if D
had not acted, then D is not the actual cause of the harm and,
therefore, is not guilty of the offense. In a sense, “yes” (yes, it
would have occurred anyway when it did) means “no” (no
criminal liability).

b. Significance of “No”
If the social harm would not have occurred when it did but for
D’s voluntary act(s), D is an actual cause of the social harm, in
which case you move on to the remaining causation issue
(proximate cause), discussed in II.
Example: D fires a gun at V, intending to kill him. A splitsecond before the bullet reaches V, lightning strikes
and instantly kills V. Ask: “But for D’s voluntary act of
firing the gun at V, would V have died when he did?”
The answer here is “Yes”: even if D had not fired the
gun, V would have died exactly when he did as the
result of lightning. Therefore, D is not an actual cause
of V’s death. He is not guilty of murder. (D is guilty of
attempted murder, however, a matter for discussion
elsewhere—but he is not guilty of murder, because he
did not cause that result, the death of V.)

C.

Multiple Actual Causes
There usually are multiple actual causes of a result. A person who dies
of lung cancer, for example, might not have died when she did but for
her smoking habit and living in a smog-polluted city. It can also be the
case that two persons—two potential defendants—are the actual cause
of a result.
Example: Donald shoots V in the abdomen. Medical testimony will
show that, based on this wound alone, V would have died
from loss of blood in two hours. Simultaneously, Denise (who
is not acting in concert with Donald—she has her own grudge
against V) also shoots V. According to medical testimony, this
wound alone would have killed V in five hours. V dies as the
result of the two wounds in one minute. Based on these facts,
both D1 and D2 are actual causes of the death.
To see how this is the case, follow the procedure from above.
Ask: “But for Donald’s voluntary act [of shooting V in the
abdomen] would V have died when he did [in one minute]?”
The answer: “No.” If Donald had not shot V, V would have
died in five hours from Denise’s voluntary act. Thus, Donald
accelerated V’s death. This is sufficient to prove “actual
cause.”
Now ask: “But for Denise’s voluntary act [of shooting V],
would V have died when he did [in one minute]?” The
answer, again, is “No.” V would have died in two hours from
Donald’s voluntary act. Thus, Denise also accelerated V’s
death. She, too, is an actual cause.
142

1.

Study Point
In the real world, a hypothetical like the last one—two people,
entirely independently of each other, shooting a victim
simultaneously—is more a law-professor’s dream (and student
nightmare?) than reality. Indeed, one may wonder whether experts

could provide the type of precise testimony hypothesized here. In
reality, if two people shoot the victim at the same time, they are
likely working in concert—co-conspirators, according to concepts
discussed elsewhere in this Outline. If they were working in concert,
they would sink or swim together. That is, they would be treated as
if they were just one person, so you would not have to go through
this separate analysis. But, in the hypothetical, they were acting
independently, so the analysis must be independent of each other.

D.

Concurrent Sufficient Causes
In rare circumstances, the “but for” test may apparently fail to reach the
morally sensible result. The problem arises when two acts, either one of
which is sufficient to cause the resulting harm when it did, occur
concurrently.
Example: D1 and D2, not acting in concert, shoot V simultaneously.
(V is obviously a very unpopular guy!) A bullet from D1’s
gun strikes V in the head; D2’s bullet strikes V in the heart. V
dies instantly. Medical testimony indicates that either wound
would have killed V instantly. Application of the “but for” test
will demonstrate that neither D1 nor D2 “caused” V’s death,
because V would have died when he did—instantly—as the
result of either wound.

1.

Substantial Factor Test
In such cases, many courts resort to the “substantial factor” test, a
standard that is often used in tort cases, as well. The question to be
asked is: “Was D’s conduct a substantial factor in the resulting
harm?” In the example above, D1 and D2 are each substantial
factors in V’s death, because each inflicted a mortal wound.

2.

Model Penal Code
The MPC does not apply the substantial factor test—it uses the “but
for” test in all cases. However, the Commentary to the Code
explains that, in deciding whether a defendant was a “but for” cause
of a “result,” one would state the “result” with great specificity. In

the current hypothetical, one would describe the result as “death by
a bullet to the head and one to the heart.” Explained that way, D1
and D2 are both actual causes of the result, because V would not
have died from two bullet wounds but for each defendant’s conduct!

II.

Proximate Cause (Legal Cause)

A.

General Principles
1.

Role of “Proximate Cause” in Legal Analysis
A person who is an actual cause of resulting harm is not responsible
for it unless she is also the proximate (or “legal”) cause of the harm.
143

a.

Relationship of “Proximate Cause” to “Actual Cause”
“Actual cause” analysis identifies the causal candidates for legal
responsibility for a result. The purpose of “proximate causation”
is to determine who among these candidates should be held
causally accountable for the harm. Which “cause” will we pick
out of the “causal lineup”?

b. Proximate Causation and Justice
As discussed above, “actual cause” is a matter hopefully
susceptible to empirical verification. This is not the case with
“proximate cause.” Ultimately, when the law states that a
defendant was the proximate cause of a result, this is a shorthand
way of saying that the jury has determined it is morally just to
hold this person causally responsible for the harm.

2.

Common Law, Model Penal Code, and Study Point
The discussion that follows focuses on common law analysis of
“proximate causation” doctrine. As with any “what is morally just”
analysis, there is no single or straightforward answer. The drafters
of the Model Penal Code have another way of handling the issue.
They treat “proximate causation” as an issue of culpability, rather
than causation. (Technically, the only “causal” issue under the Code

is the but-for test discussed above.) The MPC issue is whether the
defendant can be said to have purposely, knowingly, recklessly, or
negligently (whichever is relevant in a particular case) caused “a
particular result,” if the “result” occurs in an odd or unexpected
manner. This is essentially asking the same question as the common
law does with “proximate causation” analysis (as you will see
below). And, the Code takes all of the common law factors
discussed below and basically rolls them into a single, explicitly
policy-oriented question for the jury: Was “the actual result … too
remote or accidental in its occurrence to have a [just] bearing on the
actor’s liability or on the gravity of the offense.” MPC § 2.03 (2)(b)
and (3)(b). (The word “just” is in brackets so that a legislature can
decide whether to include the word.)

B.

Direct Cause
1.

Looking for a “Direct Cause”
In proximate causation analysis, look at the facts in the case and
determine whether there were any actual (but-for) causes of the
result that came into the picture after D’s voluntary act. If there
were none, D may be described as the “direct cause” of the social
harm.
Example: D shoots V. D dies instantly. As no other but-for causal
force occurred after D’s relevant voluntary act, D is the
direct cause of V’s death.

2.

Significance of Identifying a Direct Cause
A voluntary act that is a direct cause of the social harm is also a
proximate cause of it. This is because there is no other candidate for
causal responsibility. Thus, in the last hypothetical, D is the actual
and proximate cause of V’s
144
death. If D possessed the requisite mens rea, he may be convicted of
some form of criminal homicide (assuming no defense).

C.

Intervening Cause
1.

Definition
An “intervening cause” is an actual cause (a “but for” cause) of
social harm that arises after D’s causal contribution to the result. (It
is an “intervening” cause in that it occurs after the defendant’s
voluntary act or omission, but before the resulting social harm for
which the defendant is being prosecuted.)
Examples:
D shoots V. D is taken to a hospital where X, a
physician, attends to V’s wound. Shortly thereafter, V dies.
X might, or might not, be an “intervening cause.” One
possibility is that X had nothing to do with causing V’s
death. For example, X may have provided excellent
medical care that extended (or, at least, did not shorten)
V’s life. If so, X is not an actual cause of V’s death—she is
not an “intervening cause.” This leaves D as the direct
cause of V’s death (unless we can point to some other
cause).
However, suppose that D did not mortally wound V, and V
died due to negligent medical care by X. If so, D remains
an actual cause of the death (but for D shooting V, V
would not have been taken to the hospital, and thus would
not have died at X’s hands). But, X is also an actual cause
of the death. Therefore, as X’s actions occurred after D
shot V, X’s conduct constitutes an intervening cause. We
now have a proximate causation issue—who should be
held causally and legally responsible for the death?

2.

General Role of Intervening Causes
An intervening cause does not necessarily relieve a defendant of
causal responsibility for the resulting harm. At common law, various
factors come into play in proximate causation analysis. Those
factors are discussed below. The point to stress here is that these are
factors, not rigid rules!

3.

Nature of Intervening Cause
It is useful, although not always dispositive, to determine whether
the intervening cause was a response to the defendant’s act, or
merely a coincidence. (Sometimes, a “responsive” intervening cause
is called a “dependent” intervening cause; sometimes a
“coincidental” intervening cause is called an “independent”
intervening cause.)

a.

“Responsive” and “Coincidental” Distinguished
An intervening cause is a responsive intervening cause if it
occurs as a response to the defendant’s earlier conduct (it was
dependent on the defendant’s conduct). An intervening cause is
coincidental if the factor would have come into play even in the
absence of the defendant’s conduct (it is independent of the
defendant’s conduct).
145
Examples: D1 shoots V1. V1 is taken to a hospital for medical
care where X1, a surgeon, conducts negligent surgery
on V1. V1 dies as the result of the surgery. X1’s
conduct is a responsive intervening cause: her actions
were a medical response to D1’s act of shooting V1.
D2 shoots V2. V2 is taken to a hospital for medical
care, where X2, another patient, has an insane
delusion and walks into various patients’ rooms and
kills everyone in sight, including V2. X2 is a
coincidental intervening cause. X2’s actions were not
in response to D2’s conduct: X2 was going to kill
everyone in sight regardless. He was even going to
come into V2’s room regardless. D2 simply put V2 in
the wrong place at the wrong time.

b. Legal Significance of Terminology
Generally speaking, a defendant is responsible for a responsive
intervening cause, unless the responsive intervening act was not

only unforeseeable but freakish in its occurrence. In contrast, a
defendant is not ordinarily responsible for a coincidental
intervening cause, unless this coincidence was foreseeable to a
reasonable person in the defendant’s situation.
Examples: In the surgery example above, D1 is the proximate
cause of V1’s death, although X1 was negligent. X1’s
conduct was a response to D1’s conduct; and
negligence by a doctor, although actionable in tort
law, cannot be described as so rare as to be freakish.
In contrast, if X1 had conducted the surgery while
under the influence of heroin, this could be considered
so unusual or bizarre that X1, rather than D1, would
be considered the proximate cause of the death.
In the insane delusion example above, D2 is not the
proximate cause of the death: X2 was a coincidental
intervening cause, and his intervention was (let’s
hope) unforeseeable to a reasonable person in D2’s
situation at the time of D2’s conduct. So, causal
responsibility for the death shifts from D2 to X2.

4.

Other Important Factors
Remember that there is no absolutely dispositive test for
determining proximate causation, and that includes the analysis
above. Here are some other factors to consider. (Your professor or
casebook may discuss others, too.)

a.

Intended-Consequences Doctrine
In general, a defendant is the proximate cause of a result, even if
there is an intervening cause, if the defendant intended the result
that occurred. But, one should be very precise in stating what
“result” the defendant intended: a person may want someone
dead in a particular manner, in which case the “intended
consequences” doctrine only applies if the result occurs in the
precise manner desired.

146
Example:
M wants V, her nine-month-old child, dead by
poisoning. She obtains poison, which she furnishes to
X, V’s nurse, in the guise of medication. She instructs X
to administer it to V later that day. X does not follow
instructions, and instead places the “medication” on a
table, where Y, a child too young to understand the
consequences of his actions, picks it up and
administers the poison to V. V dies. Regina v. Michael,
169 Eng. Rep. 48 (1840). Although there were two
intervening causes in this case (X’s negligent act of
placing the poison on a table in Y’s reach; and Y’s act
of administering the poison to V), the court affirmed
M’s conviction for the death of her child. This is
consistent with the intended-consequence doctrine.
The unstated premise is that M got what she wanted
(the death of her child) in the very manner in which
she wanted it (by poisoning). The fact that this result
occurred in an unforeseeable manner (at the hands of
Y, rather than X), did not relieve M of responsibility for
the death.

b. Free, Deliberate, Informed Human Intervention
In general, a defendant is not the proximate cause of a result if a
free, deliberate, and informed act of another human being
intervenes. H. Hart & H. Honore, CAUSATION IN THE LAW
326 (2d ed. 1985). This doctrine is based on the retributive
theory that free will is a critical factor in the determination of
moral responsibility for social harm. When a person acts of her
own free will, she should accept full responsibility for the results
of her actions.
Example: D strikes V with his fist, and leaves V unconscious
on the ground. Later, X observes V on the road and
exploits the situation by robbing V. D is the proximate
cause of the battery. But, he would not be the

proximate cause of the ensuing robbery (although it
would not have occurred but for the battery), because
X’s act of robbing V is a “free, deliberate, and
informed” intervening human act.

c. Apparent Safety Doctrine
Even though the defendant has created a dangerous situation,
she is not responsible for the ensuing result if it can be
determined that the dangerous situation created by the defendant
is over—that the victim, once at risk from defendant’s conduct,
has reached apparent safety, only then to be harmed by some
other factor.
Example:
D threatened injury to his spouse, V, at home.
Therefore, V left their home on a sub-freezing night
and travelled to her father’s home where she would
have been welcomed and protected by him. Instead of
entering the house, however, she slept the night outside
in the cold, in order not to bother her father. V died of
cold. State v. Preslar, 48 N.C. 421 (1856). D was an
actual cause of V’s death (but for his threat, she would
not have gone out into the cold), but so is
147
V an actual cause of her own death. The court held that
D was not the proximate cause of V’s death. This is
consistent with the apparent-safety doctrine: she
reached apparent safety when she arrived at her
father’s home. (Notice, she would also lose under the
“free, deliberate, informed human intervention”
principle discussed immediately above.)

III. Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, page 296]
1.

State the test for “actual cause.”

2.
Albert shoots Bob in the leg, intending to kill him. He leaves Bob
helpless on a rural road, bleeding. An hour later, a fox from the nearby
forest smells the blood, comes to Bob’s body because of the smell, and kills
Bob, eating him. How would you characterize the fox (other than as a
“hungry animal”!) in terms of causal analysis?
3.

In the last question, is Albert the proximate cause of Bob’s death?

4. What are the five elements of a crime that you have studied so far?

149

PART SIX

Defenses to Crime: Justifications
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

II.

Justification Defenses: Generally
A.

Definition

B.

Basic Structure of Justification Defenses

Self-Defense
A.

Common Law

B.

Model Penal Code

III. Defense-of-Third-Parties

IV.

A.

Common Law

B.

Model Penal Code

Defenses of Property and Habitation
Conversation with Students

V.

A.

Defense of Property

B.

Defense of Habitation

C.

Special Issue: Spring Guns

Law Enforcement Defenses
Conversation with Students
A.

Crime Prevention

B. Arrest

150

C.
VI.

Constitutional Law

Necessity
Conversation with Students
A.

Common Law

B.

Model Penal Code

VII. Review Questions

151

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
Alright. You have learned the basic elements of a crime. Now we look at
some of the most important defenses to crimes. (We have already discussed
two potential defenses: “mistake-of-fact” and “mistake-of-law.”)
As you will see, there are two major categories of defenses: justification
defenses and excuse defenses. (There are other categories, but don’t worry
about them for now.) In regard to justification defenses, most criminal law
casebooks focus almost exclusively on defenses to the use of deadly force.
This is because most appellate court opinions involve criminal homicide
prosecutions. Therefore, this Outline, too, will usually center on deadly
force.

I.

Justification Defenses: Generally

A.

Definition
A justification defense is one that indicates society’s belief that the
defendant’s conduct was morally good, socially desirable, or (at least)
not wrongful. Thus, the killing of another human being, ordinarily a
morally wrong and socially harmful outcome, is considered proper (or,
at least, “not wrong”) if it occurs for a “justifiable” reason, such as selfdefense.

B.

Basic Structure of Justification Defenses
In general, a justification defense contains three components, each of
which will be developed more fully in subsequent sections of this Part.

1.

Necessity
Ordinarily, use of force against another is not justifiable unless it is
necessary. That is, if a person can protect herself or her property
without the use of force, then force is unjustified.

2.

Proportionality
Ordinarily, a person may not use force that is disproportional to the
threat that motivates the use of force. For example, deadly force
should not be used to repel a non-deadly threat.

3.

Reasonable Belief
A person may be able to successfully assert a justification defense
even if she is wrong about the attendant circumstances. Ordinarily, a
defendant’s use of force is justified if she possesses a reasonable,
even if incorrect, belief that the use of force is necessary and
proportional to a supposed threat.

II.

Self-Defense

A.

Common Law
1.

General Rule
Subject to clarification below, a person is justified in using deadly
force against another if: (a) he is not the aggressor; and (b) he
reasonably believes that such force is necessary to repel the
imminent use of unlawful deadly force by the other person. The
italicized words are discussed more fully below.
152

2.

Definition of “Deadly Force”
The term “deadly force”—whether applied to the actions of the
aggressor or the person resisting aggression—is typically defined as
“force likely to cause, or intended to cause, death or serious bodily
harm.”

Example:
A fires a loaded gun at B. This is “deadly force,”
whether or not B dies: the firing of a loaded gun at another
person is force that is intended to cause, or likely to cause,
death or serious bodily injury.

3.

“Aggressor”
An aggressor may not use deadly force in self-defense. It is
possible, however, for an aggressor to purge himself of his status as
an aggressor and regain the right of self-defense.

a.

Definition
An “aggressor” may be defined as a person who commits an
“unlawful act reasonably calculated to produce an affray
foreboding injurious or fatal consequences.” United States v.
Peterson, 483 F.2d 1222 (D.C. Cir. 1973).
Example: In Peterson, P observed V removing the windshield
wipers from P’s parked car in an alley. After a verbal
exchange, P entered his house, obtained a gun, and
returned to the alley, only to find V leaving the area. P
threatened to shoot V. In response, V secured a lug
wrench and walked toward P, whereupon P shot and
killed V in “self-defense.” On these facts, P was
deemed the aggressor at the time of the shooting and,
therefore, unjustified in using deadly force in selfdefense. The court indicated that even if V was the
original aggressor when he tampered with P’s car
(which is uncertain, since this conduct was not
necessarily likely to cause an “injurious or fatal”
conflict), V lost this status when he sought to leave the
scene and do no more mischief. That made P the
aggressor when he threatened V with the gun.

b. Losing the “Aggressor” Status
i.

Nondeadly Aggressors

A, a nondeadly aggressor, may regain her right of selfdefense against B, if B responds to A’s nondeadly aggression
by threatening to use (or using) excessive—deadly—force in
response. Courts differ, however, regarding how A regains
the right to use deadly force in such circumstances.
(1) Majority Rule
If B responds to A’s nondeadly aggression by threatening
to use deadly force against A, A immediately regains her
right of self-defense.
153
Example: A threatens to slap B in the face. In response,
B pulls out a knife and threatens to use it on A.
A may now use deadly force in self-defense
(assuming the other elements of the defense are
present): her “aggressor” status is purged due to
B’s disproportionate response.
(2) Minority Rule
If B responds to A’s nondeadly aggression by threatening
to use deadly force against A, A may not use deadly
force in self-defense unless A first retreats, and B
continues to threaten A with deadly force. If no safe
retreat is possible, however, A may immediately use
deadly force.

ii.

Deadly Aggressor
A, a deadly aggressor, loses the right of self-defense in a
conflict unless she abandons her deadly design and
communicates this fact to B.
Example: A wrongfully pulls a knife on B and threatens to
kill her. B pulls out a gun in self-defense. As A is a
deadly aggressor, she may not use deadly force
against B unless she demonstrates to B that she no
longer poses a threat, such as by dropping her knife

and running away. If B chases after her with the
continued intention of killing A in “self-defense,” A
now has a right to defend herself. At this point, B
becomes the deadly aggressor!

4.

Proportionality of Force: Deadly Against Deadly
Deadly force may never be used in response to a non-deadly threat,
even if this is the only way to repel the non-deadly threat.
Example:
Arnold and Bob are standing on a public sidewalk.
Arnold unlawfully begins to move his hand as if to slap
Bob in the face. The only way Bob can avoid being struck
is to push Arnold away, off the sidewalk, onto a major
highway where Arnold is likely to be struck by a fastmoving car. Bob may not respond to Arnold’s unlawful
force this way: to do so would constitute the use of deadly
force to respond to a non-deadly assault.

5.

“Unlawful Force”/“Unlawful Threat”
A person has no right to defend herself against lawful—justified—
force. She may only respond to unlawful threats of force.
Example:
Officer Betty is making a lawful arrest of Serial
Murderer Carl. Carl breaks away and flees. Officer Betty
pulls out her gun and calls out to Carl, “Stop or I’ll shoot.”
Carl turns and fires his weapon at Officer Betty, killing
her. At trial, Carl claims self-defense. Serial Murderer Carl
will lose this claim. Although he was responding to a
threat of deadly force by Officer Betty, Betty’s threat was a
lawful one. She would have been justified
154
in shooting at Carl, to prevent his flight. (She is justified
under a “law enforcement” defense discussed later.)

6.

“Imminency”

Although modern courts are somewhat less strict than their
predecessors, generally speaking a person may not use deadly force
in self-defense unless the aggressor’s threatened force will occur
immediately.
Example: Arthur tells Bernice, his wife, before going to sleep: “I
will kill you when I get up in the morning.” At common
law, Bernice is not permitted to use deadly force in selfdefense while Arthur sleeps, because his threatened use of
unlawful force upon her is not imminent.

7.

Necessity to Use Deadly Force
A person may not use deadly force unless it is necessary.

a.

Use of Less Force
A person may not use deadly force to repel an unlawful deadly
attack if more moderate (non-deadly) force will do the job.

b. Retreat?
Must non-aggressors retreat—flee to a safe place—rather than
stand their ground and use deadly force? Today, there is a
conflict on this subject in non-Model Penal Code jurisdictions.

i.

Majority Rule
Most non-MPC jurisdictions do not have a retreat
requirement. These states do not require a person to retreat
because, it is said, Right should never have to yield to
Wrong; also, to flee (retreat) is cowardly or “unmanly.” In
these states, therefore, the non-aggressor may use deadly
force, if it is otherwise necessary, even if he could have
avoided its use by retreating.

ii.

Minority Position
(1) Rule
Subject to the “castle exception” discussed below, some
states provide that a non-aggressor may not use deadly
force to repel an attack if she knows of a completely safe

place to which she can retreat. Notice: retreat is only
required if there is an entirely safe place available, and
only if it is known to the innocent person. It is not
enough that she should have been aware of the avenue
of retreat. The retreat requirement, where it applies,
values human life and is consistent with the general
necessity requirement: even aggressors should not be
killed if there is a way to avoid the taking of life.
155
(2) “Castle” Exception
Even in retreat jurisdictions, a non-aggressor is never
required to retreat from her own home. This rule is based
on the ancient common law view of the house as “a
man’s castle”—a natural sanctuary from external
aggression.

8.

“Reasonable Belief”
a.

General Rule
The self-defense rules discussed above are modified by the
“reasonable belief” principle, which provides that a person may
use deadly force in self-defense if she has reasonable grounds to
believe, and actually believes, that she is in imminent danger of
death or serious bodily harm, and that use of deadly force is
necessary to protect herself, even if her reasonable beliefs in
these regards are incorrect. Put differently, D may justifiably
use deadly force in “self-defense” against A although: A was not
going to use force against D; A was only going to use nondeadly
force (so that D’s response is disproportionate); a deadly threat
was not imminent; or deadly force was unnecessary to repel a
deadly attack—as long as D reasonably believes that the facts
support the defense.

i.

Imperfect Defense

In most common law-based jurisdictions, a defendant who
acts on the basis of an unreasonable belief entirely loses her
self-defense claim and, therefore, will be convicted of
murder. An increasing number of jurisdictions, however,
recognize an “imperfect” defense in homicide prosecutions:
if D kills another in unreasonable self-defense, D will be
convicted of the lesser offense of manslaughter.

b. What Is a “Reasonable Belief”?
A reasonable belief is a belief that a reasonable person would
hold. But, that only shifts the question to: who is a “reasonable
person”? Courts have struggled with this issue. Ordinarily, the
defendant’s physical characteristics may be incorporated into the
“reasonable person.” Thus, for example, if the defendant is
blind, she will be held to the standard of what a reasonable blind
person would believe in similar circumstances. Many courts
today also subscribe to the view that prior experiences of the
defendant that help the defendant evaluate the present situation
are also relevant. People v. Goetz, 68 N.Y.2d 96, 506 N.Y.S.2d
18, 497 N.E.2d 41 (1986); State v. Wanrow, 88 Wash.2d 221,
559 P.2d 548 (1977).
Examples: If D was a prior mugging victim, this experience
may be considered in evaluating the reasonableness of
D’s actions when he believes he is confronting
another mugging situation. Goetz, supra. Even more
significantly, if D has been a victim of unlawful
attacks by the current aggressor in the past—e.g., D is
a battered wife of X—these prior experiences are
relevant in determining whether a
156
reasonable person would interpret the aggressor’s
actions in the current situation as threatening.

c.

Battered Women and Self-Defense

This last Example raises a new issue, which some courts have
considered, and which your casebook may discuss: How should
the law deal with the situation of a person, physically abused for
years by her husband or live-in partner, who kills her abuser at a
moment when she is not, in fact, under imminent attack, for
example, when the batterer is sleeping or watching television?
Can we say that the battered woman reasonably believed that
the batterer represented an imminent threat in such
“nonconfrontational” circumstances?

i.

Battered Woman Syndrome (BWS) Testimony
In homicide prosecutions of the sort described here, a
defense lawyer might seek to introduce evidence that the
woman suffered from BWS, a condition that is said to cause
a woman “to sink into a state of psychological paralysis and
to become unable to take any action at all to improve or alter
her situation.” State v. Kelly, 97 N.J. 178, 478 A.2d 364
(1984). The purpose of this evidence is to try to show that
the woman subjectively believed that he represented an
immediate threat, and perhaps also to show that a reasonable
woman suffering from BWS would believe this.

ii.

Legal Trends
Most courts prohibit an instruction on self-defense if the
homicide occurred in nonconfrontational circumstances, on
the ground that no reasonable juror could believe that the
defendant, as a reasonable person, would believe that a
sleeping man represents an imminent threat. But, some
courts do permit such cases to go to the jury if BWS
evidence is introduced to show that the defendant, as a
battered woman, suffered from this condition.

iii. Observation
The battered woman controversy raises a significant
additional issue: is the law correct in requiring that a threat
be imminent (or, at least, that a reasonable person so believe)

before deadly force may be used? The Model Penal Code,
discussed below, moves away from this strict requirement.

B.

Model Penal Code
1.

General Rule
Subject to the limitations discussed below, a person is not justified
in using deadly force against another unless she believes that such
force is immediately necessary to protect herself against the exercise
of unlawful deadly force, force likely to cause serious bodily harm,
kidnapping, or sexual intercourse compelled by force or threat, by
the other person on the present occasion. MPC §§ 3.04(1), 3.04(2)
(b).
157

a.

Comparison to Common Law
i.

Belief Requirement
Notice that the rule above is not stated in terms of the
defendant’s reasonable belief, only in terms of subjective
belief. However, as with nearly all Code justification
defenses, the self-protection defense is subject to the
provisions of Section 3.09(2), which provides that if the
actor’s subjective belief is reckless or negligent, then the
defendant may be convicted of a homicide offense based on
recklessness or negligence (such as manslaughter or
negligent homicide). Thus, the Code is consistent with the
minority of common law jurisdictions that recognize an
“imperfect defense,” discussed above.

ii.

Imminency
The most significant difference between the common law
and MPC rules is that the MPC provides that a person may
use deadly force in self-protection even if the aggressor will
not use deadly force immediately. The issue under the Code
is not when the aggressor’s unlawful force will be used, but

whether the non-aggressor needs to use force on the present
occasion.
Example:
D, a battered wife, is in the kitchen making
dinner. A, her abusive husband, enters and says,
“Today is the last day of your life. I am going
upstairs to the bedroom in a few moments to find
my gun, load it, come back, and kill you.” A turns
his back on D, perhaps to go get his gun. D,
reasonably fearing for her life, stabs A to death in
the back with a steak knife. At common law, D
would likely not have a valid self-defense claim,
since A is still unarmed; the harm to D is not
“imminent” as the common law defined this term.
Under the Code, however, D has a highly plausible
self-protection claim, as the use of force was
“immediately necessary”—realistically, it was now
or never.

2.

Limitations on General Rule
Even if deadly force is otherwise permitted, it is impermissible in
two key circumstances.

a.

Defendant as Aggressor
As with the common law, the defense is not permitted if the
actor is the aggressor, which the Code defines as one who
“provokes” the use of force against herself “in the same
encounter” for the “purpose of causing death or serious bodily
injury.” MPC § 3.04(2)(b)(i).

b. Retreat
The Code follows the minority common law position that a nonaggressor must retreat if she knows that she can thereby avoid
the need to use deadly force with complete safety to herself.
MPC § 3.04(2)(b)(ii). This
158

retreat requirement, however, is itself subject to various
exceptions, most notably that a person need not retreat from her
own dwelling, even if her attacker also lives in the dwelling. See
MPC § 3.04(2)(b)(ii)(1).

c.

Other “Non-Necessity” Circumstances
The Code explicitly provides that deadly force may not be used
if, subject to various exceptions, the defendant can avoid doing
so “by surrendering possession of a thing to a person asserting a
claim of right thereto or by complying with a demand that he
abstain from any action that he has no duty to take.” MPC §
3.04(2)(b)(ii).
Examples: A loans his car to D for a specified period of time.
Later, A seeks its return. D believes that she is entitled
to retain it under their agreement. A threatens to use
deadly force to retrieve it. Whether or not A’s claim to
return of the car is justified, D must give up
possession of it if this will prevent the need for deadly
force.
A threatens to kill D, a police office, if D lawfully
seeks to arrest A for a crime. Here, D has a legal duty
not to abstain from arresting A; therefore, he may use
deadly force, if otherwise necessary.

III.

Defense-of-Third-Parties

A.

Common Law
1.

General Rule
Also called “defense of others,” a person is justified is using deadly
force to protect a third party (someone other than herself) from
unlawful use of force by an aggressor. The intervenor’s right to use
force parallels the third party’s apparent right of self-defense. That
is, the actor may use force when, and to the extent that, she
reasonably (even if mistakenly) believes that the third party (the

person whom she is seeking to protect) would be justified in using
force to protect herself.
Example:
X is being lawfully arrested at gunpoint by O, an
undercover police officer. D reasonably believes, however,
that X is being unlawfully threatened with deadly force by
“mugger” O. Based on D’s reasonable (albeit incorrect)
understanding of the situation, X would have a right to use
deadly force in self-protection. Therefore, D may use
deadly force to protect X from O.

2.

Minority Rule
Sometimes characterized as the “alter ego” principle, some
jurisdictions provide that a person may only use force to defend a
third party if the person being defended would in fact have been
justified in using the same degree of force in self-defense. That is,
the intervenor is placed in the shoes of the party whom she is
seeking to defend. If the other person has no right of self-defense,
even though the intervenor reasonably believes that she does, the
intervenor loses her claim.
159
Example: In the example above, the defense-of-third-party would
be lost. Since X¸ in fact, had no right of self-defense
against arresting officer O, D would have no right to
defend X, although D reasonably misunderstood the
situation. D would be guilty of murder!

B.

Model Penal Code
A person is justified in using deadly force to protect another if the
following conditions are met: (1) the intervenor would be justified in
using such force to protect herself, if the facts were as she believed
them to be; (2) according to the facts as the intervenor believes them to
be, the third person would be justified in using such force to protect
herself; (3) the intervenor believes force is necessary for the third
party’s protection; and (4) if the third party would be required to retreat

under the Code self-protection rules, the intervenor must attempt to
cause the third party to retreat before using deadly force. MPC § 3.05.
As with self-protection, this defense is subject to the rule that if the
intervenor is reckless or negligent regarding her understanding of the
factual circumstances—in other words, if her beliefs were unreasonable
—she may be convicted of an offense based on recklessness or
negligence, as the case may be. MPC § 3.09(2).

IV.

Defenses of Property and Habitation
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

We now turn to two related defenses. Indeed, some jurisdictions merge the
two into a single “defense of property” claim. But, there is an important
distinction between the use of force to prevent one’s property, personal or
real, from being taken from you, and the separate interest in the secure and
private habitation of one’s home. Thus, we have two defenses here to
discuss.

A.

Defense of Property
1.

Common Law
A person is never justified in using deadly force to defend her real
or personal property. A person is justified in using nondeadly force
if she reasonably believes that such force is necessary to prevent the
imminent, unlawful dispossession of her property. Some
jurisdictions also provide that, prior to using force, the property
defender must ask the dispossessor to desist from his conduct,
unless such a request would be futile or dangerous.

a.

Important Clarification
With one exception, the defender must be in lawful possession
of the property at the time defensive force is used. If she has
already been dispossessed of the property, force may not be used
to recapture the property. Instead, the victim of dispossession
must seek judicial redress. The exception is that nondeadly force
is permitted in fresh pursuit of a dispossessor of property. In

such circumstances, the use of force to recapture the property is
treated as an extension of the original effort to prevent
dispossession.
Example: V steals D’s car. The next day D observes V driving
her car. D may not justifiably use any force to regain
possession of it.
160
But, if D catches V in the act of theft, D could pursue V
(for example, in another car), and use moderate force,
if needed, to recapture the stolen vehicle.

b. Another Important Clarification
The defender’s right to use force is based on her rightful
possession of the property; she does not need to have title to it.
In fact, if the other elements of the defense are satisfied, a lawful
possessor of property may justifiably use nondeadly force
against the owner of the property, if the owner is seeking to
unlawfully dispossess her of it.

c.

Study Point
Although deadly force is never justified at common law in
defense of property, a defense-of-property claim will sometimes
merge into a self-defense claim where deadly force is justified.
Example:
D uses proper nondeadly force in an effort to
prevent X from stealing D’s car. X pulls a knife and
threatens D with it. D may now have a right to use
deadly force against X in self-defense.

2.

Model Penal Code
The MPC differs from the common law in various key respects.

a.

Belief Requirement
As with other justifications defenses, the right to use force to
protect property is based on the actor’s subjective belief, subject

however to the provisions of § 3.09, previously discussed.

b. Recapture of Property
With one exception, the MPC goes further than the common law
in that it generally authorizes use of nondeadly force to retake
possession of land or recapture personal property, even after
fresh pursuit has ended, if the actor believes that the
dispossessor has no claim of right to the property. MPC §
3.06(1)(b)(ii). The exception is that in the case of land, a
recapturer may not use force unless she believes that it would
constitute an “exceptional hardship” to delay re-entry until she
can obtain a court order.
Example:
V, not acting on a claim of right to the property,
wrongfully dispossesses D of her farm land. D may not
re-enter and throw V off the land, but must seek a
judicial remedy unless the delay will cause extreme
hardship to D, for example, if the crops on the land
require immediate harvesting.

c.

Deadly Force
The Code authorizes the use of deadly force if D believes that V:
(1) intends to dispossess D of his dwelling, other than under a
claim-of-right to possession; or (2) intends to commit arson,
burglary, robbery or felonious theft inside the dwelling and (2a)
V “has employed or threatened deadly force against or in the
presence” of D or (2b) the use of nondeadly
161
force to prevent commission of the crime would expose D or
another to substantial risk of serious bodily harm. MPC §
3.06(3)(d).

B.

Defense of Habitation
1.

Common Law
a.

Deadly Force

As discussed below, a person may use deadly force to protect her
right to inhabit her home in safe repose.

i.

Study Point
As we just saw, a person may not use deadly force to avoid
dispossession from her land—the defense of property. But,
the same person may sometimes use deadly force to protect
her right to live in her home in privacy and security.
Obviously, then, the defense of property often merges into
the defense of habitation. If a lawyer makes the proper claim
(or a student makes a proper argument on an examination!),
it may be possible to bring a case within defense-ofhabitation.

b. Older, Broader Rule
D is justified in using deadly force against V if the actor
reasonably believes that: (1) V intends unlawfully and
imminently to enter D’s dwelling; (2) V intends to commit any
felony (even, say, a theft) inside, or to cause bodily injury, no
matter how slight, to any occupant; and (3) deadly force is
necessary to prevent the threatened entry.

i.

Study Point
Notice that the right to use deadly force here is triggered by
the threat of imminent entry of the dwelling. The intended
harm inside—a felony or even minor bodily injury—need
not be imminent! Thus, this defense applies sooner than a
claim of self-defense or defense-of-third-party, and it can
justify deadly force even when a nondeadly injury is
threatened!

c.

Narrower Rule
Most jurisdictions no longer apply the broad rule set out above
and instead hold that deadly force is limited to circumstances in
which D believes that V will commit an “atrocious” (violent)

felony inside the dwelling if V enters. The other requirements
[namely, (1) and (3)] still apply.
Example:
V attempts to enter D’s home in order to steal
property. D knows that V is unarmed. Based on this
information alone, D may still use deadly force under
the broader rule, assuming that he reasonably believes
such force is the only way to prevent V’s entry. But,
under the narrower rule, D would not be justified in
using deadly force unless D has
162
reason to believe that V intends to commit a violent
felony inside the dwelling.

2.

Model Penal Code
The Code does not recognize a separate interest in habitation, as
distinguished from defense of property. See the comments above in
regard to the MPC defense-of-property claim.

C.

Special Issue: Spring Guns
An issue that used to arrive with some frequency is whether a home
dweller may set up a mechanical device, such as a so-called spring gun
(a gun that will fire if an intruder opens a door that “springs” the
device), to protect herself, her habitation, and/or her property. Spring
guns, by definition, constitute deadly force.

1.

Common Law
A person may use a spring gun to inflict deadly force on another
“where an intrusion is, in fact, such that a person, were he present,
would be justified in taking the life or inflicting the bodily harm
with his own hands.” People v. Ceballos, 12 Cal.3d 470, 116
Cal.Rptr. 233, 526 P.2d 241 (1974) (stating but rejecting this
common law rule).
Example: D installs a spring gun in her home so that it shoots to
kill any person who attempts to enter her home while she

is away on vacation or is in the house sleeping upstairs. V,
a would-be-rapist, attempts to enter D’s home. The spring
gun kills V. At common law, D has acted justifiably.

a.

Critical Feature of the Rule
As the italicized words in the quoted statement of the rule above
suggests, the user of the spring gun acts at her peril: the deadly
force must in fact be necessary. Reasonable appearances will not
suffice.

2.

Model Penal Code
The justifiable use of force does not extend to any mechanical
device that is intended to use, or is known to create, a significant
risk of causing death or serious bodily injury. MPC § 3.06(5).

V.

Law Enforcement Defenses
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

We now turn to two law enforcement defenses. The labels used to describe
them differ by jurisdiction, but they will be described here as the defenses
of “crime prevention” and “arrest.” As you consider these defenses, keep in
mind that they may overlap other justification defenses. For example, an
arrestee may threaten physical injury to a police officer conducting an
arrest; if so, the officer is also entitled to act in self-defense. Or, in
preventing a murder of another, the officer could invoke the privilege of
defense-of-third-parties as well as the defense of crime prevention. There is
a broader message here: don’t treat any fact pattern in a vacuum. Consider
alternative defenses. One defense may apply in a situation when another
does not.
163

A.

Crime Prevention
1.

Common Law
Deadly force is never justifiable in the prevention of a petty offense,
i.e., misdemeanor. Only moderate nondeadly force may be used in

such circumstances. Deadly force is permitted in felony crime
prevention under certain circumstances. The alternative approaches
are discussed below.

a.

Original (Now Minority) Approach
The original common law rule, followed today in a few
jurisdictions, is that a police officer or private citizen is justified
in using deadly force upon another if she reasonably believes
that: (1) the other person is committing a felony; and (2) deadly
force is necessary to prevent commission of the crime. This rule
applies to all felonies. As such, this version of the defense is
controversial because it can authorize use of force grossly
disproportional to the threat caused by the felon.
Example: F is about to steal D’s automobile. Because of the
value of the car, this theft constitutes a felony, rather
than a misdemeanor. In a jurisdiction applying the
original common law rule, D (or a police officer) is
justified in killing F if this is the only way to prevent F
from taking the car. This is true, even if F does not
represent a threat to anyone’s safety (and, thus, selfdefense, etc., is not implicated).

b. Modern (Majority) Approach
The majority rule differs from the original rule in one critical
way: deadly force is only permitted if the officer or private party
reasonably believes that the other person is about to commit an
“atrocious” felony. Such a felony is one that involves a
significant risk of serious bodily harm to an innocent person.
Among the felonies that are considered atrocious are: murder,
manslaughter, robbery, arson, rape, and burglary.

2.

Model Penal Code
A police officer or private party may not use deadly force to prevent
a felony unless she believes that: (1) there is a substantial risk that
the suspect will cause death or serious bodily harm to another unless
commission or consummation of the offense is prevented; (2) the

force is immediately necessary to prevent commission of the
offense; and (3) use of deadly force presents no substantial risk of
injury to bystanders. MPC § 3.07(5)(a). As with other Code
justification defenses, the defense is based on the actor’s subjective
belief, subject to the provisions of § 3.09, which permit prosecution
for reckless or negligent homicide if the actor’s beliefs were
reckless or negligent, as the case may be.
Example: D, a police officer, observes a robbery in commission in
a very busy shopping mall. The only way D can prevent
the crime is to shoot the robber from a considerable
distance. At common law, the officer would be justified in
using deadly force. Under the
164
MPC, he would not be justified unless he believes that
such force creates no substantial risk to innocent
bystanders.

B. Arrest
As with crime prevention, deadly force is never permissible to
effectuate the arrest of a misdemeanant, even if the misdemeanant will
successfully avoid arrest otherwise. But, deadly force is permitted in
some felony cases to prevent the arrestee from escaping.

1.

Common Law
a.

Rule for Police Officers
A police officer is justified in using deadly force against another
if she reasonably believes that: (1) the suspect committed any
felony; and (2) such force is necessary to immediately effectuate
the arrest. As discussed in subsection C. below, this rule is
subject to constitutional limitation.

i.

Comparison to Crime Prevention Defense
Notice that under this rule, a police officer may justifiably
kill a person whom she might not have the right to kill in

crime prevention under that majority rule. The arrest rule
applies to all felonies, whereas the modern crime-prevention
defense is limited to atrocious felonies.

ii.

Rationale of Rule
This harsh rule—permitting the use of deadly force to
effectuate an arrest, when necessary, of any felony—was
justified at early common law on the ground that the felon,
by committing the crime, forfeited his right to life.
Forfeiture, it was argued, occurred because all common law
felonies back then were capital offenses. Therefore, the
killing of a felon, if necessary to prevent his flight, was
viewed as little more than the pre-trial execution of the
penalty.

b. Special Problem of “Citizen Arrests”
Common law jurists were hesitant to permit private citizens, less
trained in the use of firearms, to use deadly force in “citizen
arrests.” Therefore, although the rules vary considerably by
jurisdiction, limitations on the use of deadly force by private
parties can be found. These may include: (i) limitation of the use
of deadly force to atrocious felonies; (ii) a requirement that the
private person give notice of her intention to make the arrest;
and (iii) denial of the defense if the suspect in fact did not
commit the felony, even if the private party reasonably believed
that she did.

2.

Model Penal Code
Deadly force may never be used by private citizens, acting on their
own, to make an arrest or to prevent a suspect’s escape. However, a
police officer (or private citizen assisting the officer) may use
deadly force to effectuate an arrest if she believes that: (1) the force
can be applied at no risk to innocent bystanders; (2) such force is
immediately necessary to make the arrest; and
165

either (3a) the felony for which the person is being arrested included
the use or threatened use of deadly force; or (3b) a substantial risk
exists that the suspect will cause serious bodily harm to another if
she is not apprehended immediately. MPC §§ 3.07(1), 3.07(2)(b).

C.

Constitutional Law
1.

Overview
The Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution prohibits
“unreasonable searches and seizures” by government officers,
including by the police. In turn, an arrest of a person constitutes a
“seizure” of that individual. See Tennessee v. Garner, 471 U.S. 1,
105 S.Ct. 1694, 85 L.Ed.2d 1 (1985). So, police use of force to
effectuate an arrest—and, thus, “seize” the person—must be
performed in a constitutionally reasonable manner.

2. Tennessee v. Garner
In Tennessee v. Garner, supra, the Supreme Court’s first decision on
the subject, the Court held that it is unconstitutional for a police
officer to use deadly force against an escaping felon unless: (1) the
officer has “probable cause to believe that the suspect poses a
significant threat of death or serious physical injury to the officer or
others” if the suspect is able to escape; (2) the officer first warns the
suspect of her intention to use deadly force (“Stop or I’ll shoot!”),
unless such a warning would be futile; and (3) the officer reasonably
believes that deadly force is necessary to make the arrest or prevent
escape. Thus, deadly force may not be used, for example, against a
fleeing unarmed thief.

3.

Beyond Garner
a.

Non-Deadly Force
In Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 109 S.Ct. 1865, 104
L.Ed.2d 443 (1989), the Court held “that all claims that law
enforcement officers have used excessive force—deadly or not
—in the course of an arrest, should be analyzed under the Fourth

Amendment … ‘reasonableness’ standard.” Among the relevant
factors to be considered, the Court stated, are the seriousness of
the crime, the extent to which the suspect poses an immediate
threat to the safety of others, and the extent to which the suspect
is resisting arrest or attempting to escape.

b. Deadly Force, Post-Garner
In Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 127 S.Ct. 1769, 167 L.Ed.2d
686 (2007), the Supreme Court returned to the issue of the use
of deadly force in arrest situations, and effectively changed the
lesson of Garner, supra. In Harris, police officers rammed a
fleeing motorist’s car from behind during a long, high-speed
chase that began when they sought to issue a speeding citation to
the motorist. The motorist survived the incident and brought suit
against the police under Tennessee v. Garner, asserting that the
officers used unreasonable force to make the arrest. Although
the Court did not overrule Garner, it suggested that there is no
rigid rule for determining when police use of deadly force
constitutes an unreasonable
166
seizure of a felon: “In the end we must still slosh through the
factbound morass of ‘reasonableness.’ ” Among the factors to
consider are those set out in Graham, supra, as well as the
relative culpability of the persons whose lives are put at risk
(e.g., in this case it was appropriate to treat the life of the
motorist, whose choice to flee put himself and innocent persons
at physical risk, as less weighty than that of the innocent persons
on the road whose lives were put at risk by the driver’s reckless
conduct).

VI.

Necessity
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

We have reached the last justification defense. Indeed, this defense—called
“necessity” at common law and “choice of evils” in the Mode Penal Code

—is properly characterized as the “residual justification.” That is, this
defense should only be considered if none of the traditional defenses speaks
to the case. By “speaks to the case” I mean that none of the other defenses
permits or rejects the justification claim being raised. The
“necessity/choice-of-evils” defense only is relevant in rare cases that simply
do not fit the usual justification defenses. Typically, “necessity” is raised
when the actor violates the letter of the law because some emergency
threatens the actor or another, and none of the usual defenses apply. For
example, the defense might arise if a defendant trespasses on another’s land
to avoid a tornado. Or, perhaps the defendant purposely uses force against
an innocent party, and not against an aggressor, for some arguably
justifiable reason. None of the other defenses, all of which focus on the use
of physical force upon a wrongdoer, are relevant to these examples. We
need a backup defense. These examples, which fall outside the scope of the
usual defenses, might fall under the “necessity” or “choice of evils”
umbrella.

A.

Common Law
1.

Elements of the Defense
There is no universally accepted definition of the common law
doctrine of necessity. In general, a person whose conduct would
otherwise constitute a crime acts justifiably if certain conditions,
such as those set out below, are met. As discussed in subsection 2.,
there is support for the proposition that the defense of necessity
never applies in homicide prosecutions.

a.

Lesser-Evils Analysis
The actor must be faced with a choice of evils or harms, and he
must choose to commit the lesser of the evils. Put differently, the
harm that D seeks to prevent by his otherwise unlawful conduct
must be greater than the harm he reasonably expects to cause by
his conduct. The balancing of the harms is conducted by the
judge or jury; the defendant’s belief that he is acting properly is
not in itself sufficient.

Examples: D1 violates the speeding laws in order to get her
seriously ill child to the emergency room of a hospital.
Firefighter D2 burns down V’s barn and trees in order
to create a firebreak, to prevent a surging firestorm
from burning down many houses in the area. In these
cases, D1 and D2 have chosen the lesser of two evils.
167

i.

Reasonable Belief
In measuring the competing harms, the court or jury must
put itself in the actor’s shoes at the time the choice had to be
made: the harms to be weighed and compared are those that
a reasonable person, at that moment, would expect to occur.
This is not a case for 20-20 hindsight.
Example: D is driving down a steep hill on a public road
when, no fault of her own, her brakes fail. D
realizes that her car, which is gaining speed, will
soon run through a red light at a busy intersection,
very possibly striking other cars at a very high rate
of speed. D observes a parked car, apparently
unoccupied, to her right. She decides to purposely
run into the car, to stop her vehicle. Unknown to D,
the vehicle contained two small children, not
visible through the window. In determining
whether D chose the lesser of two evils in hitting
the parked car, the issue is what a reasonable
person in D’s shoes, at the moment of decision,
would have believed was the better choice. The
after-the-fact unforeseeable reality that two
children were in the car is not relevant.

b. Imminency of Harm
The actor must be seeking to avoid imminent harm, i.e., harm
that appears likely to occur immediately. This rule is strictly

enforced: if there is sufficient time to seek a lawful avenue, the
actor must take that lawful route.

c.

Causal Element
The actor must reasonably believe that his actions will abate the
threatened harm.

d. Blamelessness of the Actor
Although some judicial opinions and statutes are silent in this
regard, many courts and/or statutes provide that the actor must
not be at fault in creating the necessity. Thus, in the Example
above, the necessity claim would not apply if D was at fault for
the failure of the automobile brakes.

2.

Homicide Prosecutions
It is unclear at common law whether the defense of necessity applies
to the act of killing an innocent person. Fortunately, the issue has
only rarely arisen. The leading case—and the one most likely to be
in your casebook—is the English opinion, Regina v. Dudley and
Stephens, 14 Q.B.D. 273 (1884).

a. The Case
Three adults and a 17-year-old youth were stranded on a
lifeboat. After almost three weeks, nearing starvation and
dehydration, two of the men killed the youth (who was already
very sick), so that the three men could
168
eat his remains to survive. As it turned out, they were picked up
by a vessel shortly thereafter, although they had no reason to
have believed they would be rescued. The two men who
participated in the killing were prosecuted for murder. The court
rejected their necessity claim. There is debate as to the broader
meaning of the case. Many commentators and courts interpret
this case as rejecting the principle that a person may justifiably

kill an innocent person, even if this is necessary to save a greater
number of lives.

b. Legal Observations
Dudley and Stephens may stand for the proposition just stated,
but perhaps not. There are ways to plausibly interpret the
decision more narrowly. Some feel that the emergency had not
yet reached the point where such an extreme measure was
required (i.e., lack of imminence). Others feel that the method
for determining who should die—the two men chose the youth
because he was the sickest and most likely to die first—was
faulty: perhaps the use of lots to randomly choose the victim
might have changed the analysis.

c. Theoretical Observations
Can the never-kill-an-innocent-person rule be defended? To a
retributivist, it is always wrong to treat a person merely as a
means to an end, so killing an innocent person is always
unjustifiable. (But, this does not mean that the retributivist
would necessarily punish Dudley and Stephens. Remember, the
issue here is whether the killing is justified—proper. It remains
to be seen in Part Seven whether one might excuse the
defendants, a separate issue!) A utilitarian, however, could
justify the choice to take one innocent life if it would save a
greater number of innocent lives, assuming less extreme options
were unavailable. Moreover, a strong argument can be made that
someone in Dudley’s and Stephen’s predicament is undeterrable;
therefore, punishment would be inefficacious.

B.

Model Penal Code
The MPC recognizes a “choice of evils” justification defense, MPC §
3.02.

1.

Elements
A person is justified in committing an act that otherwise would
constitute an offense if: (a) the actor believes that the conduct is

necessary to avoid harm to himself or another; (b) the harm that the
actor seeks to avoid is greater than that sought to be avoided by the
law prohibiting his conduct; and (c) there does not plainly exist any
legislative intent to exclude the justification claimed by the actor. If
the actor was reckless or negligent in bringing about the emergency,
the defense is unavailable in a prosecution for any offense for which
recklessness or negligence, as the case may be, is sufficient to prove
guilt.
169

2.

Comparison to Common Law
Under the Code, the threatened harm need not be imminent.
Moreover, the Commentary to the Code expressly states that this
defense is available in homicide prosecutions.

VII.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, pages 296–298]

1. In self-defense, at common law, what constitute a threat of “imminent”
force?
2. The Model Penal Code defense of self-protection does not require that
a person wait until threatened force is imminent. Instead, at what point may
a person use deadly force against an aggressor?
3. T or F. At common law, if Albert unlawfully threatens deadly force
against Bob, and Bob responds by pulling a gun on Albert, Albert regains
the right of self-defense if he backs away from Bob.
4.
T or F. Under the Model Penal Code, a person who honestly, but
unreasonably, believes that deadly force is necessary to protect herself will
not be convicted of any homicide offense.
5.
Donald observes a man (Bob) pointing a gun at Carla, a stranger.
Donald, believing that the man is about to unlawfully kill Carla, and seeing
no evidence that Carla can protect herself, kills Bob with a weapon lawfully
in his possession. It turns out, however, that Bob’s gun was a toy, he was
playing a practical joke on Carla, and Carla was fully aware of the joke but

was just pretending she was fearful. Donald is prosecuted for the murder of
Bob. On these facts, what is the majority common law position?
a.

Donald’s defense-of-third-party claim will fail, whether his
mistaken belief that Carla’s life was in jeopardy was reasonable or
unreasonable;

b.

Donald’s defense-of-third-party claim will succeed if his mistake
was reasonable, but not if his mistake was unreasonable; or

c.

Donald’s defense-of-third-party claim will succeed as long as he
genuinely believed that Carla’s life was in jeopardy.

6.
T or F. Deadly force is never justified to protect personal property
outside the home.
7. T or F. At common law, a person who has been unlawfully dispossessed
of his personal or real property may never use force to regain possession.
8. Under the Model Penal Code, may a person use a spring gun to defend
her property and right to inhabit her home in safe repose? (You may assume
the dweller would have a right to personally use deadly force in the
situation.)
9. In most common law jurisdictions, when may a police officer or private
party use deadly force in crime prevention?
10. How does the Model Penal Code “crime prevention” defense differ
from the majority common law rule?
11. Yes or No. Officer Jane attempted to arrest Big Corporate Embezzler
for (guess what?) embezzlement. Embezzler flees. Officer Jane reasonably
believes that the only
170
way to effectuate an arrest is to shoot Embezzler. After ordering him to stop
(he doesn’t), may she lawfully shoot Embezzler?
12. Betty kills Dr. Alice Abortionist to prevent the doctor from performing
future abortions. Betty seeks to defend the killing on necessity grounds, to
prevent the death of future fetuses. What legal hurdles must she overcome
to win a claim in a common law jurisdiction?

171

PART SEVEN

Defenses to Crime: Excuses
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

II.

Excuse Defenses: Generally
A.

Excuse: Defined

B.

Justification Versus Excuse

Duress
A.

Rationale of the Defense: Justification or Excuse?

B.

Common Law

C.

Model Penal Code

III. Intoxication

IV.

A.

Common Law: Voluntary Intoxication

B.

Model Penal Code: “Self-Induced” (Voluntary) Intoxication

C.

Involuntary Intoxication

Insanity
Conversation with Students
A.

Rationale of Defense

B. The M’Naghten Test of Insanity
C. The “Irresistible Impulse” (“Control”) Test of Insanity
D. The “Product” (Durham) Test of Insanity
E.

Model Penal Code Test of Insanity

172

V.

VI.

Diminished Capacity
A.

Putting “Diminished Capacity” in Context

B.

Diminished Capacity and Mens Rea

C.

Partial Responsibility

Entrapment
A.

Overview

B.

Subjective Test

C.

Objective Test

D.

Procedural Aspects of “Entrapment”

E.

Entrapment and the Due Process Clause

VII. Review Questions

173

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
We have just finished discussing the justification defenses. Now we look at
excuse defenses. It is often important to distinguish a “justification” from
an “excuse.” Some professors spend a lot of time focusing on the
distinction, while others don’t. If your professor is in the former category (I
am), pay great attention to what he or she says about it, and to any materials
in your casebook that help explain the distinction. (Ahem, there is at least
one treatise out there that also covers the distinction in some detail, but
modesty requires me to leave it at that.)

I.

Excuse Defenses: Generally

A.

Excuse: Defined
An excuse defense is one that indicates that, although the actor
committed the elements of the offense, and although his actions were
unjustified—wrongful—the law does not blame him for his wrongful
conduct. For example, insanity is an excuse defense. An insane person
will be acquitted of a crime. The acquittal does not mean that what the

person did was good, permissible, or tolerable—quite the opposite: the
insane actor has caused a wrongful, harmful result, but the insane
person is not punished because the law does not hold him morally and
legally accountable for his actions.

1.

Rationale
a.

Utilitarian Argument
Excuses defenses are sometimes explained on utilitarian
grounds. The argument is that some people suffer from
conditions (e.g., severe mental illness) that make them incapable
of being deterred by the threat of punishment. As punishment is
only justified in a utilitarian system if it will result in a net
reduction of pain in the form of crime, the imposition of
punishment on an undeterrable person represents an unnecessary
evil—punishment without gain. Therefore, excuse defenses
should be recognized in those circumstances in which the threat
of punishment will not serve its legitimate purpose. This
argument is weak, however. Even if a person cannot be deterred
by the threat of punishment, the actual infliction of punishment
may have the positive effect of taking a dangerous person off the
street; and punishment of an undeterrable person may serve as a
useful object lesson for other, deterrable, individuals.

b. Retributive Argument
Excuse defenses are more easily defended on retributive
grounds: “To blame a person is to express a moral criticism, and
if the person’s action does not deserve criticism, blaming him is
a kind of falsehood and is, to the extent the person is injured by
being blamed, unjust to him.” Sanford H. Kadish. Excusing
Crime, 75 Calif. L. Rev. 257, 264 (1987). That is, there are
circumstances in which our moral intuitions suggest that a
person should not be blamed for his wrongful actions—that the
wrongdoer does not deserve blame and condemnation. Blame in
a retributive system assumes that the actor freely chose to

commit the wrong, so excuses are recognized when we are
prepared to say that the person’s free choice was
174
significantly undermined, either by internal factors (such as
mental illness) or external ones (coercive conditions).

B.

Justification Versus Excuse
A justification defense tends to focus on the wrongfulness of an act or a
result; an excuse defense focuses on the actor. The distinction between
the two categories of defenses—justifications and excuses—is an
important one. We want to communicate correct messages, and there is
a big difference between saying that a result, such as the death of
another person, is good (or, at least, not bad), rather than that the result
of the defendant’s conduct was wrong, but that we believe that the
defendant should not be blamed for her wrongful conduct. Sometimes,
as well, this distinction will have practical significance in the
courtroom, as will be seen below.

II.

Duress

A.

Rationale of the Defense: Justification or Excuse?
1.

Duress as a Justification Defense
A few courts and treatises treat duress as if it were sub-species of
the necessity defense and, thus, a justification defense. That is,
when a person is forced to commit a crime, the duress exculpates
her because she did the right thing—the lesser of two evils—in light
of the coercive threat. According to this view, the only meaningful
difference between necessity and duress is that the former defense
involves natural, i.e., non-human, pressures (e.g., starvation
requiring a person to steal; weather-based emergencies, such as a
tornado requiring a person to trespass on land; and health-based
emergencies, such as appendicitis requiring a violation of traffic
laws to get to the hospital), whereas duress involves human-based
threats (e.g., a terrorist forcing an innocent person to commit a

crime against other innocent persons; a criminal forcing an innocent
person to rob a bank).

2.

Duress as an Excuse Defense
Most courts and treatises, however, treat duress as an excuse
defense, and not as a justification defense. Intuitively, most people
believe that a coerced person (based on the definition of duress
discussed below) is morally blameless, but not that she has done
nothing wrong. The essence of the duress defense is that a person is
not to blame for her conduct if, because of an unlawful threat, she
lacked a fair opportunity to conform her conduct to the law.
Example: Coercer (C) threatens to cut off D’s finger and gouge
out his left eye unless D rapes V. D succumbs to the threat.
If D is acquitted of rape on the basis of duress, it is not
because the jury has balanced the relative harms and
concluded that D’s finger and eye are more deserving of
societal protection than V’s bodily integrity. Instead, D’s
acquittal would be based on the proposition that, in light of
C’s unlawful threat, the person to blame for the social
harm suffered by V is C, and not D.
175

B.

Common Law
1.

Elements of Defense
Generally speaking, a defendant will be acquitted of an offense
other than murder on the basis of duress if she proves that she
committed the offense because: (a) another person unlawfully
threatened imminently to kill or grievously injure her or another
person unless she committed the crime; and (b) she is not at fault in
exposing herself to the threat.

2.

Breaking Down the Components
a.

Nature of the Threat

i.

Deadly Force
Notice that the common law duress defense is very narrow.
The excuse only applies if the coercer threatens to use
deadly force (force likely to cause death or serious bodily
injury). A lesser threat, such as to cause minor physical
injury or to cause economic or reputational harm, will not
excuse.

ii.

Imminency
The deadly force threatened must be “present, imminent, and
impending” (as some courts have put it). These words
suggest that the threat must be operating on the actor’s will
at the time of the criminal act. And, the requirement of
imminency effectively means that the coerced actor had no
reasonable, lawful alternative to acceding to the threat.

iii. Reasonable Belief
Although few cases speak to the issue (in large part because
the issue rarely arises), the defendant’s actions must be based
on a reasonable belief that the coercer is serious about the
threat and has the capacity to inflict the harm immediately.

b. Non-Fault of Defendant
This factor is rarely raised in criminal cases, although courts
often mention it as an element.
Example: D joins a terrorist organization, with knowledge of
its activities and tenets. Later, she is ordered by leaders
of the organization to rob a bank to obtain funds for
their terrorist activities. She initially refuses, but
accedes to the threat when the leaders threaten to kill
her child. Because she knowingly joined the terrorist
organization, D will not be excused if she claims
duress.
176

3.

Coerced Homicides
The common law duress defense does not apply to the offense of
murder. E.g., People v. Anderson, 28 Cal.4th 767, 122 Cal.Rptr.2d
587, 50 P.3d 368 (2002); Regina v. Howe, [1987] 1 App. Cas. 417
(House of Lords).

a.

Rationale
The no-defense rule is sometimes defended on the utilitarian
ground that the drive for self-preservation, although strong, is
not irresistible; therefore, people should be persuaded (by the
threat of punishment) to resist such coercion. The rule is also
defended on the moral ground that it is better to die than to kill
an innocent person. However, this latter argument only serves to
show that a person is not justified in killing an innocent person.
It does not explain why a coerced actor should not be excused on
the ground that virtually anyone, short of a saintly hero, might
succumb to the coercion.

4.

Intolerable Prison Conditions
a. The Issue
Some casebooks raise this special issue: Suppose a prisoner is
threatened by another inmate with sexual or physical assault, or
is denied critical medical care by prison officials, or is placed in
some other intolerable condition. Therefore, the inmate escapes
confinement to avoid such hardships. Later, she is caught and, of
course, returned to prison. But, she is now prosecuted for the
felony offense of prison escape. The inmate wishes to avoid
conviction by arguing that she fled as a result of the intolerable
prison condition. The frequently litigated issue is whether the
inmate may make such a claim in court; and, if so, is her claim
one of necessity (justification) or excuse (duress)?

b. The Law
Originally, courts did not permit inmates to raise prison
conditions as a defense to their escape. Today most courts

recognize a limited defense. Some courts, however, require the
escapee to turn herself in after the escape, once the prison
condition “has lost its coercive force,” or else the defense is
automatically lost. United States v. Bailey, 444 U.S. 394, 100
S.Ct. 624, 62 L.Ed.2d 575 (1980). Other courts are more lenient
and treat’s an escapee’s failure to turn herself in as just one
factor to be considered by the jury in determining whether the
escapee should be acquitted. People v. Unger, 66 Ill.2d 333, 5
Ill.Dec. 848, 362 N.E.2d 319 (1977).

c.

Nature of the Defense
Courts are fairly evenly divided on the question of whether the
defense claim is basically one of duress or necessity.

i.

Conceptual Problems
The prison escape cases do not neatly fit either defense.
Escape cases are unlike typical duress claims, in that nobody
ordered the prisoner
177
to commit the crime of escape. Also, the decision to escape
usually is a deliberate one, involving planning and more free
choice than is typical in a gun-to-the-head duress case. But,
neither do these cases usually fit the paradigm of necessity:
many cases involve human threats, rather than natural ones;
moreover, the inmate may not be claiming that escaping was
the right thing to do from a societal perspective, but rather
that she should not be blamed for escaping under the
circumstances.

ii.

Practical Significance
The duress-versus-necessity, excuse-versus-justification
issue is a matter of practical significance, as the following
examples suggest.
Examples:
Inmate Bill reasonably fears an imminent
sexual assault by another inmate. Bill receives

help in his escape from Inmate Charley. Assume
Bill will be acquitted because of the threat. Is
Charley guilty of any crime for assisting in the
escape? As you will see later, Charley is an
accomplice, but if he was an accomplice in a
justified act (on the assumption Bill gets a defense
of necessity), Charley should be acquitted. After
all, why should a person be convicted for helping
someone do a justifiable act? In contrast, if
Charley was an accomplice in an excused act (Bill
gets a duress defense), the law should punish
Charley for assistance in the wrongful conduct,
because the excuse that exculpates Bill (fear of
harm) does not apply to Charley, who was not
personally threatened with sexual assault.
What if Inmate Bill in the last hypothetical is
confronted by a guard during the escape? Does the
guard have the right to prevent Bill from
escaping? Common sense suggests that the answer
is “Of course!” But, if Bill is justified in escaping,
does it make sense to say that the guard is justified
in stopping Bill? If the inmate is only excused for
the escape, the guard’s right to stop the escape
(and even use force in the process) is indisputable.

C.

Model Penal Code
1.

Defense
The Model Penal Code duress defense (§ 2.09) unambiguously
treats duress as an excuse, and not a justification, defense. Thus, the
defense may be raised although the defendant did not commit the
lesser of two evils. Instead, the defendant must show that: (a) he
committed an offense because he was coerced to do so by another
person’s use of, or threat to use, unlawful force against him or a
third party; and (b) a person of reasonable firmness would have
committed the offense. The Code further provides that the defense is

lost if the coerced actor put himself in a situation “in which it was
probable that he would be subjected to duress.” Furthermore, if he
was negligent in placing himself in the
178
coercive situation, the defense is unavailable if he is prosecuted for
an offense for which negligence is sufficient to prove guilt.

2.

Breaking Down the Components
The Code version of duress is considerably broader than the
common law, as a careful analysis will demonstrate.

a.

Nature of the Coercion
Neither the “deadly threat” nor imminency requirements of the
common law apply here. It is enough that the coercer used, or
threatened to use, any form of unlawful physical coercion. (As
with the common law, economic and reputational threats do not
qualify.)

i.

Threat or Use
Notice that the Code also permits a duress claim to be based
on prior use of force, and not simply a threat of future harm.
Example:
Battered woman Alice robs a bank when
batterer-husband Harold orders her to do so. Even
if Harold issues no threat on this occasion, Alice
might be able to claim duress based on her fear of
Harold as a result of his prior use of force.

ii.

Unlawfulness of Threat or Force
Notice that the force used or threatened, as at common law,
must be unlawful. This means that the duress defense, as at
common law, is limited to human-caused coercion, because
natural threats (e.g. a tornado) are not capable of being
characterized as unlawful.

iii. Reasonable Firmness Standard

Although any type of threat or use of force can trigger a
duress claim, the defendant will not be excused unless a
person of reasonable firmness would have acceded to the
threat. This shifts the issue to the jury to put themselves in
the shoes of the defendant.

3.

Coerced Homicides
Unlike the common law, there is no bar to use of the duress defense
in murder prosecutions. It is up to the jury to decide whether, in
view of the facts of the particular case, including the nature of the
threat or force used by the coercer, a person of reasonable firmness
would have killed an innocent person.

III.

Intoxication

A.

Common Law: Voluntary Intoxication
When may a person avoid conviction of an offense because he
voluntarily became intoxicated? The answer (not surprisingly) is, “not
often.”
179

1.

Definition of “Intoxication”
The criminal law of “intoxication” is not limited to ingestion of
alcohol. Intoxication may be defined as a disturbance of an actor’s
mental or physical capacities resulting from the ingestion of any
foreign substance, most notably alcohol or drugs (including lawfully
prescribed medication). See MPC § 2.08(5).

2.

Not an Excuse Defense
A person is never excused for his criminal conduct on the ground
that he became voluntarily intoxicated. Indeed, because intoxicants
tend to reduce a person’s ability to control his aggressive feelings or
antisocial impulses, intoxication serves as an “anti-defense.” The act
of getting intoxicated enhances, rather than mitigates, culpability.

3. Mens Rea Defense

Although voluntary intoxication is never an excuse for criminal
conduct, most jurisdictions following the common law provide that
a person is not guilty of a specific-intent offense if, as the result of
voluntary intoxication, he lacked the capacity or otherwise failed to
form the specific intent required for the crime. In other words, on
the proper facts voluntary intoxication can negate one of the
elements of the crime, namely the specific intent element of a
specific-intent crime. However, voluntary intoxication does not
exculpate for general-intent offenses.
Example:
D, severely intoxicated, attempts to have intercourse
with V, but is arrested before consummating the act. D is
prosecuted for assault with intent to commit rape. If D can
show at trial that, due to intoxication, he genuinely but
unreasonably believed that V was consenting, he is entitled
to acquittal because he lacked the specific intent to rape
(i.e., he did not intend to have nonconsensual intercourse).
On the other hand, if D had completed the sexual act, he
would not be entitled to acquittal of the general-intent
crime of rape! (Notice, to make sense of this you need to
remember how to distinguish between “specific intent”
and “general intent” as those concepts were explained
earlier in the Outline. And, of course, you need to know
more about the crime of rape, which we consider later in
this Outline.)

a.

Rationale
Notice that the reasoning for exculpation is the same as with
claims of mistake-of-fact: it is not that the defendant is excused
for his actions, but rather that the prosecutor has failed to prove
an essential element of the offense charged, namely, mens rea.

b. Exceptions to Rule
A minority of states today have statutes that bar a defendant
from introducing evidence of voluntary intoxication to avoid
conviction for any offense, including specific-intent offenses.

Although such laws are unfair because they deny the defendant
the right to prove that, in fact, he lacked
180
a required element of the offense, the Supreme Court, by a 5–4
vote, has upheld the constitutionality of such laws. Montana v.
Egelhoff, 518 U.S. 37, 116 S.Ct. 2013, 135 L.Ed.2d 361 (1996).

4.

“Temporary” Insanity
Sometimes a defendant would like to claim he was “temporarily
insane” at the time of the crime. “Insanity,” however, presupposes a
mental illness and not mere voluntary intoxication. Therefore, a
defendant is not entitled to argue that, due to voluntary intoxication
(rather than mental illness), he did not know right from wrong, or
did not know what he was doing at the time of the offense, although
such a mental state would result in acquittal on insanity grounds if
he suffered from a mental illness.

5.

“Fixed” Insanity
Long-term use of alcohol or drugs can cause brain damage or cause
the individual to suffer from chronic mental illness. In such
circumstances, the defendant who seeks acquittal is not claiming he
should be exculpated because he was voluntarily intoxicated at the
time of the crime (even though he might have been), but rather that,
because of long-term use of intoxicants, he was insane at the time of
the crime. Such a claim is recognized by the common law, but the
applicable defense is insanity, and not intoxication.

B.

Model Penal Code: “Self-Induced” (Voluntary)
Intoxication
The MPC does not distinguish between “general intent” and “specific
intent” offenses. As discussed earlier, the Code generally requires the
prosecutor to prove a specific state of mind as to each material element
of a crime. Therefore, subject to one exception, voluntary intoxication is

a defense to any crime if it negates an element of the offense. MPC §
2.08.

1.

Exception to General Rule
If the defendant is charged with an offense for which recklessness
suffices to convict, she cannot avoid conviction by proving that,
because of intoxication, she was unaware of the riskiness of her
conduct. MPC § 2.08(2). That is, even if the defendant’s actual
culpability is that of negligence—she should have been aware but
wasn’t, that her conduct created a substantial and unjustifiable risk
of harm—she may be convicted of an offense requiring recklessness
(which ordinarily requires actual awareness of the risk), if the
reason for her failure to perceive the risk is her self-induced
intoxication.
Example: D, severely intoxicated, drives her car dangerously at a
high rate of speed, weaving between lanes, resulting in the
unintended death of V. D was so intoxicated she did not
realize she was speeding and weaving, although she should
have been aware. Thus, D negligently killed V (the offense
of negligent homicide under the MPC). However, under §
2.08(2), she may be convicted of a reckless form of
homicide (manslaughter, in the MPC). In essence, her
recklessness in getting intoxicated is transferred to the
homicide.
181

C.

Involuntary Intoxication
The law is more lenient in regard to persons who commit crimes as a
result of involuntary intoxication (or what the MPC calls “non-selfinduced” intoxication).

1. What Makes Intoxication Involuntary?
True cases of involuntary intoxication are extremely rare.
Intoxication is involuntary in the following cases: (a) coercion: the

actor is forced to ingest the intoxicant, such as when he is made to
take a narcotic by gunpoint; (b) mistake: the actor innocently ingests
an intoxicant, such as when the person takes food that, without his
knowledge, was spiked with a narcotic; (c) prescribed medication:
the actor becomes unexpectedly intoxicated from ingestion of a
medically prescribed drug, perhaps due to an allergic reaction; or (d)
pathological intoxication: the actor’s intoxication is “grossly
excessive in degree, given the amount of intoxicant, to which the
actor does not know he is susceptible.” MPC § 2.08(5)(c).

2. When Does Involuntary Intoxication Exculpate?
a.

Lack of Mens Rea
The defendant will be acquitted if, as a result of involuntary
intoxication, the actor lacks the requisite mental state of the
offense for which she was charged, whether the offense could be
denominated as specific-intent or general-intent. This is the
common law and MPC rule. MPC § 2.08(1).

b. “Temporary Insanity”
Unlike the rule with voluntary intoxication, a defendant will be
exculpated on the ground of “temporary insanity” if, due to
involuntary intoxication rather than mental illness, she otherwise
satisfies the jurisdiction’s insanity test (e.g., she did not know
right from wrong, or did not understand what she was doing,
because of involuntary intoxication). This is the common law
and Model Penal Code rule. MPC § 2.08(4).

IV.

Insanity
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

The insanity defense is the most controversial defense in the criminal law,
yet it is the most ancient. Especially when a person is acquitted on insanity
grounds in a high-profile case—such as when John Hinckley was acquitted
on grounds of insanity in the attempted assassination of President Ronald
Reagan in the 1980s—there are public calls for abolition of the defense.
Today, four states have abolished the defense (although those states do

permit a defendant to introduce evidence of mental illness to prove that she
did not possess the required mens rea for the crime).
What makes the controversy regarding the defense so interesting is that
there are critics of the defense—abolitionists—among both political liberals
(we might call them dove abolitionists) and conservatives (hawk
abolitionists). The liberals feel that a defense based on mental illness should
not be recognized because other persons, with supposedly equal moral
claims for acquittal (for example, people who commit crimes because they
were brought up in a terrible social environment), are not provided a
defense. Conservatives believe that the insanity defense is too easy to raise
and too difficult to
182
refute, so it is abused by undeserving persons. (In fact, the defense is rarely
raised and even more rarely successful.)
Another interesting feature overlaying the defense is the disparate
approaches of lawyers and mental health professionals to matters of mental
illness. Psychiatrists, as scientists, tend to look for causal explanations for
criminal conduct, which leads them to focus on the actor’s environment
(such as parental upbringing or abusive treatment) or genetic
predispositions to crime, and thus away from the “free will” premise of the
criminal law. They believe that persons with mental illness should be
treated, not punished, and they consider it odd to talk about “justice” when
dealing with “sickness.” Therefore, there is a never-ending tension between
the law and psychiatry, and the proper role of juries versus experts, in
deciding guilt or innocence.
One last point: Do not confuse “mental illness” with “insanity.” The first is
a medical term, the second is a legal concept. A person is not insane unless
he is mentally ill; but a person can be mentally ill without being insane.

A.

Rationale of Defense
1.

Utilitarian Argument
A person who suffers from a severe cognitive or volitional disorder,
i.e., a disorder that undermines the actor’s ability to perceive reality

(cognition) or to control her conduct (volition), is undeterrable by
the threat of punishment. Therefore, punishment is inefficacious.

a.

Counter-Arguments
i.

Specific Deterrence
The threat of punishment will not deter the undeterrable, but
a person’s undeterrability demonstrates her dangerousness.
Therefore, the infliction of punishment by incapacitation
may be justified.

ii.

General Deterrence
Although the threat of punishment may not deter the insane
person, her actual punishment can serve as a warning to sane
people who might otherwise believe (correctly or not) that
they could escape punishment by feigning mental illness.

2.

Retributive Argument
The insanity defense distinguishes the mad from the bad; it
separates those whom we consider evil from those whom we
consider sick. A person is not a moral agent, and thus is not fairly
subject to moral condemnation, if she lacked the capacity to make a
rational choice to violate the law or if she lacks the capacity to
control her conduct.

B. The M’Naghten Test of Insanity
There are various common law definitions of insanity. The first
significant test of insanity was announced by the British House of Lords
in M’Naghten’s Case, 8 Eng. Rep. 718 (1843). It has been heavily
criticized. Nonetheless, it quickly became the overwhelming rule in the
United States. Criticism of it began to cut into support for the rule in the
1960s and 1970s. Many jurisdictions during that period abandoned
183
M’Naghten, the narrowest insanity test, for the broader Model Penal
Code approach discussed below. Indeed, for a brief period in the 1980s,

the M’Naghten test became a minority rule. However, John Hinckley’s
insanity acquittal in the Reagan attempted assassination case turned the
tide, and many courts returned to M’Naghten. M’Naghten or some
version of it is again the majority rule.

1.

Rule
A person is legally insane if, at the time of the act, he was laboring
under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as: (1) not
to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing; or, (2), if he
did know it, that he did not know what he was doing was wrong.
Examples:
D1, mentally ill, believes that he is killing a wild
animal when he actually is killing a human being. D1 is
insane because he does not know the nature and quality of
his act. Notice, however, that this example would also
qualify under the second prong of M’Naghten: because
D1 does not realize he is killing a human being, he
presumably does not realize he is doing something wrong.
(Also notice that in this example, independent of the
insanity claim, D1 should be able to avoid conviction for
intent-to-kill murder, since D1 did not intend to kill a
human being!)
D2, mentally ill, kills V, whom D2 believes (due to
paranoid delusions) is about to kill him. Here, D2
arguably knows the nature and quality of his act—that he
is killing another human being—but does not realize that
this killing is wrong (because he thinks he is acting in
self-defense). Therefore, he might be insane under the
second prong of M’Naghten.

2.

Clarification of the Rule
a.

“Know” Versus “Appreciate”
Although the M’Naghten test originally was phrased in terms of
whether the defendant “knew” the nature and quality of his
action or “knew” right from wrong, some jurisdictions now use

the word “appreciate.” “Appreciate” is a word intended to
convey a deeper, or broader, sense of understanding than simple
“knowledge.” A small child may “know” he is pointing a gun at
another person, and “know” that shooting a person will cause
the other person to “die,” and know that killing a person is
“wrong.” But, that child is not likely to “appreciate” the
significance of his actions in a deeper sense. The child may see
the conduct in cartoon fashion—he may not realize that “death”
is permanent, and will not appreciate in any meaningful way the
devastation he is causing. Just as a youth (due to age) may,
therefore, lack appreciation of his actions, a mentally ill adult
may also lack this deeper sense of what he is doing. Some
jurisdictions, therefore, will not find a person sane—accountable
for his actions—unless he has this deeper appreciation of what
he is doing, and deeper appreciate of right from wrong.
184

b. “Right/Wrong” Prong
Courts have split fairly evenly on whether this prong refers to
legal or moral wrongfulness. However, in jurisdictions that use
the “moral wrong” test, the relevant issue is not whether the
defendant believed that his act was morally wrong, but rather
whether he knew (or appreciated) that society considered his
actions morally wrong. In most cases, the distinction between
“moral wrong” and “legal wrong” will not matter, but
sometimes it does.
Example: D stabbed his wife while she was asleep. According
to psychiatric testimony a trial, D delusionally believed
that he had a “privileged relationship” with God, that
he was in direct communication with God, and that it
was his divine mission to kill his wife. D knew that his
actions were contrary to law, but he believed that his
actions were morally justified in view of God’s wishes.
In a “legal wrong” jurisdiction, D is not insane. In a

“moral wrong” state, the fact that D thought he was
acting properly would not be the key. Instead, the jury
would need to know this: did D believe that society
would view his actions as proper? If D thought, for
example, “people will applaud my actions because
they realize I am God’s messenger,” he is legally
insane.

i.

Deific-Decree Rule
A few jurisdictions provide that a person who commits a
crime because he believes that God has literally commanded
him to do so is legally insane, even if he knows that the law
and society condemn the act. E.g., State v. Crenshaw, 98
Wash.2d 789, 659 P.2d 488 (1983). Other courts, however,
simply view a “deific decree” delusion as a factor in
assessing a person’s cognitive capacity to distinguish right
from wrong.

3.

Criticisms of M’Naghten
a.

Outmoded
The test, developed at a very primitive time in our understanding
of the human mind, focuses exclusively on cognition. Under
M’Naghten, a person is sane if he knows what he is doing and
knows that what he is doing is wrong, even if he cannot control
his conduct, i.e., even if he suffers from a volitional disorder
and, therefore, is undeterrable.

b. “Know”/“Appreciate”
Jurisdictions that use the word “know” apply a test that
essentially recognizes no degrees of cognitive disability. It
results in a finding of sanity—and moral condemnation—of
persons whose cognitive capacities are substantially but not
totally undermined.
185

c.

Expert Testimony Hampered
Because the test is so narrow and so outdated, psychiatrists may
be prevented from giving the jury—the ultimate factfinders—the
type of information needed to determine whether the defendant
deserves blame and punishment.

C. The “Irresistible Impulse” (“Control”) Test of Insanity
In an effort to go beyond the narrow cognitive-based M’Naghten rule,
some states apply M’Naghten, but supplement it with a volition-based
“irresistible impulse” test.

1.

Rule
The precise wording of the test varies by jurisdiction. In general,
this supplement to M’Naghten provides that a person is insane if, as
the result of mental illness or defect, she “acted with an irresistible
and uncontrollable impulse,” Commonwealth v. Rogers, 48 Mass.
500 (1844), or if she “lost the power to choose between … right and
wrong, and to avoid doing the act in question, as that [her] free
agency was at the time destroyed.” Parsons v. State, 81 Ala. 577, 2
So. 854 (1887).

2.

Criticisms of the Test
a. All-or-Nothing Feature
As the versions of the test set out above suggest, if taken
literally, a defendant’s ability to control herself must be totally
lacking, a standard virtually impossible to satisfy (and
impossible to prove).

b. The “Impulse” Element
The test seems to require proof that the defendant’s conduct was
impulsive. As such, it would exclude from its coverage a person
who (due to mental disease) plans a crime, but who is otherwise
unable to control her actions. Many courts, however, do not
seem to apply this concept as literally as it seems.

c.

Reliability of Proof
Some critics, including the influential American Psychiatric
Association, assert that the mental health profession cannot yet
reliably distinguish between a person who cannot control her
conduct and one who simply does not control it. Thus, the APA
has recommended that states not include a volitional prong in
the definition of insanity.

D. The “Product” (Durham) Test of Insanity
The “product” test originated in the nineteenth century but received
little attention until the influential District of Columbia federal circuit
court announced its landmark decision, Durham v. United States, 214
F.2d 862 (D.C. Cir. 1954). Twenty years later, the same court overruled
Durham. United States v. Brawner, 471 F.2d 969 (D.C. Cir. 1972). Only
one state (New Hampshire) currently applies a version of this test.
186

1.

Rule
A person is excused if his unlawful act was the product of a mental
disease or defect. As subsequently defined by the D.C. Circuit,
“mental disease or defect” is “any abnormal condition of the mind
which substantially affects mental or emotional processes and
substantially impairs behavior controls.” McDonald v. United
States, 312 F.2d 847 (D.C. Cir. 1962). Thus, to be acquitted
according to this rule, two matters must be proved: the defendant
suffered from a mental disease or defect at the time of the crime;
and, but for the mental disease or defect, he would not have
committed the crime.
Example:
D suffers from a mental illness. As a result of this
illness, D believes that V is his arch enemy. Therefore,
weighing his choices, D kills V. At the time of the crime, D
knew what he was doing, knew that the law and society
would consider his actions wrongful, and he experienced
no irresistible impulse to kill V. Therefore, under

M’Naghten or that test supplemented by the “control”
standard, D is sane. Under Durham, however, D is not
guilty by reason of insanity: there is a but-for causal
connection between D’s mental illness and the crime.

2.

Support for the Test
Mental health professionals preferred this test. It focused attention
on the actor’s mental illness; they expected the test would channel
sick persons into the mental health arena, rather than into prisons.
Likewise, mental health professionals expected the test to permit
them to testify more freely, without the need to fit their testimony
within M’Naghten’s artificial cognitive prongs, or to testify
regarding elusive irresistible impulses.

3.

Criticisms of the Test
a.

Penological Arguments
The test is unwise. It will result in acquittal of persons who
could be deterred by the threat of punishment. It will also result
in exculpation of some persons with sufficient capacity for free
choice that they deserve condemnation. Indeed, if one looks at
the Example above, there is no reason to believe that D’s mental
illness made him (or others like him) undeterrable; and the fact
that D considered his options—to kill or not to kill, knowing full
well that his contemplated actions were legally and morally
wrong—suggests he had sufficient free will to merit
condemnation and be held responsible for his actions.

b. Psychiatric Influence
The product test gave experts too much influence, according to
critics. A defense psychiatrist would testify that the defendant
had a mental illness and that it caused the outcome. The
prosecution would put on competing psychiatric testimony (the
defendant did not have a mental illness, or he had one but it did
not cause the crime). There was nothing left for the jury, the

representatives of the moral views of the community, to decide
except which expert’s testimony to believe.
187

E.

Model Penal Code Test of Insanity
1.

Rule
The MPC test represents a broadened version of the M’Naghten and
irresistible impulse tests. With modifications, it retains the second
prong of M’Naghten and adds to it a volitional prong. MPC § 4.01
provides that a person is not responsible for her conduct if, at the
time of the criminal act, as the result of a mental disease or defect (a
term left undefined), she lacked the substantial capacity either: (1)
to appreciate the criminality (or, in the alternative, wrongfulness) of
her actions; or (2) to conform her conduct to the dictates of the law.

2.

Closer Analysis
a. Avoiding All-or-Nothing Judgments
Both MPC prongs are modified by the phrase “lacks substantial
capacity.” This avoids the criticism of the original tests, namely,
that they could be interpreted to require proof of total cognitive
or volitional incapacity.

b. Cognitive Prong
Two points are noteworthy. First, the Code uses the word
“appreciate” rather than M’Naghten’s “know,” to permit the
deeper, fuller analysis discussed above. Second, the drafters
chose not to decide between “legal wrong” and “moral wrong”:
they invited legislators, in adopting the Code provision, to
choose between the words “criminality” (legal wrong) and
“wrongfulness” (moral wrong).

c. Volitional Prong
This prong is phrased to avoid the undesirable or potentially
misleading words “irresistible” and “impulse.” A person who

has a very strong, but not irresistible, desire to commit a crime,
including one who acts non-impulsively after considerable
thought, can fall within the language of the MPC.

V.

Diminished Capacity

A.

Putting “Diminished Capacity” in Context
Few terms in the criminal law cause more confusion than that of
“diminished capacity.” Some of the confusion lies in the fact that the
term “diminished capacity” is used by courts to describe two different
categories of cases in which a person suffering from a mental disability
—but one less severe than would entitle the person to successfully
assert a defense of insanity—may be partially (or, rarely, fully)
exculpated for his criminal conduct.

1. Mens Rea Version
A defendant may potentially raise a claim of “diminished capacity”
in order to show that he lacked the requisite mens rea for an offense.
In that manner, “diminished capacity” works like mistake-of-fact or
voluntary intoxication, in
188
that it does not excuse the wrongdoer, but serves to show that the
prosecutor has failed to prove an essential element of an offense.

2.

Partial Responsibility Version
“Diminished capacity” may also serve as a highly controversial
“partial excuse” defense, used exclusively in criminal homicide
prosecutions, as a basis for reducing the severity of the offense. For
purposes of clarity, this version of diminished capacity will be
characterized here as a “partial responsibility” claim.

B.

Diminished Capacity and Mens Rea
A sane person may suffer from a mental disability (e.g., mental illness,
mental retardation, Alzheimer’s) that arguably prevents him from
forming the mental state required for the commission of an offense.

Examples: D1 pushes V1 to the ground, with the purpose of having
intercourse with V1. D1 is arrested before intercourse. D1is
charged with assault with intent to commit rape. He claims
that due to a mental disability, he believed (albeit quite
irrationally) that, after he pushed V1 to the ground, she
wanted intercourse.
D2 has nonconsensual intercourse with V2. D2 is charged
with rape of V2. D2 claims that due to mental retardation, he
thought that V2 had consented to the intercourse. Therefore,
he claims, he lacked the intent to have nonconsensual
intercourse with V2.

1.

Model Penal Code Approach
As a matter of logic, a defendant should be acquitted of any offense
for which he lacked the requisite mens rea, including those cases in
which he lacked the mental state because of a mental disability,
whether that disability is permanent or temporary. This is the
position taken by the Model Penal Code. MPC § 4.02(1).
Examples: In the examples above, if D1’s claim is believed by the
jury, D1 lacked the intent (or, in MPC language, purpose)
to rape V1. Therefore, D1 cannot be convicted of the
offense charged, but is guilty of assault, a lesser-included
offense.
Likewise, if D2’s claim is accepted, he is not guilty of
rape or any other offense that requires proof that he
intended to have nonconsensual sexual relations.

2.

Common Law
Logic notwithstanding, most states permit evidence of an abnormal
mental condition, if at all, in order to negate the specific intent in a
specific-intent offense. Similar evidence is inadmissible in the
prosecution of general-intent offenses. A minority of jurisdictions
do not permit diminished capacity to be claimed in any case.

Example:
In the examples above, D1, charged with a specificintent offense, will be permitted to introduce evidence of
his mental condition, whereas D2 will be barred because
rape is a general-intent offense.
189

a.

Reasons for Hostility to the Defense
i.

Concerns About Psychiatric Testimony
According to the United States Supreme Court, which
upheld Arizona’s restrictions on mental health testimony
intended to demonstrate a defendant’s lack of mens rea: “Are
there … characteristics of mental-disease and capacity
evidence giving rise to risks [that justify prohibiting the
evidence for mens rea purposes]? We think there are: in the
controversial character of some categories of mental disease,
in the potential of mental-disease evidence to mislead, and in
the danger of according greater certainty to capacity
evidence than experts claim for it.” Clark v. Arizona, 548
U.S. 735, 126 S.Ct. 2709, 165 L.Ed.2d 842 (2006).

ii.

Doubts About the Need for the Defense
Some courts and scholars reason that mentally abnormal
offenders almost always possess the requisite criminal intent.
Indeed, it is easier to prove insanity than it is to show
inability to form a specific intent: a person may not
appreciate the gravity of his actions or be unable to conform
his actions to the law, i.e., the person is insane, but he still
will almost always have the requisite intent. Indeed, anyone
whose mental condition truly renders him incapable of
entertaining the requisite intent is likely to be suffering from
a mental condition so severe that he can claim insanity
anyway. Therefore, the defense is essentially unnecessary;
psychiatric testimony should be limited to matters relating to
insanity.

iii. Post-Trial Implications
A person found not guilty by reason of insanity is typically
committed to a mental institution on the basis of the
acquittal; a finding of diminished capacity does not provide
that assurance. Therefore, neither the defendant nor society
is benefitted.

iv.

Specific Intent Versus General Intent
Courts that limit diminished capacity claims to specificintent offenses rarely explain why the defense does not apply
to general-intent offenses. The pragmatic reason appears to
be that with specific-intent offenses, there usually is a lesser,
general-intent offense for which the defendant may be
convicted; with general-intent offenses, however, the defense
would often result in outright acquittal, an outcome that
“would open the door to consequences which could seriously
affect our society.” Chestnut v. State, 538 So.2d 820 (Fla.
1989). In order to avoid “arbitrary applications of the law”
on the basis of the “nebulous distinction” between generaland specific-intent, some courts prefer to disallow the
defense in both circumstances.
190

C.

Partial Responsibility
1.

Common Law
In this country, the partial responsibility defense was originated by
the California Supreme Court, and adopted by a small number of
other courts. In general, a person who commits a criminal homicide
and suffers from some mental illness or abnormality short of
insanity may have her offense reduced because of her diminished
mental capacity. States that recognize the partial-responsibility
claim permit reduction of the offense from first-degree to seconddegree murder, or from murder to manslaughter. The underlying
rationale of the partial responsibility doctrine is that a person who

does not meet a jurisdiction’s definition of insanity, but who suffers
from a mental abnormality, is less deserving of punishment than a
killer who acts with a normal state of mind. Therefore, she should
be convicted of a lesser offense. The originator of the defense—
California—has since abolished it by statute. Cal. Pen. Code §
28(b).

2.

Model Penal Code
The Code provides that a homicide that would otherwise be murder
is reduced to manslaughter if the homicide was the result of
“extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which there is a
reasonable explanation or excuse.” MPC § 210.3(1)(b). This
language is intended to cover two types of cases: (a) it broadens the
scope of the common law provocation doctrine (a topic discussed
later in this Outline); and (b) it permits courts to recognize a partial
responsibility defense.

VI.

Entrapment

A.

Overview
Entrapment issues arise when law enforcement agencies use undercover
police officers to investigate crimes. Most commonly, undercover
officers are used in the investigation and prosecution of so-called
victimless crimes, such as prostitution or drug offenses, in which it is
unlikely a victim will come forward and report that he or she has been
harmed. Undercover officers are also used to infiltrate groups suspected
of organized crime or, today, terrorism. Sometimes undercover officers
get sufficiently involved in criminal activities—suggest crime to
suspects or participate in them—that courts become concerned that the
police have gone too far. The issue is how far the police may go in such
undercover activity. And, over time, two different approaches have
developed, one called the “subjective” approach, which is followed in
federal courts and many state courts; the other is the “objective”
approach followed by some states.

B.

Subjective Test

1.

Origins of the Test
In 1932, in Sorrells v. United States, 287 U.S. 435, 53 S.Ct. 210, 77
L.Ed. 413 (1932), the Supreme Court recognized a defense of
entrapment, applicable in the federal courts. The defense articulated
in that case, and reaffirmed in Sherman v. United States, 356 U.S.
369, 78 S.Ct. 819, 2 L.Ed.2d 848 (1958), and United States v.
Russell, 411 U.S. 423, 93 S.Ct. 1637, 36 L.Ed.2d 366
191
(1973), is commonly called the “subjective” test of entrapment
because it focuses on the mental state of the defendant.

2. Test
Entrapment is proved if a government agent implants in the mind of
an innocent person the disposition to commit the alleged offense
and induces its commission in order that the government may
prosecute. The defense does not apply if a private individual, rather
than a government agent, induces the crime.
Example:
In Sorrells, supra, a government agent posing as a
tourist, befriended S by claiming to be a member of the
same military division in which S had served. Thereafter,
the agent attempted to convince S to sell him whiskey, in
violation of the National Prohibition Act. S initially
refused, but on the third request he sold the agent a onehalf gallon jug of “bootleg” liquor. The Court held that S
was entrapped as a matter of law: S “had no previous
disposition to commit [the criminal act] but was an
industrious, law-abiding citizen … lured … to its
commission by repeated and persistent solicitation.”

a.

Innocent Persons Versus Unwary Criminals
According to the Supreme Court in Sherman, supra, the police
may employ “artifice and stratagem” to trap an unwary criminal,
but it is improper when a criminal design, originating with the
government, is used to induce an innocent person.

b. Predisposition of the Defendant
Following the subjective test, entrapment is not proved if the
government agent induces a “predisposed” person to commit the
offense. A person is criminally “predisposed,” if, when he is first
approached by the government, he is ready and willing to
commit the type of crime charged if a favorable opportunity to
do so presents itself.
Examples: In Russell, supra, an undercover agent pretending
to be a representative of a criminal organization
interested in controlling the drug trade in the Pacific
Northwest, offered to supply R, an illegal
manufacturer of amphetamines, with a difficult-toobtain chemical needed for the production of the drug.
R agreed to the arrangement. The Court rejected R’s
claim that he was entrapped as a matter of law: R was
predisposed to commit the type of offense for which
he was charged; the government merely provided him
with an opportunity to ply his illegal trade.
In contrast, in Jacobson v. United States, 503 U.S.
540, 112 S.Ct. 1535, 118 L.Ed.2d 174 (1992), J
purchased child pornography at a time when it was
legal to do so. After Congress made possession of
such materials illegal, J became the 26-month target
of various government agencies posing as fictitious
private organizations, which mailed him
192
materials intended to convince him that he had a
moral and constitutional right to receive child
pornography through the mail. Finally, one of the
fictitious groups convinced J in a mailing to purchase
such materials in violation of federal law. The
Supreme Court held that the government action
constituted entrapment as a matter of law. According

to the Court, the fact that J had purchased such
materials when it was legal was of little probative
value in establishing predisposition to commit a nowillegal act. Therefore, for purposes of entrapment, J
was “innocent” when the government first approached
him.

3.

Rationale of the Subjective Test
The Supreme Court justifies the subjective version of entrapment on
the ground that Congress did not intend its criminal sanctions to be
applied to innocent persons induced by government officials to
commit criminal offenses.

a.

Criticisms of the Subjective Test
i.

Legislative Intent Argument Is Fictional
There is no evidence that Congress ever considered the issue
of entrapment when they drafted specific criminal statutes.
Therefore, the stated justification of the rule is fictional.

ii.

Unfairness of the Test
The “predisposition” element of the test is unfair because it
permits a prosecutor to introduce otherwise inadmissible
evidence of the defendant’s prior criminal conduct, the effect
of which is to make the defendant appear to be “a bad
guy”—which prejudices the defendant in the jury’s eyes.

iii. Inconsistent with Criminal Law Doctrine
A person who is acquitted according to this test has
voluntarily committed the offense, albeit as the result of
government inducements. An entrapped person has not been
coerced to commit the offense, i.e., no gun has figuratively
or literally been placed at his head. If the same inducements
had been offered to the defendant by a private party, he
would have no defense, so why here?

C.

“Objective” Test

1. Test
In states that apply this standard, the test is defined variously, but it
generally seeks to determine whether, in Justice Frankfurter’s words
in Sherman, supra, “the police conduct falls below standards, to
which common feelings respond for the proper use of government
power.”
Example: In one reported case, a large city police force attempted
to induce female prostitutes to solicit their services by
having non-uniformed male officers go into highprostitution areas, stand
193
in alleys, unzip their trousers, and expose themselves.
Such conduct might constitute entrapment under the
objective test stated immediately above, even though the
prostitutes were “predisposed” (and thus were not
entrapped under the subjective version of entrapment).

a. Variation on the Theme
Some states provide that entrapment only exists if the police
conduct is sufficiently egregious that it would induce an
ordinary law-abiding individual to commit the offense.
Example:
In the prostitution case above, for example, it is
implausible to argue that an ordinary law-abiding
woman would be induced to solicit sex for money with
a man under the circumstances described there, so no
entrapment would be found.

2.

Rationale of the Objective Test
a.

Deterrence
The defense should be used to deter police overreaching. By
acquitting an entrapped defendant, the police learn what police
conduct society will not countenance. As a result, the police will
be induced to behave more appropriately.

b. Judicial Integrity
Some argue that a court should protect “the purity of its own
temple” by making sure that guilt is not proved by ignoble
means. Sorrells, supra.

3.

Criticisms of the Objective Test
a.

Deterrence
The objective test is too vague to send a clear message to the
police, particularly if the message comes in the form of a general
jury verdict of acquittal in a criminal prosecution. Moreover,
whatever deterrence occurs comes at too great a cost because it
results in the acquittal of predisposed—and thus culpable and
dangerous—wrongdoers.

b. Judicial Integrity
Critics argues that the public does not want judges to protect the
“purity” of their “temple” at the expense of the safety of the
community.

D.

Procedural Aspects of “Entrapment”
Although entrapment is a criminal law defense, some jurisdictions
(primarily those that apply the objective test) permit the defendant to
raise the defense in a pre-trial hearing before a judge. If the judge
determines that the defendant was entrapped, the prosecution is barred.
No trial is held. In most jurisdictions, especially those that apply the
majority subjective test, entrapment is treated like all other defenses: the
defendant has the burden to raise the entrapment defense and
194
present evidence in support of the claim at trial. If the factfinder
determines that the defendant was entrapped, it brings back a not-guilty
verdict.

E.

Entrapment and the Due Process Clause

Although entrapment is not a constitutional doctrine, the Supreme Court
has stated in dictum that police conduct could become so outrageous as
to violate the Due Process Clause. More than once, however, the
Supreme Court has refused to find a due process violation in
entrapment-like circumstances.
Examples:
In Russell, supra, the Court ruled that the Due Process
Clause was not violated merely because the government
furnished a lawful, but hard-to-obtain, chemical to an illegal
manufacturer of amphetamines. The Court stated that the
government was not inappropriately “enmeshed in the
criminal activity.”
In Hampton v. United States, 425 U.S. 484, 96 S.Ct. 1646, 48
L.Ed.2d 113 (1976), the Court rejected a due process claim
where the police used an undercover agent to supply heroin
to the defendant, so that the latter could sell it to another
undercover agent. Notice here that the government was
involved in both the beginning and end of the transaction, but
the Court said it did not offend due process!

VII.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, pages 298–299]

1. T or F. Justification defenses focus on the actor, excuses focus on the
act committed.
2. How does the Model Penal Code version of the duress defense differ
from the common law? Specify the differences.
3. T or F. “Voluntary intoxication” is an excuse defense in the prosecution
of a specific-intent offense.
4. At common law, in which one or more of the following cases will a
defendant be acquitted on the basis of intoxication?
a.

D1 voluntarily ingests LSD, a hallucinogenic; as a result, she
hallucinates that Bob, standing in front of her, is a dangerous polar
bear; she shoots at Bob but misses. D1 is charged with assault with
intent to commit murder;

b.

D2 voluntarily ingests LSD; as a result he irrationally believes that
his wife, Carla, is trying to kill him, so D2 purposely kills her “in
self-defense”; or

c.

The same as b., except that D2 ingested the LSD innocently after
someone put the hallucinogenic in his food.

5. Which test of insanity do (or did) mental health professionals prefer,
and why?
6.
Alice suffers from a mental illness that sometimes causes her to
hallucinate. Alice, a tenant in Bob’s apartment building, becomes incensed
when he raises the rent on her apartment. Therefore, she plots to kill Bob
the next time she is alone with him. A week later, when the opportunity
arises, Alice kills Bob. Under which of the following insanity tests, if any,
is Alice probably legally insane?
a. M’Naghten;
195
b. Control test;
c. Product test; or
d. None of the above.
7.
David, an elderly man suffering from Alzheimer’s disease, wanders
into Bobbi’s home one night, believing Bobbi’s home is his own. David is
charged with felony burglary, defined as “entering the dwelling house of
another at night with the intent to commit a felony therein.” The jurisdiction
in which these events occurred also prohibits misdemeanor trespass,
defined as “entering another’s property.” Based on this information, which
of the following statements about diminished capacity is most correct
according to the common law? (Ignore other possible defenses.)
a.

David suffers from diminished capacity and, therefore, is guilty of
neither burglary nor trespass;

b.

David suffers from diminished capacity and, therefore, will be
acquitted of burglary but is guilty of trespass;

c. David suffers from diminished capacity, but is guilty of burglary; or

d.

Because Alzheimer’s disease does not constitute a mental illness,
David cannot claim diminished capacity.

8.
T or F. The Model Penal Code does not recognize a diminished
capacity defense.
9. Which test of entrapment, the subjective or the objective one, focuses
on the predisposition of the defendant?
10. Which test of entrapment, the subjective or objective one, is based on
concerns about police deterrence and judicial integrity?

197

PART EIGHT

Inchoate Conduct
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

II.

Attempt
A.

Common Law

B.

Model Penal Code

Conspiracy
Conversation with Students

III.

A.

Common Law

B.

Model Penal Code

Solicitation
Conversation with Students
A.

General Principles

B. Actus Reus
C. Mens Rea
D.
IV.

Defense: Renunciation

Other Inchoate Offenses
A. Assault
B.

V.

Inchoate Offenses in Disguise

Review Questions

198

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

This Part deals with “inchoate”—“incomplete” or “unsuccessful”—criminal
conduct. As we know already, in Anglo-American law a person is not
punished for her criminal thoughts alone. To be guilty, she must put her
thoughts into action. The question to be considered in this Part is: At what
point does an incomplete or unsuccessful effort to commit a crime itself
become a crime?
As a matter of policy, this is a difficult question to answer. If the criminal
law enters the picture too quickly, individuals without criminal design
might be arrested and punished for innocent, but suspicious appearing,
conduct. On the other hand, the police must not be left helpless: if a person
cannot be arrested for inchoate conduct until the last moment, it may be
impossible to prevent commission of an intended offense.
You will see in this Part that Anglo-American law has balanced these
competing concerns. Three crimes are covered in detail: criminal attempts;
criminal solicitation; and criminal conspiracy. Brief discussion of other
offenses will be included. Among the primary inchoate offenses, “attempt”
involves conduct that comes the closest to completion of the offense; a
conspiracy involves much more preliminary conduct; and criminal
solicitation comes into play earlier still. In a comparative sense, the three
crimes look like this, in which “CT” represents “criminal thoughts,” “S” is
“solicitation,” “C” is “conspiracy,” “A” is “attempt,” and “CO” is the
“completed offense”:
CT S C A CO
Don’t take the placement of the crimes on this line too literally. In
particular, a criminal attempt is not necessarily midway between the
criminal thought and the completed offense. In some cases, it may be much
closer to “CO,” whereas in other cases it will be further away.
As you consider these offenses, attempt (no pun intended) to do the
following. First, decide whether you agree with the developed law. Does the
law intrude too soon? Too late? Second, inchoate crimes, like completed
offenses, have an actus reus and mens rea. Learn what they are. Third, there
are special defenses applicable only to inchoate crimes. Learn them. (All of
the justification and excuse defenses discussed in Parts Six and Seven apply
to inchoate crimes, as well.)

I.

Attempt

A.

Common Law
“Attempt” was first recognized as a criminal offense in English
common law in Rex v. Scofield, Caldecott 397 (1784).

1.

General Principles
a.

Basic Definition
In general, an attempt occurs when a person, with the intent to
commit a criminal offense, engages in conduct that constitutes
the beginning of the perpetration of, rather than the mere
preparation for, the target (i.e., intended) offense. As explained
below, however, this distinction—preparation versus
perpatration—is not very helpful, and courts have reached
different conclusions as to when a criminal attempt begins.
199

b. Grading of Offense
A criminal attempt was a common law misdemeanor in England,
regardless of the seriousness of the target offense. Thus,
although murder was a capital crime, attempted murder was a
mere misdemeanor. Today, modern statutes provide that an
attempt to commit a felony is a felony.

i.

Attempt as a Lesser Crime
Most states that are based on the common law treat a
criminal attempt as a lesser offense than the target crime.
Often a criminal attempt is punished about one-half as
severely as the target offense. Thus, if the maximum penalty
for rape is 20 years’ imprisonment, attempted rape would
carry a maximum penalty of 10 years.
(1) Criticism of the Traditional Grading Approach
Many scholars argue that a person who attempts to
commit a crime is as dangerous and morally culpable as

the successful criminal; only good luck (bad luck from
the offender’s perspective) or poor implementation of
the criminal design, prevented the successful completion
of the crime, so attempts should be punished as severely
as completed offenses.
(2) Defense of the Traditional Grading Approach
A criminal attempt causes less social harm than a
successful crime. A person who murders, for example,
has caused greater harm than one who only wounds the
victim. The attempter, therefore, has a lesser debt to pay
for her wrongdoing. Consequently, punishment of an
attempt should be less. Also, from a utilitarian
perspective, the legal system may wish to give a person
an incentive to desist from completing an offense by
mitigating the punishment for an attempt.

c.

Merger Doctrine
A criminal attempt merges into the target offense, if it is
successfully completed.
Example:
D attempts to kill V, but is arrested before
completion. D is guilty of attempted murder. However,
if her attempt succeeds, the attempt merges into the
completed crime. She will be convicted of the murder.
The attempted murder merges into the completed
offense.

2. Actus Reus
Courts have long struggled to identify the point at which conduct
moves from the preparatory stages to one of perpetration. Thus,
there is no single common law test, but rather a number of tests that
courts consider. Most, but not all, of the common law tests focus on
how close the actor is to completing the target offense. In
considering the various tests below, it is well to remember the
special competing concerns that apply to inchoate conduct: the
danger of

200
arresting and convicting innocent persons; and the law enforcement
need to prevent real criminal conduct from coming too close to
fruition.

a.

Last Act Test
The rule used to be that a criminal attempt only occurred when a
person performed all of the acts that she believed were necessary
to commit the target offense. The undesirability of this rule is
obvious. In most cases it will not be possible for the police to
prevent the target offense if they must wait until the last act is
committed in order to make an arrest. Today, there is general
agreement that an attempt occurs at least by the time of the last
act, but no jurisdiction today requires that it reach this stage on
all occasions.
Example: According to this no-longer-followed test, D is not
guilty of attempted murder unless, for example, she
pulls the trigger of the gun, stabs the victim, or puts the
poison in V’s coffee.

b. Dangerous Proximity Test
Oliver Wendell Holmes announced the “dangerous proximity to
success” test. This standard is not satisfied unless the conduct
“is so near to the result that the danger of success is very great.”
People v. Rizzo, 246 N.Y. 334, 158 N.E. 888 (1927). In regard to
this relatively vague test, courts consider three factors: the
nearness of the danger; the substantiality of the harm; and the
degree of societal apprehension felt by the defendant’s conduct.
The more serious the offense, the less close the actor must come
to completing the offense to be convicted of attempt.
Example: In Rizzo, supra, R and three other armed men drove
around in their car looking for their intended victim,
who did not show up. Because they lacked the ability
to complete the crime—the victim was missing—the

court concluded that were not yet dangerously close to
success.

c.

Physical Proximity Test
To be guilty of attempt under this test, an act “must go so far
that it would result, or apparently result in the actual
commission of the crime it was designed to effect, if not
extrinsically
hindered
or
frustrated
by
extraneous
circumstances.” Commonwealth v. Kelley, 162 Pa.Super. 526, 58
A.2d 375 (1948). Or, as it is sometimes explained, the actor’s
conduct must approach sufficiently near to the completed
offense “to stand either as the first or some subsequent step in a
direct movement toward the commission of the offense after the
preparations are made.” State v. Dowd, 28 N.C.App. 32, 220
S.E.2d 393 (1975).
Examples: D1, weapon in hand, has her victim in sight and
can immediately proceed to rob her, absent external
factors (such as the intervention of the police). D1 is
guilty of attempted robbery.
In Kelley, supra, D2, intending to trick V out of her
money, convinces her to go to the bank and withdraw
some of her savings. D2 is arrested before the money
is withdrawn, and
201
before D2 can make overtures to obtain the money
from V. D2 is not guilty of attempted “larceny [theft]
by trick.”

d. “Unequivocality”/“Res Ipsa Loquitur” Test
This test provides that a person is not guilty of a criminal
attempt until her conduct ceases to be equivocal, i.e., her
conduct, standing alone, demonstrates her criminal intent. This
test reduces the risk of a false conviction of an innocent person,

but it may also increase the risk the police will be unable to act
quickly enough to prevent the target offense.
Example:
In People v. Miller, 2 Cal.2d 527, 42 P.2d 308
(1935), M threatened to kill V, whom he accused of
harassing his wife. Later that day, M, armed with a
rifle, entered a field where C, the local constable, and
V, standing 30 yards further away, were present. M
walked in their direction, stopped, loaded his rifle but
did not aim it, and continued to walk. V fled at a right
angle from M’s line of approach. C took possession of
M’s weapon without resistance. Remarkably, the court
held that M was not guilty of attempted murder,
because “up to the moment the gun was taken from the
defendant, no one could say with certainty whether [M]
had come into the field to carry out his threat to kill [V]
or merely to demand his arrest by [C]” for harassing
his wife.

e.

Probable Desistance Test
A person is guilty of attempt if she has proceeded past “the point
of no return,” i.e., the point past which an ordinary person is
likely to abandon her criminal endeavor. This test has been
criticized because it provides little guidance to the police, and
because it is odd to apply an objective test here: is the standard
what a reasonable criminal would do? How does a jury
determine that? If the standard is what a reasonable law-abiding
person would do, it is nonsensical since, by definition, such
persons never commence criminal activity in the first place.

3. Mens Rea
a.

Dual Intent
It is often said that the mental state required for a criminal
attempt is “the intent to commit some other crime.” This is an
accurate statement, as far as it goes. It is more complete to say,
however, that a criminal attempt involves two “intents.”

i.

First “Intent”
The actor must intentionally commit the acts that constitute
the actus reus of an attempt, as discussed above, e.g., he
must intentionally perform an act that brings him in
dangerous proximity to commission of the target crime.
202

ii.

Second “Intent”
The actor must commit the actus reus of an attempt with the
specific intent to commit the target offense. This latter state
of mind is almost always the critical mens rea issue in
attempt prosecutions.
Example: D intentionally aims a loaded gun at V, who is
standing nearby. D is arrested before he can pull
the trigger. Although D intentionally aimed the gun
at V—the first intent—he is not guilty of attempted
murder unless he aimed the gun with the specific
intent of killing V. If he merely intended to scare V,
he is not guilty of attempted murder.

b. Comparing Mens Rea of Attempt to Target Offense
i.

Higher Mens Rea
An attempt sometimes requires a higher level of mens rea
than is necessary to commit the target offense!
Example: As a practical joke, D intentionally fires a gun
into an occupied building to scare the occupants. If
D kills an occupant, he can be convicted of murder,
as his conduct would almost certainly constitute
extreme recklessness, or “depraved heart,” a state
of mind that satisfies the element of “malice
aforethought,” i.e., the mens rea of murder (as
discussed later in the Outline). However, if nobody
dies as the result of D’s conduct, he is not guilty of

attempted murder, as he did not have the specific
intent to kill an occupant.

ii.

Specific-Intent Versus General-Intent
As the second “intent” noted above shows, “attempt” is a
specific-intent offense, even if the target crime is generalintent. Thus, rape is a general-intent crime, whereas
attempted rape is specific-intent in nature.

c.

Special Problem: Attendant Circumstances
At common law, it is unclear what mens rea, if any, an actor
must possess regarding an attendant circumstance to be guilty of
attempt.
Example: D engages in conduct that brings him close to his
intended goal, which is to have sexual intercourse with
V, a 15-year-old girl, whom D believes is 17 years old.
Assume that if D were to have intercourse with V, he
would be guilty of statutory rape (assume that age 16 is
the cut-off point), because statutory rape is a strictliability crime in most jurisdictions. If D does not
complete the offense, however, is he guilty of
attempted statutory rape? Many state codes are silent
on how to handle this issue.
203

i. Alternative Approaches
Some courts hold that a person may be convicted of a
criminal attempt if he is, at least, reckless with regard to an
attendant circumstance. Other courts believe that it must be
proven that the actor is as culpable regarding an attendant
circumstance as is required for that element of the target
crime.
Example: In the statutory rape hypothetical, some courts
will not convict D unless he knew that V was
underage or was, at least, reckless in his belief that

she was old enough to consent. Other courts would
hold that, since statutory rape is a strict liability
offense in regard to the female’s age, D may also be
convicted of attempted statutory rape, even if he
possessed no culpable state of mind as to V’s age.

4.

Special Defense: Impossibility
a.

General Rule
The common law distinguished between “factual” and “legal”
impossibility. Legal impossibility was a defense to an attempt;
factual impossibility was not. Unfortunately, the line between
legal and factual impossibility is often unclear—indeed, there
can be an overlap, as discussed below.

b. Factual Impossibility
Factual impossibility, which is not a defense, may be defined as
occurring when an actor’s intended end constitutes a crime, but
he fails to complete the offense—indeed, it was impossible to
commit the offense—because of a factual circumstance
unknown to him or beyond his control. One way to phrase this
is: if the facts had been as the defendant believed them to be,
would his conduct have constituted a crime? If yes, then this is a
case of factual impossibility.
Examples:
D1, a pickpocket, puts his hand in an empty
pocket, believing it is full. D1 is guilty of attempted
larceny.
D2 sexually assaults V, but he fails to penetrate her
because he is impotent. D2 is guilty of attempted rape.

c.

Legal Impossibility
Although most courts do not acknowledge the point, there are
two varieties of “legal impossibility.” (For a court that has noted
the distinction, see People v. Thousand, 465 Mich. 149, 631
N.W.2d 694 (2001).)

i.

Pure Legal Impossibility
This form of impossibility applies when an actor engages in
lawful conduct that she incorrectly believes constitutes a
crime. Just as ignorance of the law generally is no excuse, it
is also true that one
204
who incorrectly thinks he is committing a crime is not guilty
of an attempt to commit a non-existent offense.
Examples: D1 puts his hand on V’s shoulder. D1 believes
that this act constitutes the crime of rape. Of
course, it does not. Therefore, he is not only not
guilty of rape, but he is not guilty of attempted
rape, as this is a case of pure legal impossibility.
D2 files her federal income tax forms on April 15,
the deadline for filing tax forms. She incorrectly
believes that the legal deadline for filing is April
14, so she incorrectly believes that she is in
violation of federal law. Nonetheless, she is not
guilty of attempted violation of the tax law.

ii.

Hybrid Legal Impossibility
The more typical case of “legal impossibility” occurs when
an actor’s goal is illegal (this distinguishes it from pure legal
impossibility), but commission of the offense is impossible
due to a mistake by the actor regarding the legal status of
some factual circumstance relevant to her conduct. Thus, as
this last sentence suggests, such cases of legal impossibility
are hybrids—it may just as easily be characterized as one of
factual impossibility (no defense) as legal impossibility
(defense)!
Examples:
D1 receives property that he believes was
stolen. In fact, the property had not been stolen.
Uncontroversially, D1 is not guilty of the crime of

“receiving stolen property,” since an element of
the actus reus of this offense has not been proven
(the attendant circumstance that the property
received was stolen property). According to some
courts, however, D1 is also not guilty of attempted
receipt of stolen property. People v. Jaffe, 185
N.Y. 497, 78 N.E. 169 (1906). Because the
property had the legal status of being unstolen, it
was legally impossible for D1, when he took
possession of the unstolen property, to receive
stolen property; this legal impossibility prevents
him from being guilty of attempt, as well. But, this
also can be characterized as factual impossibility:
if the facts had been as D1 believed them to be—if
the property he received had been stolen—then
D1 would be guilty of the crime of receiving
stolen property.
In People v. Dlugash, 41 N.Y.2d 725, 395
N.Y.S.2d 419, 363 N.E.2d 1155 (1977), X shot V.
While V was lying on the ground, D2 fired more
bullets into him. The coroner concluded that V
may have been dead prior to the time of D2’s
actions. If so, then D2 fired his gun into an already
dead person. In this case he can’t be guilty of
murder: you can’t murder a dead person. This case
could fit either form of impossibility. Arguably, it
is factual impossibility: D2’s intended end (killing
a human being)
205
constitutes a crime, but he failed to complete the
offense because of a factual circumstance
unknown to him (that V was already dead). But,
just as arguably, this is a case of legal
impossibility: It is legally impossible to kill a dead

person, because the law of homicide only prohibits
the killing of a “human being,” which V was not at
the time. If we characterize this as legal
impossibility, D2 is not guilty of attempted
murder. He is guilty, however, if this is
characterized as factual impossibility!

d. Should the Factual/Legal Distinction Be Followed?
Many states have followed the Model Penal Code approach,
discussed below, and have purportedly abolished the “legal
impossibility” defense. More accurately, they have abolished the
hybrid version of legal impossibility. The reasoning for abolition
includes: (1) the people who are acquitted on the ground of legal
impossibility are as dangerous and culpable as those who are
convicted on the ground of factual impossibility; and (2) as
noted above, the distinction between factual impossibility and
hybrid legal impossibility is largely non-existent—virtually any
case can logically be characterized as either factual or legal
impossibility.

B.

Model Penal Code
1.

General Principles
a.

Definition
The MPC definition of a criminal attempt is set out in a
particularly inartfully drafted provision, § 5.01(1). Rather than
set it out here, you should look at it in your casebook. The
relevant provisions will be quoted and considered below.

b. Grading of Offense
Unlike the common law and non-MPC statutes, which treat
criminal attempts as a lesser offense, with lesser punishment,
than the target offense, the MPC generally treats the inchoate
offenses of attempt, solicitation, and conspiracy as offenses of
the same degree, and thus subject to the same punishment, as the
target offense. MPC § 5.05(1). The one exception to this is that,

for a felony characterized as a “felony of the first degree” under
the Code—basically, an offense that carries a maximum
punishment of life imprisonment, MPC § 6.06(1)—an attempt to
commit such an offense is a felony of the second degree, i.e., a
lesser offense.

c.

Merger
The common law merger doctrine applies as well under the
Code. MPC § 1.07.
206

2. Actus Reus
It is sometimes necessary to distinguish between a “complete”
attempt and an “incomplete” one. This distinction is especially
critical in understanding and applying the MPC attempt provisions.
A complete attempt is one in which the defendant has done every
act necessary on his part to commit the target offense, but has failed
to commit the crime; an incomplete attempt occurs when the
defendant has not committed the last act necessary on his part.
There are no actus reus issues in the case of a completed attempt—
the defendant has done everything, including the last act, but simply
has failed to commit the crime. The actus reus issues arise with
incomplete attempts.
Examples: D1 aims and fires her gun at V1, intending to kill V1.
The bullet misses V1, or wounds but does kill V1. This is
a complete attempt.
D2 aims her gun at V2, but is arrested before she pulls the
trigger, or she changes her mind before pulling the trigger.
This is not a completed attempt case, as D2 has not yet
committed the final act. The issue is whether this case of
incomplete conduct has gone far enough to constitute an
attempt.

a. Test

The Model Penal Code abandons all of the common law tests
described earlier and replaces them with a substantial step
standard. Specifically, one has gone far enough to constitute an
attempt if the “act or omission constitut[es] a substantial step in
the course of conduct planned to culminate in his commission of
the crime.” MPC § 5.01(1)(c).

i.

Important Clarification
The term “substantial step” is not defined, but the Code
states that it must be “corroborative of the actor’s criminal
purpose.” MPC § 5.01(2). Furthermore, the Code provides a
list of factual circumstances in which the defendant’s
conduct, if strongly corroborative of her criminal purpose,
“shall not be held insufficient as a matter of law.” Id. That is,
if any one of the listed factual circumstances exists (e.g., the
defendant was “lying in wait, searching for or following the
contemplated victim of the crime”), the judge must let the
factfinder (the jury) consider the prosecutor’s case. In turn,
the jury will be told, simply, to determine whether the
defendant’s act/omission constituted a substantial step in a
course of conduct planned to culminate in commission of the
target offense.

ii.

Distinction from Common Law
One significant difference between the substantial step test
and the various common law standards is that, in general, the
common law looked to see how close the defendant was to
completing the crime, whereas the MPC looks to see how far
the defendant’s conduct has proceeded from the point of
initiation of the target offense. In general, in terms of the
actus reus of an attempt, the MPC “substantial step”
207
approach results in a finding of attempt sooner than the
common law tests.

Example: Look at the line I set out in the Conversation
with Students at the start of Part Eight. The
common law focuses on how close the defendant is
to “CO”; the MPC focuses on how far the
defendant has gone past “CT.”

3. Mens Rea
In order to apply the MPC criminal attempt statute, a lawyer (or
student!) needs to draw two important distinctions at the outset.
First, look at the facts of the case and decide whether it implicates a
complete attempt or an incomplete attempt, as defined earlier. All
incomplete attempts are considered in MPC § 5.01(1)(c). Complete
attempts are considered pursuant to MPC § 5.01(1)(a)–(b). Second,
if one is dealing with a complete attempt, decide whether the target
offense relates to a criminal result or to criminal conduct. Conduct
crimes are handled by (1)(a), whereas results are considered in (1)
(b).
Examples:
D1 aims a gun at V1, intending to shoot V1. D1 is
arrested and charged with attempted murder. This is an
incomplete attempt. Apply MPC § 5.01(1)(c).
D2 aims her gun and shoots at V2, but misses. D2 is
charged with attempted murder. This is a complete
attempt, and the target offense (murder) is a “result
crime,” in that it prohibits the result of the death of
another person. Apply MPC § 5.01(1)(b).
D3, a would-be pickpocket, puts his hand in V3’s pocket
in order to take V3’s wallet, but she fails to grasp the
wallet. D3 is charged with attempted “unlawful taking.”
This is a complete attempt (she has done everything she
intended to do), and the target offense is a conduct crime
(it prohibits the conduct of “taking” another’s property).
Apply MPC § 5.01(1)(a).

a.

Rule

The Code uses slightly different language than the common law,
but the analysis is essentially the same. A person is not guilty of
attempt unless he: “purposely engages in conduct that would
constitute the crime.” (MPC § 5.01(1)(a)); acts “with the
purpose of causing” or “with the belief that it will cause” the
criminal result (MPC § 5.01(1)(b)); or “purposely does … an act
… constituting a substantial step” in furtherance of the offense.
MPC § 5.01(1)(c).

b. Special Problem: Attendant Circumstances
The analysis above tells us what mens rea is required—purpose
—as to conduct and results, but what about “attendant
circumstance” elements of an offense?

i.

Rule
The “purpose” requirement for an attempt does not apply to
attendant circumstances; as to attendant circumstances, a
person is
208
guilty of an attempt if she “act[s] with the kind of culpability
otherwise required for commission of the [target] crime.”
MPC § 5.01(1). In short, the MPC approach is similar to the
approach taken by some common law courts: the actor need
only be as culpable regarding an attendant circumstance as is
required for the target offense.
Example:
Reconsider the common law “attendant
circumstance” Example dealing with statutory rape
on page 202. If statutory rape is a strict liability
offense regarding the attendant circumstance of the
female’s age, then the same applies as to this
attendant circumstance in an attempted statutory
rape charge. On the other hand, if the required
mens rea as to the attendant circumstance of the
female’s age is, for example, negligence, then

“negligence” is required for the crime of attempted
statutory rape. Quite simply, one looks at the target
offense, determines the required culpability as to an
attendant circumstance, and then applies this same
mens rea as to the attendant circumstance element
in the attempt charge.

4.

Special Defense: Impossibility
The Code provides that a person is guilty of an attempt if his
conduct “would constitute the crime if the attendant circumstances
were as he believes them to be.” MPC § 5.01(1)(a). The effect of
this language is to abandon the hybrid legal impossibility defense
discussed earlier. The rationale for abolition of the defense is set out
above in subsection A.4.d. Notwithstanding the Code language
quoted above, pure legal impossibility remains a defense.
Examples:
A person would be guilty of an attempt in both the
Jaffe and Dlugash cases set out in the Examples above in
A.4.c.ii, supra, as well as in all of the factual
impossibility cases.
In the hand-on-shoulder “rape” and tax filing Examples
noted in A.4.c.i., supra, the defendant would still be not
guilty of a criminal attempt.

5.

Special Defense: Renunciation of Criminal Purpose
The Code recognizes a new defense of “renunciation of criminal
purpose.” MPC § 5.01(4). A person is not guilty of a criminal
attempt, even if her actions constitute a substantial step in the
commission of an offense, if: (1) she abandons her effort to commit
the crime or prevents it from being committed; and (2) her conduct
manifests a complete and voluntary renunciation of her criminal
purpose. This defense is sometimes described as the “abandonment”
defense.
Examples:
While attempting to rob a bank, D1 flees when she
observes a police officer. D1 cannot successfully claim

the renunciation or abandonment defense, because D1’s
abandonment of the robbery was not voluntary.
D2, a prison inmate, attempts to escape confinement. Just
as he is about to climb over the prison fence, he thinks of
his family
209
and decides that he does not want to shame them further
by his conduct. Therefore, he abandons his escape and
returns to his cell. Commonwealth v. McCloskey, 234
Pa.Super. 577, 341 A.2d 500 (1975). In a Model Penal
Code jurisdiction, D2’s conduct would result in acquittal
of attempted prison escape.

a.

Rationale
A person who voluntarily and completely abandons her criminal
endeavor is no longer dangerous. Moreover, this defense
provides an incentive to an actor to turn away from her criminal
enterprise before she consummates the offense.

b. Common Law Counter-Rationale
The common law did not recognize this defense. The rationale
for this position is that once the social harm of an attempt has
occurred, a person cannot undo that harm, just as a person
cannot avoid guilt for a theft by returning the property to the
victim.

II.

Conspiracy
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

Conspiracy is a hard crime to study. The Supreme Court has stated that the
concept is “so vague that it almost defies definition.” Krulewitch v. United
States, 336 U.S. 440, 69 S.Ct. 716, 93 L.Ed. 790 (1949). It is also a
controversial crime because it is “predominantly mental in composition.”
Id. That is, the crime consists of little more than a guilty meeting of the
minds of two or more persons. Consequently, “conspiracy” is, as Judge

Learned Hand has put it, “the darling of the modern prosecutor’s nursery.”
Harrison v. United States, 7 F.2d 259 (2d Cir. 1925). (In this regard, you
would do well to take another look at my Conversation at the start of this
Part, to see where conspiracy fits in among the inchoate offenses.)
One other important point. Conspiracy is a crime. But, it is also a theory of
complicity, that is, it is also a means of holding a person accountable for the
criminal conduct of another. Put still more clearly, if A and B, for example,
commit the crime of conspiracy to commit murder, and if A then commits
the murder, not only are both persons guilty of the crime of conspiracy, but
B—who did not personally commit the murder—may be convicted of this
crime as well, because “conspiracy” also serves as a basis for holding
people responsible for the actions of others (co-conspirators). This latter
feature of conspiracy—as a doctrine of complicity—is discussed in the next
Part. Don’t worry about it for now. For now, we look only at the crime of
conspiracy.

A.

Common Law
1.

General Principles
a.

Definition
A common law conspiracy is an agreement between two or more
persons to commit an unlawful act or series of unlawful acts.
210

b. Grading
At original common law, conspiracy was a misdemeanor. Today,
conspiracy to commit a felony is usually a felony, but typically
is a lesser offense than the target crime.

c.

Rationale of the Offense
i.

Preventive Law Enforcement
Like other inchoate offenses, recognition of the offense of
conspiracy provides a basis for the police to arrest
individuals before they commit another offense. With

conspiracy, the police may intervene even before the parties
reach the “attempt” stage.

ii.

Special Dangerousness
Group criminality is considered by some observers as more
dangerous than one-person criminality. Thus, a “conspiracy”
involves its own aggravated social harm. The thesis is that
when people combine to commit an offense, they are more
dangerous than an individual criminal because of their
combined resources, strength, and expertise. They are also
thought to be less likely to abandon their criminal purpose if
they know that other persons are involved.

d. Merger
Unlike criminal attempts (and, unlike criminal solicitations,
discussed below), a common law conspiracy does not merge into
the attempted or completed offense that is the object of the
agreement.
Example: D1 and D2 conspire to kill V1. They kill V1. Under
these circumstances, they may be convicted of both
conspiracy and murder.

i.

Rationale of No-Merger Rule
The no-merger rule is based on the special dangerousness
rationale of conspiracy. That is, the extra danger inherent in
conspiratorial relationships is thought to justify punishment
of the conspiracy, even if its criminal object is completed
and can be punished on its own.

2. Actus Reus: Basics
The gist of a conspiracy is the agreement by the parties to commit
an unlawful act or series of unlawful acts together. (Notice in this
regard that the agreement—the actus reus of the offense—is little
more than the meeting of the minds—which is also the mens rea of
the offense!) Although there is more to be said on the subject of the
agreement, here are the basics.

a.

Overt Act
A common law conspiracy is committed as soon as the
agreement is made. No act in furtherance of it is required.
Today, influenced in part by the Model Penal Code, many
statutes provide that a conspiracy does not occur
211
unless at least one party to the agreement commits an overt act
in furtherance of it. The overt act need not constitute a
substantial step in furtherance of the target offense. Any act will
do.
Example: D1 and D2 agree to rob a bank. At common law, D1
and D2 are now guilty of conspiracy, even if they do
nothing further. In an “overt act” jurisdiction, neither
person may be convicted of conspiracy until one of
them commits a single act in furtherance of the
robbery, such as to map out the get-away route, or to
obtain a gun to later use in the robbery.

b. Method of Forming the Agreement
The conspiratorial agreement need not be in writing, nor even be
verbally expressed. It may be implied from the actions of the
parties. (Remember, the agreement is really nothing more than a
nebulous “meeting of the minds.”) A conspiracy often looks as
if the events were choreographed, with each party performing a
different act in furtherance of the crime.
Example: D1, D2, and D3 drive to the City Bank together. D1
and D2 exit the vehicle, while D3 remains in the car,
with the ignition on. D1 and D2 enter the bank. D1
points a gun at a teller. D2 stands at the door, blocking
it. When D1 receives money from the teller, D1 and
D2 flee to the automobile outside, and D3 drives them
away. By the very nature of these facts—working in
unison—a jury may infer a conspiratorial agreement,

even without written evidence or any testimony
regarding the forming of a verbal agreement.

c.

Nature of Agreement
Notice the common law definition of conspiracy set out above:
the object of the agreement must be unlawful. For purposes of
conspiracy, an “unlawful” act is a morally wrongful act; it need
not be a criminal act.
Example: D1 and D2 agree to defame V. Their agreement is
punishable as a common law conspiracy, although
defamation is not a crime. State v. Henry, 117 N.J.L.
442, 188 A. 918 (1937). Few, if any, states today
punish conspiracy unless it is a criminal act.

3. Mens Rea: The Basics
a.

General Rule
Conspiracy is a dual-intent offense. First, the parties must intend
to form an agreement (the actus reus of the conspiracy). Second,
they must intend that the object(s) of their agreement be
achieved. This second intent makes conspiracy a specific-intent
offense.
212

b. Purpose Versus Knowledge
i. The Issue
An issue that arises in some conspiracy prosecutions is
whether a person may be convicted of conspiracy if, with
knowledge that another person intends to commit an
unlawful act, but with indifference as to whether the crime is
committed, he furnishes an instrumentality for that offense or
provides a service to the other person that aids in its
commission.

Examples:
A rents out a room to B, a prostitute, with
knowledge that B will use it in her illegal
activities. Does this show an A-B conspiracy to
commit prostitution?
C, a drug wholesaler, sells large quantities of legal
drugs to D, knowing that the latter will use them
for illegal purposes. Direct Sales Co. v. United
States, 319 U.S. 703, 63 S.Ct. 1265, 87 L.Ed. 1674
(1943). Does this demonstrate a C-D drug
conspiracy?

ii.

Case Law
The law is split on the issue set out above. Most courts,
however, will not convict a person unless he acts with the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the offense. Knowledge,
coupled with indifference as to whether the offense is
committed, is usually insufficient. But, be careful:
sometimes one can infer purpose from knowledge.
(1) Proving Purpose from Knowledge
Even in jurisdictions that require proof of purpose, this
mental state may be inferred from knowledge, if there is
evidence that the party had a stake in the venture. United
States v. Falcone, 109 F.2d 579 (2d Cir. 1940). This may
be proven in many ways.
Examples: In the Examples above, if A rents the room
to B, the prostitute, at a grossly inflated price,
A’s purpose to facilitate the acts of prostitution
may be inferred. That is, A now has reason to
want B to succeed in her prostitution activities:
in order to continue to receive the inflated
rental fees.
If C obtains a disproportionate amount of his
business from D, the drug purchaser, the
requisite intent may be inferred.

4.

Plurality Requirement
No person is guilty of conspiracy unless two or more persons
possess the requisite mens rea: i.e., the intent to agree and the intent
that the object of their agreement be achieved.
Examples:
D1 suggests to X, an undercover police officer, that
they rob a bank together. X pretends to go along and says,
“Fine.” Later, X arrests D1 for conspiracy. D1 had the
requisite mens rea: she
213
intended to agree, and she had the specific intent to rob
the bank. However, X did not have the requisite mens rea:
he intended to agree (in order to trap D1), but he did not
intend for the robbery to occur. Therefore, because two
(or more) persons did not possess the dual intents, no
conspiracy has occurred. D1, therefore, is not guilty of
conspiracy!
D2 and D3 agree to commit a crime. Later, it turns out
that D3 lacked the requisite mens rea because he was
insane. The plurality rule precludes conviction of D2.
D4, D5, and Y (an undercover officer, feigning
participation) agree to rob a bank. Here, D4 and D5 may
be convicted of conspiracy. Even after Y is dropped out of
the picture, the plurality requirement is met!

a.

Important Clarification
The plurality doctrine does not require that two persons be
prosecuted and convicted of conspiracy. It is satisfactory that the
prosecutor proves beyond a reasonable doubt that there were
two or more persons who formed the agreement with the
requisite mens rea.
Example:
D and X agree to murder V. Prior to trial for
conspiracy, X dies or flees the jurisdiction. D may still
be convicted of conspiracy, as long as the prosecutor

proves beyond a reasonable doubt that D conspired
with X.

b. Observations About the Plurality Requirement
The plurality rule may make some sense if one focuses on the
supposed special dangers of conspiracies. If what makes a
conspiracy more dangerous is the extra person involved in the
criminal enterprise, then the fact that one of the “conspirators” is
an undercover police officer negates the special dangerousness.
On the other hand, the fact that one party feigns agreement, is
insane, or is otherwise incapable of committing the offense, does
not render the other person less dangerous or culpable. And, the
preventive law enforcement purpose of conspiracy law—giving
the police the chance to respond early—is frustrated by the
plurality requirement.

5.

Parties to an Agreement
a. The Issue
Even if it is clear that a conspiracy exists as defined and
explained above, it is sometimes difficult to determine who is a
party to the conspiracy.
Examples:
In Kotteakos v. United States, 328 U.S. 750, 66
S.Ct. 1239, 90 L.Ed. 1557 (1946), D, a broker,
assisted at least eight separate groups of persons to
obtain federal loans in a fraudulent manner. Is this one
conspiracy involving all of the parties (as the
government alleged), or is this eight smaller
conspiracies, with D as the common party in each of
them?
214
In Blumenthal v. United States, 332 U.S. 539, 68 S.Ct.
248, 92 L.Ed. 154 (1947), O, a liquor wholesaler,
illegally distributed whiskey to two men, A and B,
who in turn worked with X and Y to sell the liquor to

local taverns. Is this a single conspiracy, consisting of
O, A-B, and X-Y (as the prosecutor alleged), or are
there two conspiracies: one between O and the people
with whom he dealt (A and B); and the other
conspiracy between A and B, on the one hand, and the
people with whom they dealt, X and Y?
In United States v. Bruno, 105 F.2d 921 (2d Cir.
1939), various persons smuggled narcotics into the
Port of New York. The smugglers sold the narcotics to
a number of middlemen, who in turn sold the drugs to
retailers in New York and to another group of retailers
in the Texas-Louisiana region. Is this a single
conspiracy, including everyone from the smugglers to
the local retailers, or do these facts suggest smaller
conspiracies, e.g., a conspiracy between the smugglers
and the middlemen, and another between the
middlemen and the New York and Texas-Louisiana
retailers?

b. Structure of Conspiracies
In conspiracy prosecutions involving many layers of actors, it is
useful to conceptualize the alleged conspiracy in diagrammatic
fashion. Usually a conspiracy looks something like a wheel, a
chain, or a combination of the two.

i.

Wheel Conspiracy
A conspiracy may look like a wheel. In the center (the hub)
is one person or group, who/which conducts illegal dealings
with various other persons or groups (they are the spokes).
Example:
In Kotteakos, supra, the most logical way to
characterize the conspiracy is in the form of a
wheel, in which D is in the center, with each of his
clients for whom he obtained the fraudulent loans
functioning as spokes emanating from the hub.
(You may see this by diagraming the situation: put

D in the middle, and draw lines [the spokes] from
D to each of the eight groups he assisted.)
(1) Connecting the Spokes
But, wait! In the description above, something is missing
—there is no rim around the wheel. That is, although
you have drawn lines between D and each client, there is
no line around the wheel, connecting each client (spoke)
to each other. In order to connect the spokes—to put the
rim around the wheel—there must exist some community
of interest between the spokes. If there is none, the
wheel remains rimless, and there cannot be a single
conspiracy among all of the parties. Instead, you would
have a lot of smaller conspiracies (the spokes).
215
Example:
In Kotteakos, there was no community of
interest. None of the spokes cared about the
loans D brokered for the others. Each spoke
obtained personal assistance in obtaining a
fraudulent loan, and then moved on. Therefore,
the wheel had no rim. As a consequence, the
Court held that the prosecutor was wrong in
charging a single conspiracy; instead, these
were multiple two-party conspiracies.

ii.

Chain Conspiracy
Some conspiracies involve multiple layers of personnel, in
which each person or group in the conspiracy has specialized
responsibilities that link together the various aspects of the
unlawful conduct. Thus, the parties are linked to each other
as if in a chain. The very nature of the conspiracy, with its
multiple layers with specialized responsibilities, creates a
community of interest among the parties. In such
circumstances, it is justifiable to treat the arrangement as a
single conspiracy.

Example:
In Blumenthal, supra, if you were to diagram
the conspiracy, it would look like a chain, because
you have a business-like linkage: the owner who
works with the distributors who in turn deal with
their local contacts, and so on.

iii. Chain-Wheel Conspiracy
Sometimes a conspiracy will include a chain and a wheel.
Example: In Bruno, supra, it is plausible to treat some of
the conspiracy as a chain: smugglers-tomiddlemen-to-retailers, but to have the third link—
the retailer link—split off, as if there were separate
spokes, one spoke involving the New York
retailers, and a separate spoke for the TexasLouisiana retailers. Thus, we might see this as two
chain conspiracies, each involving the smugglers
and middlemen, but with a different retailer for
each. (This is not what the court ruled in Bruno: it
treated this, merely, as one chain conspiracy.)

6.

Objectives of a Conspiracy
a.

Issue
Another analytical problem is this: Since the gist of a conspiracy
is an agreement, what if the parties to the agreement intend to
commit more than one offense. Is this one conspiracy or more?
Examples: D1 and D2 rob Bank 1 on Day 1. They rob Bank 2
on Day 2. They rob Bank 3 on Day 3. Assuming that
it is clear that these robberies were the result of prior
arrangement, is this a single conspiracy to rob three
banks or are there three
216
conspiracies to rob one bank each, thus resulting in
three conspiracy prosecutions?

D3 and D4 kill X, kill Y, and rape and kill Z, in a oneday crime spree. Is this one conspiracy? Or, two
conspiracies, one for each section of the penal code
that was violated (conspiracy to murder; and
conspiracy to rape)? Or, three conspiracies (one per
victim)? Or, four conspiracies (one per criminal
incident)?

b. Rule
In general, there are as many (or as few) conspiracies as there
are agreements actually formed. Braverman v. United States,
317 U.S. 49, 63 S.Ct. 99, 87 L.Ed. 23 (1942). In each of the
Examples above, the number of conspiracy charges will depend
entirely on whether the parties formed one agreement to commit
multiple offenses, or formed a number of separate agreements.

i.

Comment on Rule
Although this rule makes conceptual sense—after, all, a
conspiracy is an agreement, so there should be as many
conspiracy charges as there are separate agreements—the
rule is impractical. In view of the secretive nature of most
conspiracies, there is rarely going to be direct evidence
regarding whether the parties had a single agreement with
multiple objectives, or multiple agreements with fewer
objectives. Not only is the rule impractical, but it is apt to
result in unfairness. Parties who form multiple agreements to
commit a single crime are subject to much greater
punishment under this rule than those who have the foresight
—or luck—to draw up a single multiple-objective agreement
at one time. Yet, they are no more dangerous or culpable
than the other group.

7.

Special Defense: Wharton’s Rule
a.

Rule

If a crime by definition requires two or more persons as willing
participants, there can be no conspiracy to commit that offense if
the only parties to the agreement are those who are necessary to
the commission of the underlying offense. This is Wharton’s
Rule, a common law defense to conspiracy.
Examples: By definition, adultery requires two willing parties:
A, who has consensual sexual intercourse with B, who
is married to another person. There is no way to
commit adultery in the absence of an agreement
between A and B. Therefore, under Wharton’s Rule, A
and B may not be prosecuted for conspiracy to
commit adultery.
C agrees to sell heroin to D. C and D may not be
prosecuted for conspiracy to sell heroin: a sale, by
definition, requires two persons (a willing seller and
buyer). However, they may
217
be prosecuted for conspiracy to possess contraband,
because the crime of possession does not by definition
require two persons. For example, a person can pick
up contraband she finds on the ground, and thus
possess it without the intervention of a second willing
party.

i.

Justification of the Rule
To the extent that a conspiracy is thought to involve special
dangers inherent in group criminality—it is worse for two
people to agree to commit a crime than for one person to
plan a crime—there is no extra harm in the cases in which
Wharton’s Rule applies, as the crime inherently involves
group criminality. Therefore, it is thought proper to
recognize a defense. On the other hand, Wharton’s Rule
frustrates the law enforcement purpose of conspiracy laws:

the police must wait for the “Wharton Rule” crime to be
attempted.

b. Wharton’s Rule Exceptions
i.

Unnecessary Party
Wharton’s Rule does not apply if the two conspirators are
not the parties necessary to the commission of the offense.
Example:
A conspires with C, B’s spouse, to commit
adultery with B. Wharton’s Rule does not apply
here. Although only two persons are involved, the
two who agreed are not both the adulterers. A and
C may be convicted of conspiracy.

ii. Third-Party Exception
Wharton’s Rule does not apply if more persons than are
necessary to commit the crime are involved in the agreement
to commit the crime.
Example:
A, B agree to sell heroin to C. Because three
persons are involved in the conspiracy—one more
than it takes to agree to a sale—the extra-danger
rationale of group criminality comes back into play.
Therefore, all three persons may be prosecuted for
conspiracy to sell heroin.

c.

Breakdown of the Rule
Wharton’s Rule is increasingly disliked by courts. The Supreme
Court has announced that, in federal courts, the doctrine is no
more than a judicially rebuttable presumption. If there is
evidence that the legislature, in defining an offense that would
otherwise bring Wharton’s Rule into play, intended to reject the
rule, then the doctrine will not be enforced. Iannelli v. United
States, 420 U.S. 770, 95 S.Ct. 1284, 43 L.Ed.2d 616 (1975).
218

8.

Special Defense: Legislative-Exemption Rule

a.

Rule
A person may not be prosecuted for conspiracy to commit a
crime that is intended to protect that person.
Example: Statutory rape laws are intended to protect young
females from immature decisions to consent to
intercourse. It would defeat the purpose of the statutory
rape law if a young female could be prosecuted for
conspiracy to commit statutory rape on herself.
Therefore, she is considered legally incapable of
conspiring to commit statutory rape of herself.

b. Significance of the Rule
Notice the implications of this rule. If one party to a two-party
conspiracy is exempt from prosecution, there is now only one
remaining party to the conspiracy. Under the plurality doctrine
discussed earlier in the chapter, that remaining person must also
be acquitted of conspiracy!

9.

Special Defense?: Impossibility
Is there is a “legal impossibility” defense to the crime of conspiracy,
as there is to the common law crime of attempt? Case law here is
particularly thin, but it has been stated that neither factual
impossibility nor legal impossibility is a defense to a criminal
conspiracy.

10. Special Defense?: Abandonment
a.

No Defense to Crime of Conspiracy
At common law, the crime of conspiracy is complete as soon as
the agreement is formed by two or more culpable persons. There
is no turning back from that. Once the offense of conspiracy is
complete, abandonment of the criminal plan by one of the
parties is not a defense to the crime of conspiracy.

b. Relevance of Abandonment

Although abandonment, or withdrawal, from a conspiracy is not
a defense to prosecution of the crime of conspiracy, a person
who withdraws from a conspiracy may avoid conviction for
subsequent offenses committed in furtherance of the conspiracy
by other members of the conspiracy, if the abandoning party
communicates her withdrawal to every other member of the
conspiracy (a near impossibility in many-member conspiracies).

B.

Model Penal Code
The MPC law of conspiracy has had mixed results. Some aspects of it
have been influential and resulted in movement away from common law
doctrines discussed above. Other features have had much less impact.
The Code “criminal conspiracy” provision—Section 5.03—is long and
very complicated. If your professor intends to focus on it, look at it
carefully in your casebook.
219

1.

General Principles
a.

Definition
The MPC provides that “a person is guilty of conspiracy with
another person or persons to commit a crime” if that person,
“with the purpose of promoting or facilitating” commission of
the crime, “agrees with such other person or persons that they or
one or more of them will engage in conduct that constitutes such
crime or an attempt or solicitation to commit such crime,” or if
that person agrees to aid the other person or persons in
commission of the offense, or of an attempt or solicitation to
commit such crime. MPC § 5.03(1).

b. Grading
Unlike the common law, which treats conspiracy as a lesser
offense than the targeted crime, the Code provides that a
conspiracy to commit any offense other than a felony of the first
degree is graded the same as the crime that is the object of the
conspiracy. MPC § 5.05(1).

c.

Merger
Unlike the common law, a conspirator may not be convicted of
both conspiracy and the target offense(s), unless the conspiracy
involves a continuing course of conduct. MPC § 1.07(1)(b).
Examples: D1 and D2 agree to murder V1, and do so. D1 and
D2 may be convicted of one, but not both, conspiracy
and murder,
D3 and D4 conspire to murder V2 and V3. They kill
V2. They are arrested before they can kill V3. Under
these circumstances, they may be convicted of the one
murder, as well as of conspiracy to kill V3.

2. Actus Reus: How It Differs from Common Law
a.

Overt Act
In contrast to the common law, an overt act is required (except
for felonies of the first and second degree) in order for the crime
of conspiracy to occur. MPC § 5.03(5).

b. Nature of Agreement
In contrast to the common law, the object of the agreement must
be a crime, and not merely an “unlawful” act. MPC § 5.03(1).

3. Mens Rea
As the definition set out above suggests, the Code provides that a
person is not guilty of conspiracy unless she acts with the purpose
of promoting or facilitating the commission of the conduct that
constitutes a crime. MPC § 5.03(1). One who furnishes a service or
instrumentality with mere knowledge of another’s criminal activities
is not guilty of conspiracy.
220

4.

Plurality Rule

The most influential feature of the MPC is its rejection of the
common law plurality requirement. Notice that the Code defines the
offense in unilateral terms: “A person is guilty of conspiracy with
another person … [if he] agrees with such other person ….” MPC §
5.03(1). Notice: it takes two people to agree, but it takes only one
person to be guilty of conspiracy. Therefore, the special common
law plurality problems discussed above drop out under the MPC.

5.

Parties to Agreement
Two aspects of the Code need to be kept in mind in determining the
parties to a conspiracy. First, conspiracy is a unilateral offense, as
discussed above. Second, MPC § 5.03(2) provides that if a person
guilty of conspiracy knows that the person with whom he has
conspired has, in turn, conspired with still another person or persons
to commit the same crime, the first person is also guilty of
conspiring with the other persons or person, “whether or not he
knows their identity.” This aspect of the Code approach to
conspiracy is very difficult to analyze.
Example: Let’s reconsider Bruno, discussed above, but with much
easier facts for analysis. Assume A, drug importer, meets
with B, and they agree that A will smuggle narcotics into
the country, in violation of Statute X. In their meeting, they
further agree that B will find retailers to sell the imported
narcotics in their respective states. These sales would
violate Statute Y. Later, B meets with C, a New York
retailer, and later still with D, a Texas retailer, and each
agrees with B to sell drugs in their respective states.
Assume further that neither retailer knows that B is dealing
with the other retailer, nor do the retailers know the details
of the A-B agreement.
Based on these facts, here is what you do. Step One:
Apply § 5.03(1), in order to identify each agreement to
commit a crime that occurred. Here, we have four
agreements: (1) A and B to violate Statute X; (2) A and B
to violate Statute Y; (3) B and C to violate Statute Y; and

(4) B and D to violate Statute Y. So far, therefore, we have
four two-person agreements.
Step 2: Bring § 5.03(2) into play, to potentially bring
additional links into the conspiracy. But, because the MPC
treats conspiracy as a crime of which one person may be
guilty, we have to analyze each person separately. Thus, A
knew that B, with whom A conspired to violate Statute Y,
would also conspire with others to commit the same
offense. Therefore, A is guilty of conspiracy not only with
B, but with C and D (although he did not know their
identities), to violate Statute Y. But, looking at the parties
from the other direction, in our hypothetical facts, C and
D did not know of the A-B agreement to violate Statute Y,
so neither C nor D is guilty of conspiracy with A in regard
to Crime Y, even though A is guilty of conspiracy with
them as to Crime Y!
221
Now consider the B-C conspiracy to violate Statute Y. Is
D also a party to this conspiracy? Probably not: because D
may not have had the “purpose of promoting of
facilitating the commission” of that offense. (Ditto
analysis on C’s part, in regard to B-D conspiracy to sell
drugs in Texas.)

6.

Objectives of a Conspiracy
The Code provides that there is only one conspiracy between
parties, even if they have multiple criminal objectives, as long as the
multiple objectives are part of the same agreement (this is the same
as the common law) or part of a “continuous conspiratorial
relationship.” MPC § 5.03(3).
Examples: D1 and D2 rob Bank 1 on Day 1. They rob Bank 2 on
Day 2. They rob Bank 3 on Day 3. This would be a single
conspiracy, even if D1 and D2 had formed three separate
agreements, if the crimes were committed as part of a

continuous conspiratorial relationship between D1 and
D2.
D3 and D4 kill X, kill Y, and rape and kill Z, in a one-day
crime spree. Again, there should be a single charge of
conspiracy if it is shown that the crimes were all
committed as part of a continuing conspiratorial
relationship between D3 and D4.

7.

Special Defenses
The MPC does not recognize Wharton’s Rule, nor any impossibility
defense.

a.

Legislative-Exemption Rule
The Code provides that it is a defense to a charge of conspiracy
(or solicitation) “that if the criminal object were achieved, the
actor would not be guilty of a crime under the law defining the
offense or as an accomplice.” MPC § 5.04(2). The effect of this
language is to permit a defense if enforcement of the conspiracy
law would frustrate a legislative intention to exempt that party
from prosecution.
Example: Statutory rape laws are intended to protect underage
females. It would frustrate that intent, if an underage
female could be prosecuted for statutory rape of
herself, either as accomplice of the male, or as a
conspirator. Therefore, she will not only not be
convicted of statutory rape, but she is also not guilty of
conspiracy to commit statutory rape of herself.
However, as the MPC rejects the plurality doctrine, the
male may be convicted of conspiracy with the
underage female, although she is exempt!

b. Renunciation of Criminal Purpose
A person is not guilty of conspiracy under the Code if he
renounces his criminal purpose, and then thwarts the success of

the conspiracy “under circumstances manifesting a complete and
voluntary renunciation of his criminal purpose.” MPC § 5.03(6).
222

III.

Solicitation
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

Thankfully, solicitation is an easier concept to learn that conspiracy. Indeed,
the common law and the MPC differ in only small respects. Therefore,
unless I indicate otherwise, you can treat the common law and MPC as
basically the same.

A.

General Principles
1.

Definition
At common law, a person is guilty of solicitation if she intentionally
invites, requests, commands, or encourages another person to
engage in conduct constituting a felony, or a misdemeanor involving
a breach of the peace or obstruction of justice.

a.

Model Penal Code
The Code definition of “solicitation” (§ 5.02) is broader than the
common law in that it applies to solicitation to commit any
misdemeanor (as well as all felonies).

2.

Grading
At common law, a criminal solicitation was a misdemeanor, even
when the offense solicited was a felony. Today, a solicitation to
commit a felony is often treated as a felony, but of a lesser degree
than the felony solicited.

a.

Model Penal Code
As with other inchoate offenses, the MPC treats a solicitation to
commit any offense other than a felony of the first degree as an
offense of equal grade as the target offense. MPC § 5.05(1).

3.

Merger
The concept of merger applies to the crime of solicitation, just as it
does to the offense of attempt.
Example:
D solicits X to rob V. X refuses. D is guilty of
solicitation. However, if X agrees and commits the robbery
or attempts it, D will be convicted of the robbery (or its
attempt, as the case may be), as an accomplice in its
commission. (See Part Nine, which deals with accomplice
liability.) The crime of solicitation, however, merges into
the robbery so D will not be convicted of the solicitation.
(Notice, also, that when X agreed to the robbery, there is
now a D-X conspiracy to commit robbery! The solicitation
merges, as well, into the conspiracy, leaving only the crime
of conspiracy. As we saw, however, the merger doctrine
does not apply at common law to conspiracy, so D and X
can be convicted both of the conspiracy and robbery (or
attempted robbery).)
223

B. Actus Reus
1.

General Rule
The actus reus of a solicitation is consummated when the actor
communicates the words or performs the physical act that
constitutes the invitation, request, command, or encouragement of
the other person to commit an offense.
Example: D asks X, or inquires of X by letter, “Will you please
kill V?” This is a solicitation.

2.

Unsuccessful Communications
At common law, a solicitation does not occur unless the words or
conduct of the solicitor are successfully communicated to the
solicited party.

Example: D is not guilty of solicitation, even if he requests X to
commit an offense, if X does not hear the words, does not
understand their meaning (e.g., X does not speak the same
language), or if the solicitation message to X never reaches
him. In some jurisdictions, however, D is guilty of
attempted solicitation in these circumstances.

a.

Model Penal Code
The Code provides that one who unsuccessfully attempts to
communicate a solicitation is guilty of solicitation. MPC §
5.02(2).

3.

Relationship of Solicitor to Solicited Party
At common law, a person is not guilty of solicitation if she merely
asks another person to assist in the crime, that is, requests the other
person to merely be an accomplice in the crime. To be guilty of
solicitation at common law, a solicitor must ask the other person to
actually perpetrate the offense herself. In contrast, the MPC
provides that a person is guilty of solicitation if she asks the other
person to commit the offense (as at common law), or if she requests
the other person to do some act that would establish the latter
person’s complicity as an accomplice in the offense. MPC § 5.02(1).
Example: D asks X to furnish D with a gun so that he (D) can kill
V. D is not guilty of common law solicitation, as he did not
ask X to kill V—he only asked X to aid in the crime. In
contrast, D is guilty of solicitation under the MPC.

C. Mens Rea
1.

Common Law
Solicitation is a specific-intent offense at common law. The solicitor
must intentionally commit the actus reus (request, encourage, etc.,
another to commit the crime) with the specific intent that the person
solicited commit the target offense.

Example: D jokingly asks Y to kill D’s wife. D is not guilty of
solicitation (although he is a jerk). Although he intended to
communicate
224
the solicitation, he did not possess the specific intent to
have Y commit the crime.

2.

Model Penal Code
The Model Penal Code does not deal in concepts of “specific intent”
and “general intent.” However, the analysis is the same: a person is
not guilty of solicitation unless she acts with the purpose of
promoting or facilitating the commission of the solicited offense.
MPC § 5.02(1).

D.

Defense: Renunciation
The Model Penal Code—but not the common law—provides a defense
to the crime of solicitation if the soliciting party: (1) completely and
voluntarily renounces her criminal intent; and (2) persuades the
solicited party not to commit the offense or otherwise prevents her from
committing the crime. MPC § 5.02(3).

IV.

Other Inchoate Offenses

A. Assault
1.

Common Law Definition
A common law assault is an attempted battery. (A battery is
unlawful application of force to the person of another.) However,
the common law recognized “assault” as an offense before criminal
attempt laws developed, so general attempt doctrines do not apply to
it. To be guilty of assault, a person must engage in conduct that is in
much closer proximity to completion than is generally required for
other attempt offenses.
Example: As seen earlier, a person may be convicted of attempted
murder although she has not committed the last act

necessary, e.g., she has not pulled the trigger of a gun or
begun stabbing the victim. However, to be guilty of assault
(attempted battery), the actor must usually commit the last
act, such as swinging her fist at V.

2.

Modern Statutes
Nearly all states have broadened the definition of assault to include
the tort definition of assault: intentionally placing another person in
reasonable apprehension of an imminent battery.
Example:
D swings her fist at V, in order to scare V. D is not
guilty of common law criminal assault, but she may be
guilty of statutory criminal assault, if her conduct placed V
in reasonable apprehension of an unlawful touching.

B.

Inchoate Offenses in Disguise
Various common law offenses and modern statutes may be considered,
in some sense, inchoate crimes in disguise. They are worth brief note
here, in this context.

1.

Burglary
Common law burglary involves “breaking and entering the dwelling
house of another at night with the intent to commit a felony
therein.” Thus, burglary
225
only occurs if a person not only breaks into another person’s
dwelling at night, but has the further specific intention to commit a
serious crime inside the dwelling. The latter felony is inchoate at the
time that the actus reus of burglary (breaking and entering) occurs.
At early common law, when burglary law was in formulation, it was
not evident that the burglar could be prosecuted, at the moment he
entered the home, for an attempt to commit the felony inside. He
had to come closer to perpetration of that felony. The burglary
offense, therefore, provided law enforcement the opportunity to

arrest a suspected felon before he came dangerously close to
committing the crime inside.

2.

Larceny
Common law larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of
the personal property of another with the intent to steal the property,
i.e. permanently deprive the other of the property. As with burglary,
the specific intent points to the inchoate aspect of the offense. The
ultimate harm of theft comes when the wrongdoer permanently
deprives the person of the property. That harm has not occurred at
the moment when the thief nonconsensually “takes and carries
away” the personal property of another. If all that we were
concerned with is the taking and carrying away of property, there
would be no need to add the specific intent to the definition of the
crime: it is that latter intent, not yet brought to fruition, that converts
the taking into a felony.

V.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, pages 300–302]

1. T or F. At common law, criminal attempt is treated as a lesser offense
than the successful completion of the target crime.
2.
Name at least three common law tests for determining whether a
defendant has done sufficient acts to constitute an attempt.
3. T or F. Attempted rape is a specific-intent crime at common law.
4. Donald Despicable has sexual intercourse with a female he believes is
unconscious from extreme intoxication. In fact, the female is dead. (Yuck,
but this is a real case!) Donald is charged with attempted rape. At common
law:
a. This is a case of factual impossibility;
b. This is a case of pure legal impossibility; or
c. This is a case of hybrid legal impossibility.
5. What result in Question 4, at common law: Is Despicable guilty or not
guilty of attempted rape?

6. What result in Question 4, under the Model Penal Code.
7. Denise intends to kill Victor. She comes to Victor’s house with a loaded
gun and waits behind a bush for Victor to come out of his house. When
Victor comes out, Denise decides not to kill Victor now or in the future, and
leaves. Is Denise guilty of attempted murder under the MPC? What about
the common law?
8. T of F. At common law, a person may be convicted of conspiracy with
another to commit an act that, if he committed it alone, would not constitute
a crime.
226
9. Alex, a licensed gun dealer, sells a gun to Bob at a regular price, with
knowledge Bob intends to use the gun to murder Carl. At common law, is
Alex guilty of conspiracy with Bob to commit murder? What about under
the MPC?
10. Betty and Karen agree to duel, which is a felony. They are arrested
before they act out their illegal plan. Are they guilty of common law
conspiracy?
11. Chester and Donald agree to rob First State Bank. It turns out later that
Donald was involuntarily intoxicated at the time he and Chester formed the
agreement. Therefore, Donald did not really know what it was he agreed to.
Chester and Donald are charged with conspiracy to rob the bank. What
result under the common law? What about the Model Penal Code?
12. Jack and Jill meet on Day 1 and decide to rob Bank1. The next day,
they decide they should also rob Bank 2. (Assume they have not robbed
either bank yet.) How many charges of conspiracy are permitted here? Try
the common law, and then MPC.
13. Roger and Carl agree to murder the President. The next day, before
either person has acted on this plan, Carl tells Roger, “forget it. I am out. I
don’t want to do this.” Are Roger and Carl guilty of conspiracy to commit
murder? Apply the common law.
14. Alex asks Richard to kill Carl. Richard says no. At common law, is
Alex guilty of solicitation? Extra credit: Can you think of any other

inchoate crime of which he might be guilty?
15. Gina writes an e-mail message she intends to send to Bill, requesting
that Bill steal certain property from Harold. Gina then decides it is a bad
idea. She tries to push the DELETE button on her computer but accidentally
pushes the SEND button. Harold receives and reads Gina’s message. Is
Gina guilty of common law solicitation?
16. Is there anything odd or troubling about charging a person with the
offense of attempted common law assault?

227

PART NINE

Complicity
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

Accomplice Liability: Common Law
A.

General Principles

B. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Assistance
C. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Mens Rea
D. Accomplice Liability: If the Perpetrator Is Acquitted

II.

E.

Perpetrator and Accomplice: Degrees of Guilt

F.

Special Defense: Legislative-Exemption Rule

Conspiracy Liability
A. The Pinkerton Doctrine

III. Model Penal Code
A.

Forms of Complicity Liability

B. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Assistance
C. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Mens Rea
D. Accomplice Liability: If the Perpetrator Is Acquitted

IV.

E.

Special Defenses

F.

Special Provision to Consider: Relationship of Accomplice Liability to Criminal
Attempts

Review Questions

228

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
We now turn to a new question: Under what circumstances may a person
who did not personally commit a crime be held accountable for the criminal
actions of another.
There are two forms of so-called complicity liability. First, a person is
accountable for the actions of another if she is an accomplice in the
commission of the crime. Second, she is accountable if she conspires (as
“conspiracy” was explained in Part Eight) with another person.
Usually, an accomplice in a crime is also a co-conspirator, and vice-versa,
in which case both complicity theories apply. However, it is possible
(although uncommon) to conspire without assisting, or vice-versa.
Therefore, each theory should be considered separately. It is especially
important that you do so because, as you will see, conspiracy liability
potentially is broader than accomplice liability.

I.

Accomplice Liability: Common Law

A.

General Principles
1.

General Rule
Subject to considerable clarification below, a person is an
accomplice in the commission of an offense if she intentionally
assists another person to engage in the conduct that constitutes the
offense.

2. Accomplice Liability as Derivative Liability
An important point to remember—as it will help you understand
accomplice law—is that accomplice liability is derivative in nature.
That is, an accomplice’s liability derives from the primary party to
whom she provided assistance. Put another way, there is no crime of
“aiding and abetting.” The accomplice is convicted of the offense
committed by the primary party.
Example: If A intentionally assists P (the primary party) to rob a
bank by driving the get-away vehicle, A is guilty of the
crime of robbery. She derives her guilt for robbery, as an

accomplice, from P. It follows that if P is arrested in the
bank while attempting the robbery, A is guilty of attempted
robbery instead: as that is the crime P committed, this is
the crime that D derives. If P is stopped before his actions
reach the “attempt” stage—in which case, presumably, P is
guilty of no offense—A is also guilty of no common law
offense relating to the bank robbery, as there is no liability
to derive from P. (Of course, A and P may still be
convicted of the crime of conspiracy to commit robbery.)

3.

Justification for Derivative Liability
Accomplice liability is loosely based on the civil concept of agency.
That is, when a person intentionally assists another person in the
commission of an offense, she manifests thereby her willingness to
be held accountable for the conduct of the other person, i.e., she
allows the perpetrator of the crime to serve as her agent. Essentially,
“your acts are my acts.”
229

4.

Common Law Terminology
There are four common law categories of parties to criminal
offenses. Nearly every state has abolished these categories, but the
terminology persists in judicial opinions.

a.

Principal in the First Degree
He is the person who, with the requisite mens rea, personally
commits the offense (e.g., in murder, fires the gun that kills the
victim; in rape, personally has sexual intercourse with the
nonconsenting female), or who uses an innocent human
instrumentality to commit it.

i.

Innocent Instrumentality Doctrine
A person is a principal in the first degree if she dupes or
coerces an innocent human being to perform the acts that
constitute an offense.

Examples: P puts a gun to I’s head, and threatens to kill I
unless I robs V. If I accedes to the threat, I will be
acquitted of robbery on the ground of duress; P
may be convicted of robbery, as the principal in
the first degree, on the ground that she used I as
her innocent instrumentality.
P says to I, “Please go next door and pick up my
automobile, which I loaned to V, and bring it back
to me.” I agrees, and brings the vehicle to P,
unaware of the fact that the car really belongs to V.
I is not guilty of larceny, as he lacked the specific
intent of the offense (he did not take and carry
away V’s property with the intent to steal it).
Instead, P will be convicted of larceny, as the
principal in the first degree, because she duped I
into performing the larcenous acts.

b. Principal in the Second Degree
This is the person who intentionally assists the principal in the
first degree to commit the offense, and who is actually or
constructively present during its commission. A person is
“constructively” present if she is close enough to assist the
principal in the first degree during the crime.
Example: P robs a bank, while A1 stands guard at the door,
and A2 remains in the car, ready to drive them away. P
is the principal in the first degree; A1 is a principal in
the second degree, as she is actually present. A2 is also
a principal in the second degree, as she is
constructively present.

c. Accessory Before the Fact
This is the person who intentionally assists in the commission of
the offense, but who is not actually or constructively present
during its commission.

Example: A is an accessory before the fact if she solicits a
murder, or if she intentionally furnishes P with a gun
for use in the homicide, but she is not present at the
time of the crime.
230
Notice: one who is guilty of the crime of solicitation is
thereby an accomplice in the commission of the
solicited crime.

d. Accessory After the Fact
This is one who knowingly assists a felon to avoid arrest, trial,
or conviction. Although the common law treated an accessory
after the fact as an accomplice in the commission of the crime
and, thus, held her responsible for that crime, all states today
treat accessoryship after the fact as an offense separate from the
felony committed by the principal in the first degree.
Consequently, accessories after the fact will not be discussed
further.

e. Why the Distinctions Mattered
The distinction between principals (of either degree), on the one
hand, and accessories, on the other hand, was of substantial
practical procedural significance in the early common law era.
The procedural distinctions have almost universally been
abrogated.

i.

Venue
A principal had to be brought to trial in the jurisdiction in
which the crime occurred. An accessory had to be
prosecuted in the jurisdiction in which her accessorial acts
occurred.

ii.

Proper Pleading
An indictment had to state correctly whether the party
charged was a principal or an accessory. A person indicted as

a principal could not be convicted as an accessory, or viceversa.

iii. Timing of Prosecution
Principals and accessories could be tried jointly, or a
principal could be tried first, but under no circumstances
could an accessory be brought to trial before the principal
was prosecuted.

iv. Acquittal of Principal
An accessory could not be convicted if the principal was
acquitted, regardless of the reason for the principal’s
acquittal.

B. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Assistance
A person “assists” in an offense, and thus may be an accomplice in its
commission, if she solicits or encourages another person to commit the
crime, or if she aids in its commission.

1.

If No Assistance
A person is not an accomplice unless her conduct in fact assists in
commission of the crime. Merely attempting to aid does not make
one an accomplice at common law.
231
Example:
A, intending to help P burglarize V’s home, opens a
window at V’s house so that P can enter. P, unaware that
the window has been opened, enters by another route. A is
not an accomplice on the basis of the window opening.
Conceptually, A attempted to assist, but she did not in fact
aid in the commission of the crime.

2. Trivial Assistance
If a person intentionally aids in the commission of an offense, she is
liable as an accomplice, although her assistance was trivial. Indeed,
an accomplice is liable even if the crime would have occurred

without her assistance, i.e., she is guilty although her assistance did
not cause commission of the offense. It is enough that the
accomplice made commission of the crime slightly easier.
Example: In the window-opening Example immediately above, if
P had entered the window that A opened, this assistance
would render A liable as an accomplice (assuming that A
had the requisite mens rea), even if P would have
committed the crime anyway.

a.

Encouragement
Because actual assistance, no matter how trivial, renders one an
“accomplice,” a person may be an accomplice merely by
providing psychological encouragement to the perpetrator.
Example: P says to A, his wife, “I am going now to rob the
bank.” A to P: “That’s wonderful dear. Do a good job. I
love you.” Remarkably, these words of encouragement
can serve as the basis for treating A as an accomplice!

3.

Presence at the Scene
A person who is present at the scene of a crime, even if she is
present in order to aid in commission of the offense, is not an
accomplice unless she in fact assists in the crime. Although “mere
presence” does not constitute assistance, it does not take much to
convert presence into trivial assistance. In some circumstances, a
person’s presence could provide psychological encouragement to
the principal, which is enough to trigger accomplice liability.
Example: A offers to sit in a car and serve as a lookout for P,
while P breaks into a home. P goes into the house. A falls
asleep in the car and never serves as a lookout.
Nonetheless, A’s offer to serve as a lookout probably
provided encouragement to P, which is assistance.

4.

Omissions
Although a person is not generally an accomplice if she simply
permits a crime to occur, one may be an accomplice by failing to act

to prevent a crime when she has a duty to so act.
Example: A, a police officer, observes a crime being committed.
She stands by and does nothing. As it is her duty to
intervene, A’s omission constitutes assistance. If A omitted
her duty with the
232
requisite mens rea—she wanted the crime to occur—she is
an accomplice in its commission.

C. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Mens Rea
1.

Rule
A person is an accomplice in the commission of an offense if she
possesses two mental states. She must: (1) intentionally engage in
the acts of assistance; and (2) act with the level of culpability
required in the definition of the offense in which she assisted. (This
rule is subject to one exception, described below in subsection C.3.)
The easy cases to analyze involve offenses for which “intent” is the
required mens rea for the target offense.
Example: A is a customer in a bank. P comes up to A, another
customer, and asks for a pencil, which A provides to P. P
uses it to write out a note that reads, “This is a robbery.
Give me all of your cash,” which P hands to a teller. On
these facts, A has assisted in the crime, albeit minimally,
by handing over the pencil. But, what about mens rea? A
intentionally handed over the pencil (the first mens rea
described above). However, A did not act with the intent
that P commit the robbery (the second mens rea).
Therefore, A is not guilty of robbery.

2.

Crimes of Recklessness or Negligence
Notice that, whereas the first mens rea set out above requires proof
of intent—the intent to perform the acts that in fact constitute the
assistance—the second mens rea requirement, relating to the

commission of the crime itself, is that the individual possess the
level of culpability required in the definition of the offense in which
she assisted. The prosecutor does not have to prove that the
accomplice intended a crime of recklessness to occur: it is enough
that the would-be accomplice was reckless in regard to the ensuing
harm; as for a crime of negligence, it is enough to show that the
would-be accomplice was negligent in regard to the ensuring harm.
Example: A is in a rush to get to the airport. She tells P, a taxi
driver, “I am very late for a plane. You will have to speed.
I will give you a huge tip if you get me there on time.” As
a result, P drives at a negligent rate of speed, and kills V, a
pedestrian. Assume from these facts that P is guilty of
manslaughter, based on his criminal negligence. On these
facts, A plausibly may also be convicted of manslaughter.
Here is why: she assisted P in commission of the offense
by soliciting or encouraging P to drive above the speed
limit; her words of solicitation or encouragement were
intentionally expressed (the first mens rea element); as to
the second mens rea requirement, she may be convicted if
her assistance (offering a large tip and telling P to rush)
constituted criminal negligence, the mens rea required for
the offense committed by P. Quite arguably, she should
have realized that her words would cause P to drive in a
dangerous manner and, thus, risk human life.
Consequently, A was negligent, the mens rea for the crime
charged. Therefore, she is an accomplice to manslaughter.
233

3.

Natural-and-Probable-Consequences Doctrine
An accomplice is guilty not only of the offense she intended to
facilitate or encourage, but also of any reasonably foreseeable
offense committed by the person she aided. Put more precisely, once
the prosecutor proves that A was an accomplice of P in the
commission of Crime 1 (using the analysis discussed so far), A is

also responsible for any other offense committed by P that was a
natural and probable consequence (i.e., foreseeable consequence) of
Crime 1.
Examples:
A intentionally assists P in an armed robbery of V
(Crime 1). To A’s surprise and dismay, P intentionally
kills V during the robbery because V resists (Crime 2). A
is an accomplice in the robbery by P based on the
principles we have studied. She is also guilty of the
intent-to-kill murder of V, even though she did not intend
a killing to occur, because the death of an armed robbery
victim is a “natural and probable”—foreseeable—
consequence of this crime.
In the same armed robbery example, assume that P also
intentionally kills X, who coincidentally happens to be at
the robbery site, because X was having an affair with P’s
spouse, and this was P’s first opportunity to exact
revenge. This homicide is not foreseeable, so A will not be
guilty of X’s murder, although she remains accountable
for the robbery and V’s death.

D. Accomplice Liability: If the Perpetrator Is Acquitted
Remember that accomplice liability is derivative in nature. Therefore,
ordinarily, but not always, acquittal of the principal in the first degree
should result in acquittal of the alleged accomplice as a matter of logic.

1.

If No Crime Occurred
If a jury finds that the alleged crime never occurred and, therefore,
acquits the principal in the first degree, it logically follows that any
accomplice must be acquitted as well, as there is no guilt to derive
—one cannot be an accomplice to a nonexistent crime.
Example: P is prosecuted for rape of V. A is prosecuted as P’s
accomplice. P’s defense at trial is that no rape occurred
because V consented. The jury acquits P. It must also
acquit A. A cannot be an accomplice to something (rape)
that the jury has concluded didn’t happen!

2.

If Perpetrator Is Acquitted on Grounds of a Defense
If a jury acquits the alleged perpetrator of a crime on the ground that
he was justified in his actions, then the accomplice should also be
acquitted, as this means she aided in a justified (proper) act. But, if
the jury acquits the perpetrator on the ground of an excuse, then the
jury has determined that a crime has occurred. The perpetrator’s
excuse claim is personal to him, and should not protect the
accomplice.
234
Examples:
A assists P to escape prison. In a subsequent
prosecution for escape, P claims that he fled because he
was threatened with sexual assault by another inmate. If P
is acquitted on the ground of necessity—a lesser-evils
justification defense—A should also be acquitted, because
A cannot derive criminal liability from a lawful (justified)
act. See United States v. Lopez, 662 F.Supp. 1083 (N.D.
Cal. 1987).
On the other hand, if the jury acquits P on the ground of
duress—an excuse—A may properly be convicted. Under
such circumstances, the jury has concluded that a crime
occurred, but that P should not be held accountable for it
because of duress. Unless A was also coerced, there is no
reason why A should not be held accountable for the
crime that occurred.

E.

Perpetrator and Accomplice: Degrees of Guilt
The common law rule used to be that an accessory before the fact could
not be convicted of a more serious offense, or a higher degree of an
offense, than that for which the principal was convicted. (It has nearly
always been the case that an accomplice may be convicted of a lesser
degree of crime than the principal in the first degree.) This rule is
breaking down. Even in an earlier era, however, most courts treated
criminal homicides differently: on the right facts, courts are prepared to

convict an accomplice of a higher degree of criminal homicide than the
perpetrator.
Example: A wants P to kill V. A knows that P’s spouse is having an
affair with V, so A induces P to go home one afternoon when
A knows that P will discover his wife in bed with V. P arrives
home, discovers the act of adultery, and in sudden passion
kills V. Based on criminal homicide doctrine, discussed later
in this Outline, P is guilty of voluntary manslaughter. A, who
not only intended the killing to occur, but acted calmly and
premeditatedly, may be convicted of murder. See People v.
McCoy, 25 Cal.4th 1111, 108 Cal.Rptr.2d 188, 24 P.3d 1210
(2001).

F.

Special Defense: Legislative-Exemption Rule
A person may not be convicted as an accomplice in her own
victimization.
Example: A, an underage female, assisted P break into V’s home one
night, so that P and A could use V’s home to have sexual
intercourse. P was charged with burglary, on the ground that
he broke and entered another person’s home at night with the
intent to commit a felony—statutory rape of A—therein.
Although P was guilty of this offense, and A did assist in the
burglary, she is not guilty of the burglary. In re Meagan R., 42
Cal.App.4th 17, 49 Cal.Rptr.2d 325 (1996). This is because
statutory rape laws are intended to protect underage females;
A, therefore, may not properly be convicted as an accomplice
in her own statutory rape. As she may claim a “legislative
exemption” defense to the charge of being an accomplice in
the statutory rape, and this was the underlying felony in the
burglary, she is also legislatively exempt in the burglary
prosecution!
235

II.

Conspiracy Liability

A. The Pinkerton Doctrine
At common law, a person may be held accountable for the actions of
others either as an accomplice, discussed above, or as a co-conspirator.
A controversial feature of conspiracy law in many, but not all,
jurisdictions is the Pinkerton doctrine, named after the Supreme Court
ruling in Pinkerton v. United States, 328 U.S. 640, 66 S.Ct. 1180, 90
L.Ed. 1489 (1946). This doctrine provides that a co-conspirator is
responsible for any crime committed by any other member of the
conspiracy, whether or not he assisted, if the offense falls within the
scope the conspiracy or is a reasonably foreseeable consequence
thereof.
Example: In Pinkerton, A and P conspired to violate certain tax laws.
However, A did not assist in their commission because he was
in prison on an unrelated offense when the tax crimes
occurred. Under accomplice liability, A was not guilty of the
tax law violations. However, under the doctrine announced in
the case, A was guilty of the tax-law violations because they
were the object of the conspiracy.

1.

Breadth of the Rule
The Pinkerton doctrine can result in exceptionally broad liability.
Conspiratorial agreements are often open-ended, such as a
conspiracy “to rob banks,” “to commit prostitution,” or “to
distribute narcotics.” Thus, the conspiracy can last a very long time,
involve many parties (both major and minor in involvement), and
include many crimes. Under Pinkerton, every member of the
conspiracy will be guilty of every crime committed by every other
member of the conspiracy, as long as the crime is among the objects
of the conspiracy (e.g., a bank robbery, an act of prostitution, or a
sale of narcotics), or is a reasonably foreseeable outgrowth of the
broad conspiracy (e.g., theft of a car to use in the bank robbery, a
homicide to protect the drug dealers, bribery of a police officer to
overlook the prostitution, etc.).

III.

Model Penal Code

A.

Forms of Complicity Liability
MPC complicity liability is set out in Section 2.06.

1.

Innocent-Instrumentality Doctrine
A person is guilty of an offense that she did not personally commit
if, acting with the requisite mens rea, she “causes an innocent or
irresponsible person” to commit the crime. MPC § 2.06(2)(a). This
is equivalent to the common law innocent-instrumentality rule
discussed earlier. The same analysis applies.

2. Accomplice Liability
A person is guilty of an offense that she did not personally commit
if she is an accomplice of another person in the commission of the
offense. MPC § 2.06(2)(c).
236

a.

Study Point
Notice: Under the Code, accomplice liability is conceptually
independent of the innocent-instrumentality doctrine. Thus,
when the Code uses the word “accomplice” in Section 2.06, it is
not speaking of a person who uses an innocent or irresponsible
person to commit an offense. Treat them separately!

3. Pinkerton Rule
The broad Pinkerton conspiracy doctrine discussed above is not
recognized in the Code.

B. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Assistance
1.

Rule
To be an accomplice in the commission of an offense, the person
must: (a) solicit the offense; (b) aid, agree to aid, or attempt to aid in
its commission; or (c) fail to make a proper effort to prevent
commission of the offense (assuming that she has a legal duty to
act). MPC § 2.06(3)(a)(i)–(iii).

2.

Comparison to Common Law
a.

“Agree to Aid”
This provision differs from the common law. It permits
potentially greater liability than common law accomplice
liability.
Example: A agrees to drive the get-away car in a bank robbery
to be committed by P. A does not live up to her
promise—she fails to show up on the day of the crime.
P goes ahead with the robbery anyway. At common
law, A would not be guilty of robbery under
accomplice liability (she did not in fact aid), but she
would be guilty under the Code, as she agreed to aid.

b. “Attempt to Aid”
This provision goes beyond the common law, as it permits
accomplice liability if an actor tries, but fails, to aid in
commission of the offense.
Example: Reconsider the window-opening Example (I.B.1.,
supra), in which A opened a window in order to assist
P in entering a house to commit a crime, but P entered
by another route. A would be guilty of the ensuing
crime under the MPC. Although A did not aid in the
crime, she attempted to aid.

C. What Makes a Person an Accomplice: Mens Rea
1.

Rule
To be an accomplice, the person must act “with the purpose of
promoting or facilitating the commission of the offense.” MPC §
2.06(3)(a).
237

2.

Exception to the Requirement of Purpose

The MPC handles the common law issue discussed earlier—liability
for a crime of recklessness or negligence—with the following
provision: A person who is an accomplice in the commission of the
conduct that causes a criminal result, is also an accomplice in the
result thereof, if she has the level of culpability regarding the result
required in the definition of the offense. MPC § 2.06(4).
Example: Reconsider the taxi-cab hypothetical discussed in I.C.2.,
supra. A would be guilty of negligent homicide as an
accomplice of P. The MPC analysis will go as follows:
First, ask whether A was an accomplice in the commission
of the conduct (the speeding) that caused the result (the
death). The answer would seem to be that she was: she
encouraged the speeding (the assistance) with the purpose
(the mens rea) of promoting this conduct. Second, did A
have the requisite mens rea (negligence) regarding the
result (death)? On the facts in the hypothetical, yes.

D. Accomplice Liability: If the Perpetrator Is Acquitted
MPC § 2.06(7) provides that an accomplice in the commission of the
offense may be convicted of that offense, even if the alleged perpetrator
“has been convicted of a different offense or degree of offense or … has
been acquitted.” One must be very careful in reading this provision: if
there has been no offense, then one is not an accomplice “in the
commission of the offense.” Therefore, although an accomplice may
properly be convicted if the perpetrator is acquitted on the ground of an
excuse defense, an accomplice should not be convicted if there was no
offense, i.e., the principal party was acquitted because no crime
occurred or because the primary party was justified in his conduct.

E.

Special Defenses
1.

Legislative-Exemption Rule
Like the common law, the MPC applies the legislative-exemption
rule (see I.F. above). MPC § 2.06(6)(a).

2.

Inevitable Incidence

An accomplice is not guilty of an offense if her conduct is an
inevitable incident to the commission of the offense. MPC § 2.06(6)
(b).
Example:
A customer in the act of prostitution is not an
accomplice in its commission.

3. Abandonment
A person is not an accomplice in the commission of a crime if she
terminates her participation before the crime is committed, and if
she either neutralizes her assistance, gives timely warning to the
police of the impending offense, or in some other manner prevents
commission of the crime. MPC § 2.06(6)(c).
238

F.

Special Provision to Consider: Relationship of Accomplice
Liability to Criminal Attempts
Note the relationship between the MPC complicity provisions and the
law of attempts. The Code goes well beyond the common law by
permitting an accomplice to be convicted of criminal attempt, if she
attempts to aid in commission of an offense, although the other person
does not commit or even attempt the offense. MPC § 5.01(3).
Example: A furnishes P with a gun to kill V. Thereafter, P changes his
mind and abandons his plan. At common law, P is not guilty
of anything (except conspiracy, which for present purposes we
will ignore). Because A derives her liability from P, A is free
of common law liability. Under the Code, however, A is guilty
of attempted murder, although P is guilty of nothing! This is
not a violation of the concept of derivative liability, because
the Code is not convicting A on the basis of accomplice
liability. Instead, A is the perpetrator of the offense of
attempted murder (more accurately, she is the perpetrator of
the offense of attempting to aid a murder), which MPC §
5.01(3) makes an offense!

IV.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, pages 302–303]

1. Bob takes Carl’s child hostage. Bob threatens to kill Carl’s child unless
Carl rapes Vanessa in his presence. To save his child, Carl rapes Vanessa.
Which of the following best describes Bob’s common law liability for the
rape?
a. He is the principal in the first degree;
b. He is the principal in the second degree;
c. He is an accessory before the fact; or
d. None of the above.
2. Assume the same facts as the last question, except that Bob commands
Carl to kill Vanessa. Carl kills Vanessa. Which of the possible answers
above best describes Bob’s common law liability for the criminal homicide?
3. T or F. Carla drives to the liquor store. Joshua accompanies Carla in the
vehicle, Joshua knows that Carla plans to rob the store. Carla does not know
Joshua is aware of this. Joshua intends to help, if needed. That is why he is
there. His assistance is never needed: Carla robs the store without his help.
Joshua is not guilty of the robbery.
4. Janice loans Xavier her car, although he is severely drunk. Janice was
not aware of his condition, but should have been. Xavier drives the car and,
due to intoxication, recklessly kills a pedestrian. Assume that Xavier’s
recklessness is so extreme that he is guilty of murder. Of what MPC crime,
if any, is Janice guilty?
5.
Kelli, a fifteen-year-old female, helps Roger, a thirty-year-old male,
have intercourse with Camille, another fifteen-year-old female. Roger is
guilty of statutory rape. Is Kelli guilty of statutory rape?
6. Nellie, a drug peddler in Chicago, is a member of a nationwide drug
conspiracy consisting of Smuggler, Middleman (who furnishes Nellie with
the drugs she sells on the
239

street), and drug peddlers in 50 other cities, who receive their drugs from
Smuggler and Middleman. Overall, the other drug peddlers conduct 42,976
drug sales, 47 batteries and 1 murder of buyers who failed to pay for their
drugs. Nellie in no way assisted in the crimes in the other cities. Is Nellie
guilty of these non-Chicago criminal activities? Answer under the common
law and Model Penal Code.
7. Carlos furnishes a gun to Zelda so she can murder Kelly. Thereafter,
Carlos has a change of heart and tells Zelda, “I want my gun back. Don’t
kill Kelly.” Zelda ignores Carlos and proceeds to kill Kelly. Is Carlos an
accomplice in the murder? Apply the MPC.
8.
Let’s turn the facts around a bit from Question 7. This time Carlos
furnishes the gun to Zelda to kill Kelly, but doesn’t have a change of heart,
but Zelda does! Zelda does not kill Kelly, or even attempt the crime. Under
the MPC, is Carlos guilty of anything?

241

PART TEN

Criminal Homicide
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

Criminal Homicide: Overview
A.

“Homicide”

B.

“Human Being”

C. Year-and-a-Day Rule
D. A Brief Touch of History
II.

Common Law: Murder
A.

Definition of “Murder”

B.

Murder: Intent to Kill

C.

Murder: Intent to Inflict Grievous Bodily Injury

D.

Murder: “Depraved Heart” (Extreme Recklessness)

E.

Felony-Murder Rule

III. Common Law: Manslaughter
A.

Manslaughter: General Principles

B. Voluntary Manslaughter: Provocation (“Heat-of-Passion”)

IV.

C.

Involuntary Manslaughter: Criminal Negligence

D.

Involuntary Manslaughter: Unlawful-Act Doctrine

Model Penal Code
A.

Criminal Homicide: Overview

B.

Murder

V.

C.

Manslaughter

D.

Negligent Homicide

Review Questions

242

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
We now discuss the common law crimes of murder and manslaughter, as
well as statutory variations on the common law, including the Model Penal
Code.
Be careful: most or all of the homicide cases you read in your casebook are
based on a particular state’s homicide statute (perhaps the MPC version,
perhaps not), which will not precisely mirror the common law version of
the crime. Learning the common law here is just a starting point—an
important one, however—to understanding modern homicide law. So, pay
attention to the specific statutes applied in the cases you read.
One more point: The discussion below necessarily uses mens rea terms we
discussed earlier. If you need to refresh your memory, look back at Part
Three.

I.

Criminal Homicide: Overview

A.

“Homicide”
1.

Definition
The English common law defined “homicide” as “the killing of a
human being by a human being.” In American common law, it is
“the killing of a human being by another human being.” Thus, the
first definition, but not the second, treats suicide as a form of
homicide. We will focus on the American version. Notice, too:
“homicide” is a legally neutral term. A homicide may be justifiable,
excusable or criminal.

2.

“Criminal Homicide”

A criminal homicide is a homicide committed without justification
(e.g., in self-defense) or excuse (e.g., as the result of insanity).

B.

“Human Being”
1. At the Start of Life
The common law provides that a fetus is not a human being until it
is born alive. Keeler v. Superior Court, 2 Cal.3d 619, 87 Cal.Rptr.
481, 470 P.2d 617 (1970). Therefore, a person is not guilty of
criminal homicide under common law doctrine if he causes a fetus
to be stillborn.
Example:
In Keeler, supra, K intentionally struck his estranged
wife in the abdomen when he learned that she was
pregnant by another man. The viable fetus was born dead.
K was prosecuted for murder, based on a statute that did
not define the term “human being.” The state supreme
court held that, in the absence of a statutory definition, the
common law definition prevailed. Therefore, K was not
guilty of murder, as he did not kill a human being.

2. At the End of Life
At common law, a person is legally dead (and, therefore, ceases to
be a “human being”) when there is a total stoppage of the
circulation of the blood and a permanent cessation of the functions
of respiration and heart pulsation.
243

a.

Brain Death
The common law definition has proven impractical in modern
times. Due to life-support machinery, it is possible artificially to
maintain the heart and lung activities of patients who have lost
the spontaneous capacity to perform these functions. Therefore,
the overwhelming trend among the states, in part by common
law but mostly by statute, has been to redefine death. Today,
virtually every state provides that a person may be deemed

legally dead if he experiences an irreversible cessation of
breathing and heartbeat (the common law definition), or suffers
from “brain death syndrome,” which occurs when the whole
brain (not just one portion of it) permanently loses the capacity
to function.

C. Year-and-a-Day Rule
At common law, a homicide prosecution may only be brought if the
victim dies within one year and a day of the injury inflicted by the
accused.
Example: D stabs V in the stomach on March 1, 2013. If V dies on or
before March 1, 2014 as the result of the stab wounds, a
homicide prosecution may be brought. If V dies thereafter, a
homicide prosecution is barred. In such circumstances, D may
be prosecuted for a non-homicide offense, such as assault with
intent to kill.

1.

Rationale of Rule
In the early, medically unsophisticated common law era, courts were
concerned that if a death occurred too long after the initial attack,
the factfinder would be unable to determine reliably whether the
death was the result of natural or criminal causes. Therefore, an
arbitrary line was drawn: it was considered unfair to hold the
defendant responsible for the death if a year and a day passed.

2.

Modern Approach
Today, the cause of death can reliably be ascertained far more easily
than centuries ago, so the risk of unfair prosecution is reduced.
Moreover, life-support machinery can artificially sustain a person’s
life well beyond a year and a day, thereby frustrating criminal
prosecutions. Consequently, many states have abolished the rule.

D. A Brief Touch of History
In early English history, criminal homicide was a single offense,
punishable by death. Gradually, English judges determined that some

homicides, although criminal, should not be punished by death. As a
result, the offense was divided into two offenses: murder and
manslaughter. The latter was a statutory non-capital offense in England.
However, manslaughter is a common law offense in this country.
244

II.

Common Law: Murder

A.

Definition of “Murder”
Common law murder is a killing of a human being by another human
being with malice aforethought.

1.

“Malice”
A person acts with “malice” if she unjustifiably, inexcusably, and in
the absence of any mitigating circumstance, kills a person with any
one of four mental states: (a) the intention to kill a human being; (b)
the intention to inflict grievous bodily injury on another; (c) an
extremely reckless disregard for the value of human life (“depraved
heart” at common law); or (d) the intention to commit a felony
during the commission or attempted commission of which a death
accidentally occurs (the “felony-murder rule”). The first form
(“intent to kill”) of malice is sometimes characterized as “express
malice”; the other three versions are called “implied malice.” These
four categories of malice are considered below.

2.

“Aforethought”
Originally, the term “aforethought” meant that the actor thought
about the killing beforehand, i.e., that he premeditated the killing.
Over time, the term lost significance, except as a reminder of the
obvious: that the “malicious” mental state must exist at the time of
the homicide, rather than after the killing. In other words, the law
doesn’t punish people for killing with “malice afterthought.”

B.

Murder: Intent to Kill
1.

General Rule

In view of the definition of “malice aforethought” set out above, an
intentional killing that is unjustifiable (e.g., not committed in selfdefense), inexcusable (e.g., not committed by an insane person), and
unmitigated (e.g., not the result of sudden heat of passion, a concept
described later in this Part) constitutes common law murder.

2.

Proving Intent
“Intent” is a subjective form of fault. The prosecutor must prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that the killer purposely or knowingly
took another’s life. How does the prosecutor determine that it was
the conscious objective of the killer to take life, or that this person
subjectively knew that death was virtually certain to result from his
conduct?

a.

Natural and Probable Consequences Inference
For a long time, juries were often instructed in murder
prosecutions that “the law presumes that a person intends the
natural and probable consequences of his voluntary acts.”
Example: D loads her gun, aims it in the direction of V’s head,
and fires the weapon, killing V. Unless V confesses, or
there is
245
strong evidence of a motive to kill, a jury might find it
difficult to determine, beyond a reasonable doubt, D’s
subjective intentions. However, under the instruction
quoted above, the jury would presume the “natural and
probable consequence” of D’s conduct of pointing a
loaded gun at V’s head and pulling the trigger: namely,
that she intended to kill V.

i.

Constitutional Law Intervenes
This instruction violates the Due Process Clause of the
United States Constitution, because it improperly shifts the
burden of proof regarding an element of the offense (malice

aforethought, via a finding of intent-to-kill) from the
prosecutor to the defendant. Sandstrom v. Montana, 442 U.S.
510, 99 S.Ct. 2450, 61 L.Ed.2d 39 (1979). (See generally
Part One.)

ii.

Common Sense to the Rescue
The jury instruction, however, simply points out the obvious.
In the absence of evidence that the actor is of subnormal
intelligence, is mentally unstable, or deeply intoxicated, it is
reasonable to infer that a person intends the natural and
probable consequences of her actions. Therefore, even
without an instruction, a jury may infer (but not formally
presume) intent on facts such as those set out in the Example
above.

b. Deadly Weapon Rule
A corollary of the natural-and-probable-consequences inference
is the “deadly weapon” rule, which provides that a jury may
infer an intention to kill if the defendant intentionally uses a
deadly weapon directed at a vital part of the human anatomy. In
appropriate cases, jurors may be instructed that they may, but
need not, draw this inference.

3.

Statutory Reform: “Wilful, Deliberate, Premeditated”
Formula
a.

Historical Note
As noted above, English judges determined that not all criminal
homicides justified the death penalty. So, they divided criminal
homicide into two offenses. Murder carried the death penalty;
manslaughter did not. In this country, legislatures took the
process one step further. Starting in Pennsylvania (thus, the socalled “Pennsylvania Model”), many states concluded that not
all murders merited the death penalty and, as a consequence,
they divided murder into degrees. Only first-degree murder

carried the possibility of capital punishment. (Of course, today
some states do not impose the death penalty for any murder.)

i.

Study Point
Although most states followed the Pennsylvania Model and
divided murder into two degrees, you must remember that
the common law
246
had no degrees of murder. So, if you are tested on the
common law, you would be wrong to discuss “first-degree”
or “second-degree” (or, for that matter, “tenth-degree”)
murder. I repeat: There was no such thing at common law
as degrees of murder! The “wilful, deliberate,
premeditation” formula about to be discussed was not part
of the common law analysis. To decide whether a particular
murder is “first-degree,” “second-degree,” or any other
degree—or whether it is just plain old “murder”—can only
be answered by reading and interpreting the particular
statute in question.

b. The “Wilful, Deliberate, Premeditated” Formula
In states that have followed the Pennsylvania Model, which
divides murder into degrees, a “wilful, deliberate, premeditated”
killing is first-degree murder. What do these terms mean?

i.

Wilful
In the context of murder statutes, this term means, simply,
“intentional.” (This is where we find the “malice
aforethought” needed for murder.) Thus, a wilful killing, is
an intentional killing.

ii.

Premeditated
To “premeditate” is “to think about beforehand.” People v.
Morrin, 31 Mich.App. 301, 187 N.W.2d 434 (1971). But,

this does not tell us how long one much think about a killing
beforehand to constitute “premeditation.”
(1) How Much Premeditation?
Some courts state that “no time is too short for a wicked
man to frame in his mind a scheme for murder, and to
contrive the means of accomplishing it.” King v.
Commonwealth, 4 Va. 78 (1817). In contrast, others
courts require proof that the actor thought about the
killing “some appreciable time.” E.g., People v.
Anderson, 70 Cal.2d 15, 73 Cal.Rptr. 550, 447 P.2d 942
(1968).
(2) Critique
The problem with the first approach is that if “no time is
too short” to constitute premeditation, then it follows
that every intentional (wilful) killing is a premeditated
homicide. If this is so, why would the legislature have
divided the crime into degrees, and require proof, not
just of intent to kill, but also of premeditation and
deliberation, for first-degree murder? Thus, the second
approach—“some appreciable time” or similar language
—although vague, is preferable.

iii. Deliberate
Unfortunately,
courts
often
fail
to
distinguish
“premeditation” from “deliberation”—they treat it as a single
entity. But, if this is so, why include both words in the
murder statute? When courts do draw a
247
distinction, as they should, the latter term means “to measure
and evaluate the major facets of a choice or problem.”
People v. Morrin, supra. Notice: to satisfy this standard of
deliberation, a person would have to premeditate longer than
an instant.

(1) Study Point
Think of it this way: premeditation considers the
quantity of time taken to form the intention to kill;
deliberation concerns the quality of the thinking
processes during that time. In general, deliberation is
characterized by “cool, calm” thinking. Understood this
way, it is possible to premeditate without deliberating,
but deliberation requires premeditation. (Deliberate on
that!)

iv. What If …
What if a jury concludes that the defendant acted wilfully—
intended to kill—but did not premeditate and/or deliberate?
Assuming there is no claim of justification, excuse, or
mitigation, the defendant is guilty of second-degree murder
in states with murder statutes of the sort being considered
here. It is murder because the killing was intentional
(remember: intent-to-kill is one form of malice
aforethought); since the killing was not premeditated and
deliberate, it is not first-degree murder. So, by matter of
elimination, it drops to second-degree.

C.

Murder: Intent to Inflict Grievous Bodily Injury
A person acts with malice aforethought if she intends to inflict grievous
bodily injury on another human being. Therefore, if a death results from
her conduct, she is guilty of murder.
Example: D stabs V in the stomach with a large knife. V dies. D states
that she did not intend to kill V. Even if a jury were to believe
her claim, which it need not, she could be convicted of murder
because she intended to inflict grievous bodily injury on V.

1.

“Grievous Bodily Injury”
Statutes sometimes fail to define “grievous bodily injury” (or other
terms they sometimes use synonymously, such as “serious bodily
injury” or “great bodily harm”). When the term is defined, either by

statute or judicial opinion, the definitions vary. It has been defined
as injury “that imperils life” or that “is likely to be attended with
dangerous or fatal consequences.” See Wellar v. People, 30 Mich. 16
(1874); People v. Crenshaw, 298 Ill. 412, 131 N.E. 576 (1921). Or,
it is an injury that “gives rise to the apprehension of danger to life,
health, or limb.” Jackson v. State, 168 Tex.Crim. 51, 323 S.W.2d
442, 443 (App.1959).

2.

Statutory Approach
In states that distinguish between degrees of murder according to
the Pennsylvania Model, one who kills another person with this
state of mind is usually guilty of second-degree murder. It
constitutes malice aforethought
248
(murder), but it is not a wilful, deliberate, premeditated killing (firstdegree murder).

a.

Study Point
This form of malice very often merges with the “extreme
recklessness”/“depraved heart” type of malice discussed next.

D.

Murder: “Depraved Heart” (Extreme Recklessness)
1.

General Rule
A person who acts with what the common law colorfully described
as a “depraved heart” or an “abandoned and malignant heart” is one
who acts with malice aforethought. If a person dies as a result of
such conduct, the actor is guilty of murder, although the death was
unintended.

2. What Is “Depraved Heart”/“Extreme Recklessness”?
Common law judges did not provide a clear definition of “depraved
heart” or “abandoned and malignant heart” behavior. In general
terms, it is conduct that manifests an extreme indifference to the
value of human life. Although no single definition of such extreme

indifference can explain all of the common law decisions, today
most courts would probably agree that an actor manifests an
extreme indifference to the value of human life if he consciously
takes a substantial and unjustifiable foreseeable risk of causing
human death. (In short, “depraved heart” equals “extreme
recklessness.”)
Examples: Although each case must be decided on its own merits,
the following facts have supported a charge of extreme
recklessness: failing to properly control a pit bull that has
a history of threatening and attacking people, People v.
Knoller, 41 Cal.4th 139, 59 Cal.Rptr.3d 157, 158 P.3d 731
(2007); knowingly placing a loaded gun at the victim’s
temple, after which the weapon goes off accidentally,
People v. Love, 111 Cal.App.3d 98, 168 Cal.Rptr. 407
(1980); playing “Russian roulette,” Commonwealth v.
Malone, 354 Pa. 180, 47 A.2d 445 (1946); shooting into a
moving train for no apparent reason other than to cause
mischief, Banks v. State, 85 Tex.Crim. 165, 211 S.W. 217
(1919); and speeding, driving in an intoxicated condition,
and ignoring stop signs and red lights. Pears v. State, 672
P.2d 903 (Alaska 1983).

3.

Statutory Approach
In states that divide murder into degrees pursuant to the traditional
model, a depraved-heart homicide ordinarily is second-degree
murder.

E.

Felony-Murder Rule
1.

General Rule
At common law, a person is guilty of murder if she kills another
person, even accidentally, during the commission or attempted
commission of any felony.
249

Regina v. Serné, 16 Cox. Crim. Cas. 311 (1887) (Eng.). This is the
so-called “felony-murder rule.”
Examples: At gunpoint, D1 robs V, a man with a history of heart
disease. V dies of a heart attack caused by fright from the
robbery. D1 is guilty of murder under the felony-murder
rule. People v. Stamp, 2 Cal.App.3d 203, 82 Cal.Rptr. 598
(1969).
The police spot D2 and D3 stealing tires from a used car
lot. A high-speed chase ensues between the police and the
car driven by D2. As a result of the chase, D2 and D3 run
their car through a red light, killing the driver of another
vehicle. D2 and D3 (the latter, as his accomplice) were
guilty of felony-murder. People v. Fuller, 86 Cal.App.3d
618, 150 Cal.Rptr. 515 (1978).

a.

Statutory Approach
Many states that divide murder into degrees have a dual
approach to felony-murder. The murder statute will often
provide that a killing that occurs during the commission of
certain specifically listed felonies (most commonly: arson,
robbery, rape, and burglary) is first-degree murder; a death
during the commission of any non-enumerated felony
constitutes murder of the second-degree.

2.

Rationale of the Rule
Various justifications for the rule have been suggested. The most
common explanations for the rule are based on deterrence. Some
seek to defend the rule on the ground that the threat of a murder
conviction, and the punishment that follows from it, may deter
felonies. But, this argument has been correctly criticized: if we want
to use the threat of punishment to deter a robber or rapist or burglar
or thief from committing their felony, the solution is to increase the
potential punishment of the felony and not to deal with it indirectly
by threatening greater punishment for the unintended (and relatively
rare) homicide that may occur during the felony. The somewhat

more plausible deterrence argument—the one that is used more
often to defend felony-murder—is that the harshness of the rule will
cause felons to commit their crimes in a less dangerous manner,
thereby decreasing the risk that deaths will ensue. People v.
Washington, 62 Cal.2d 777, 44 Cal.Rptr. 442, 402 P.2d 130 (1965).

3.

Controversies Regarding Felony-Murder
a.

Deterrence
Opponents of the rule contend that there is no serious empirical
evidence to support the deterrence reasoning set out above.
Indeed, statistics suggest that the felony-murder rule is used
most often in cases in which the felon intentionally killed the
victim, or in which he acted in an extremely reckless manner,
i.e., in cases in which the rule is unnecessary because other
forms of malice aforethought are provable. In the few cases
where the felony-murder rule is really needed, the felon likely
did not expect anyone to die and, therefore, is not significantly
deterred by the rule.
250

b. Retributive Criticism: Culpability
Retributivists often contend that the rule, when applied to
accidental homicides, results in disproportional punishment. In
effect, the intent to commit the felony is transferred to the
homicide, which is unfair.
Example:
Imagine two pickpockets. Pickpocket A takes
money out of V1’s pocket. Pickpocket B does the same
thing in regard to V2, but in her case V2 has a heart
attack from the experience and dies. The actors are
equally culpable: each committed a theft; and each
took the same risk (very little) that a person would die
from the act. A will be convicted of theft; B is guilty of
theft and murder. Yet, the death—the difference in
result in the two cases—was accidental and

unforeseeable. Unlucky Pickpocket B will now be
treated as a murderer.

4.

Limitations on Felony-Murder Rule
Because the felony-murder rule is controversial, many courts have
limited its scope. Among the most common limitations are those
discussed below. But, do not lose sight of the fact that some
jurisdictions apply the felony-murder as described above without
these limitations, and other jurisdictions may apply one or another,
but not all, of these limits.

a.

Inherently-Dangerous-Felony Limitation
Although the “pure” felony-murder rule applies to homicides
that occur during the commission of any felony, many states
limit the rule to killings that arise during the commission of
“inherently dangerous” felonies. Courts do not agree, however,
on how to determine whether a felony is “inherently dangerous.”
Some courts consider the felony “in the abstract”: they ignore
the specific facts in the case, and look merely at the definition of
the crime, and ask whether the felony, by its nature, cannot be
committed without creating a substantial risk that someone will
be killed. People v. Howard, 34 Cal.4th 1129, 23 Cal.Rptr.3d
306, 104 P.3d 107 (2005). Put differently, a felony will be
treated as “inherently dangerous” if the felony, as defined,
always—no matter how it is actually committed—creates a
substantial risk of death. In contrast, others courts consider a
felony “inherently dangerous” if it is dangerous in the abstract
or in light of the factual circumstances in the particular case, i.e.,
if it was committed in this case in a dangerous manner. State v.
Harrison, 90 N.M. 439, 564 P.2d 1321 (1977).
Examples: The difference in approach is significant. Consider
People v. Phillips, 64 Cal.2d 574, 51 Cal.Rptr. 225,
414 P.2d 353 (1966): P obtained money from X under
false pretenses by claiming to have a medical cure for
V, X’s terminally ill child, and convincing X to forego

traditional cancer treatment for V. V died as the result
of P’s fraud. P was prosecuted for felony-murder,
based on the felony of grand theft. Applying the inthe-abstract test, the court determined that grand theft
is not inherently dangerous
251
because a person can certainly commit a theft without
creating a high probability of loss of life. Under the
facts-of-the-case test, however, it would seem that P
committed the theft in a highly dangerous manner.
(But, notice: in the latter analysis, the felony-murder
rule probably is unnecessary to convict P of murder.
The depraved heart approach will do.)
In People v. Henderson, 19 Cal.3d 86, 137 Cal.Rptr. 1,
560 P.2d 1180 (1977), H falsely imprisoned V at
gunpoint. The gun went off accidentally causing
death. The court held that the felony-murder rule did
not apply because, looking at the felony (false
imprisonment) in the abstract, it was not inherently
dangerous. It reached that conclusion because the
statute prohibited imprisonment “effected by violence,
menace, fraud, or deceit.” The court pointed to the
disjunctive “or” in the statute: a person could be guilty
of the crime if she imprisoned the victim by the
nondangerous means of fraud or deceit.

b. Independent-Felony Limitation
Some courts require that the felony that serves as the predicate
for the felony-murder rule be “independent” of the homicide. A
felony that is not independent is said to merge with the
homicide, and thus the felony-murder rule will no longer apply
—the felony disappears from the picture.

i.

The Easy Case

The most obvious example of a felony that merges according
to this limitation on the felony-murder rule is assault with a
deadly weapon.
Example: I shot and killed V, his wife, during a dispute.
The prosecutor sought to convict I on the basis of
the felony-murder rule: I killed V during the
commission of the felony of assault with a deadly
weapon. People v. Ireland, 70 Cal.2d 522, 75
Cal.Rptr. 188, 450 P.2d 580 (1969). The court held
that the underlying felony was not independent of
the homicide—it merges into the homicide and
cannot be used to support a felony-murder
prosecution.
(1) Rationale
In light of the most plausible rationale of the felonymurder rule—that it motivates the felon to commit the
felony in a less dangerous manner—the independentfelony limitation makes perfect sense. There is no way
for an actor to commit an assault with a deadly weapon
in a non-dangerous manner. Therefore, there is no
deterrent value to the felony-murder rule in such
circumstances.
252

ii. The Difficult Cases
Many violent offenses include assaultive conduct. For
example, armed robbery basically consists of the offense of
larceny + assault with a deadly weapon; rape involves
assaultive conduct. In order that the “independent
felony/merger” limitation not entirely eat up the felonymurder rule, courts have followed either of two approaches:
some limit the merger principle to crimes of assault; other
courts define a felony as independent—thus, a felony that
will support the felony-murder rule, even if it is assaultive—

if it involves an “independent felonious purpose.” People v.
Burton, 6 Cal.3d 375, 99 Cal.Rptr. 1, 491 P.2d 793 (1971).
Example:
Armed robbery has an independent felonious
purpose: to take property from the victim. Rape has
an independent felonious purpose: sexual
intercourse with the unconsenting victim.
Therefore, these felonies are independent although
they involve assaultive conduct. The felony-murder
rule applies.

c. Res Gestae Limitation
Many courts provide that the mere fact that a death occurs, in a
temporal sense, “during” the commission of a felony, is
insufficient to trigger the felony-murder rule. There must also be
a causal connection between the felony and the death.
Examples: D1 robs a cashier in a grocery store. While this is
occurring, a customer, unaware of the robbery, dies of
a coincidental heart attack. The felony-murder rule
would not apply. Yes, there was a death during the
commission of the felony, but there wasn’t a killing,
causally speaking.
D2, in felonious possession of an unlicensed firearm
in the glove compartment of her vehicle, accidentally
strikes and kills a pedestrian. The felony-murder rule
does not apply, as there is no link between the felony
and the car accident.
Pilot D3 is flying a small aircraft unlawfully
containing marijuana. Because of heavy fog, he
becomes lost and crashes into a mountain, causing the
death of X, a passenger also involved in the drug
offense. In a case close to these facts, the court held
that there was no causal connection between the
felony of drug distribution and the death by plane
crash. That is, although D3 and X presumably would

not have been in the airplane but for their felonious
behavior, the crash was not the result of any act in
direct furtherance of the felony, e.g., they were not
flying low to avoid radar detection.

i.

Important Clarification (The Res Gestae Rule)
Just as the preceding discussion shows that you cannot treat
the phrase “during the commission of a felony” literally—
some deaths
253
that occur during the crime do not fall within the felonymurder rule—it is also the case that a killing that occurs after
the felony has been completed may still fall within the socalled “res gestae” of the felony (and, therefore, within the
scope of the felony-murder rule). If the death occurs during
the escape from the scene of the crime or is part of the same,
continuous transaction, the felony-murder rule will still
apply.

d. Killing by a Non-Felon
Some jurisdictions provide that the felony-murder rule does not
apply if the person who commits the homicide is a non-felon
resisting the felony. But, as discussed below, even among courts
that take this position, their reasoning differs.
Examples: In State v. Bonner, 330 N.C. 536, 411 S.E.2d 598
(1992), D1, D2, D3, and D4 robbed a restaurant.
During the robbery, O, an off-duty police officer,
thwarted the crime by killing D1 and D2. May D3 and
D4 be charged with felony-murder of their cohorts,
although the shooter was O?
Or, suppose that X, the victim of the robbery, attempts
to shoot one of the felons, but instead accidentally
kills V, an innocent bystander. May the felons be

charged with felony-murder of the innocent victim,
although the shooter was a non-felon?

i.

Initial Observation
In such cases, the felony-murder rule literally applies: a
killing has occurred during the attempted commission of a
felony. Indeed, there is a causal connection between the
felony and the homicide, since the shooter was resisting the
felony.

ii.

Judicial Approach to Issue
(1) Agency Approach
Most courts apply the “agency” theory of felony-murder.
That is, a felon is only responsible for homicides
committed in furtherance of the felony, i.e., by a person
acting as the felon’s “agent.” Therefore, a homicide
committed by a police officer, the victim of the felony,
or a bystander resisting the felony, falls outside the
felony-murder rule. After all, they are antagonists, not
agents, of the felon; a homicide committed by one of
them is not in furtherance of the felony.
(2) Proximate Causation Approach
Some courts instead apply a “proximate causation” rule,
which holds that a felon may be held responsible for a
homicide perpetrated by a non-felon if the felon
proximately caused the shooting by the non-felon.
Essentially, this makes a felon responsible for the death
of another, although the shooter was a
254
police officer, felony victim, or bystander, as long as the
shooting is a foreseeable response to the felon’s conduct.

III.

Common Law: Manslaughter

A.

Manslaughter: General Principles

1.

Definition of “Manslaughter”
Common law manslaughter is an unlawful killing of a human being
by another human being without malice aforethought.

2.

Categories of Manslaughter
The common law recognized two type of manslaughter, “voluntary”
and “involuntary.” Once punished alike, today voluntary
manslaughter is now the more serious offense.

a. Voluntary Manslaughter
As discussed below, voluntary manslaughter involves an
intentional killing (thus, the offense might more accurately have
been called “intentional manslaughter), but one in which the
actor takes a life in “sudden heat of passion,” as the result of
“adequate provocation.”

i.

Study Point
A few jurisdictions also recognize a diminished capacity
“partial responsibility” defense that will reduce murder to
manslaughter. (See Part Seven, section V. to learn or remind
yourself about this principle.) Also, some jurisdictions
recognize “imperfect” justification defenses (see Part Six,
II.A.8.a.i.), which will reduce murder to voluntary or
involuntary manslaughter (depending on the jurisdiction).

b. Involuntary Manslaughter
As discussed below, an unintentional killing constitutes
involuntary manslaughter if the homicide occurs in either of two
ways.

i.

Criminal Negligence
A homicide is manslaughter if it is the result of a lawful act
performed (in Blackstone’s words) “in an unlawful manner,
and without due caution and circumspection.” This means
simply that the killing occurred in a criminally negligent (or

what some courts have, unfortunately, loosely called
“reckless”) manner.

ii.

Unlawful-Act Doctrine
A homicide is manslaughter if it is the result of the
commission of an unlawful act. Somewhat less accurately,
this is sometimes called the “misdemeanor-manslaughter”
rule.
255

3.

Murder Versus Manslaughter
a.

Intentional Killings
Notice that an intentional killing, if criminal (i.e., not justifiable
or excusable) can constitute either murder or manslaughter. An
intentional killing will constitute murder, unless a mitigating
factor is present—namely, that the killing occurred as a result of
provocation, as explained below.

b. Unintentional Killings
An unintentional killing can constitute either murder or
manslaughter.

i.

Recklessness Versus Negligence
In general, a reckless killing is murder, whereas a criminally
negligent one is manslaughter. Sometimes courts describe
the line between the offenses differently: an “extremely
reckless” killing is murder, and a “reckless” killing is
manslaughter.

ii. Accidental Killings
An accidental killing does not constitute criminal homicide
unless it occurs during the commission of a wrongful act. In
general, if a death occurs accidentally during the commission
of a felony, the homicide is murder; if it results during the

commission of a misdemeanor or some other unlawful act, it
is manslaughter.

B. Voluntary Manslaughter: Provocation (“Heat-of-Passion”)
1.

General Rule
An intentional, unjustified, inexcusable killing, which ordinarily is
murder, constitutes manslaughter (or “voluntary manslaughter”) if it
is committed in sudden heat of passion, as the result of adequate
provocation. Thus, the provocation doctrine functions as a full
defense to murder, and as a partial defense overall (as the defendant
is guilty of manslaughter).
Example: Hal returns home and finds his wife in bed with Victor.
Enraged, Hal shoots and kills Victor. As discussed below,
Hal may be guilty of voluntary manslaughter: although he
killed Victor intentionally, he did so in sudden heat of
passion, as the result of the provocation of observing his
wife in an act of adultery.

2.

Rationale of the Provocation Doctrine
Courts and commentators disagree regarding why an intentional
killing in heat of passion is reduced to manslaughter.

a.

Partial Justification
Although it is currently the minority view, some courts in the
past seemed to believe—and a few scholars have expressly
argued—that the
256
provocation doctrine functions as a partial justification for a
killing, i.e., that the death of the provoker-victim constitutes less
of a social harm than the killing of an entirely “innocent”
person. Some would argue that the victim, by provoking the
killer, partially forfeits his right to life by his unlawful conduct.

b. Partial Excuse

Most commentators today now characterize the defense as a
partial excuse, as a concession to normal human frailty. That is,
the social harm is unmitigated (the provoker does not deserve,
even partially, to die) but the culpability of the actor is reduced
because of the provocation. Why is this so? If the provocation is
serious enough (what the common law calls “adequate
provocation”), “we are prepared to say that an ordinary person
in the actor’s circumstances, even an ordinarily law-abiding
person …, might become sufficiently upset by the provocation
to experience substantial impairment of his capacity for selfcontrol and, as a consequence, to act violently.” Joshua Dressler,
Why Keep the Provocation Defense?: Some Reflections on a
Difficult Subject, 86 Minn. L. Rev. 959, 974 (2002).

c.

Critique
The provocation doctrine is under attack today. As always, some
have criticized the partial defense on the ground that it
undermines utilitarian goals by “rewarding” (through lesser
punishment) people who respond violently to non-violent
provocations. But, in recent years, the doctrine has also been
attacked by feminists (some who would abolish the defense, and
by others who would narrow its scope), who argue that the
defense serves to partially excuse male aggression, typically at
the expense of women: “men are by far the most frequent
victimizers, and women the most frequent victims.” Victoria
Nourse, Passion’s Progress: Modern Law Reform and the
Provocation Defense, 106 Yale L.J. 1331, 1335 (1997).
Although much of the criticism of the provocation doctrine is
directed at post-common law expansions of the defense
(especially by the Model Penal Code), the thrust of the criticism
applies to the common law as well.

3.

Elements of the Defense
a. Adequate Provocation

A person may not claim the defense simply because he was
provoked. The provocation must be such that it might “inflame
the passion of a reasonable man and tend to cause him to act for
the moment from passion rather than reason.” See Girouard v.
State, 321 Md. 532, 583 A.2d 718 (App. 1991). Another way to
put it, is that the provocation must be such that it “might render
ordinary men, of fair average disposition, liable to act rashly or
without due deliberation or reflection, and from passion, rather
than judgment.” Maher v. People, 10 Mich. 212 (1862).
257

i.

Fixed Categories
At original common law, the judge, rather than the jury,
determined the adequacy of the provocation. Only a few
types of provocation were deemed adequate. The most
common were: a serious battery; mutual combat; and
observation by the husband of his wife in an act of adultery.
“Adequate provocation” was not proved if the husband was
informed of the adultery but did not observe it. And, a rigid
rule existed: words alone, no matter how insulting or
egregious, were insufficient grounds for reducing a homicide
to manslaughter.

ii.

Modern Trend
Today, most jurisdictions go beyond the limited categories of
“adequate provocation” of the original common law. The
issue is now left to juries to decide whether the alleged
provocation would render an ordinary person liable to act
rashly. However, most jurisdictions continue to hold that
words alone cannot constitute adequate provocation for a
homicide.
(1) The “Reasonable [or Ordinary] Person”
To the extent that juries have relatively free rein to
determine what provocation is adequate, they must test

the provocation against the standard of the “reasonable
person” or “ordinary person.” A significant issue is
whether
this objective standard should
be
“subjectivized” to the extent of incorporating any of the
defendant’s
characteristics
into
the
“reasonable/ordinary” person. This issue is even more
important in those limited number of jurisdictions in the
United States that permit words to constitute adequate
provocation.
Examples: X sexually assaulted C, a 15-year-old boy,
who responded by beating X to death. Director
of Public Prosecutions v. Camplin, [1978] 2
All. Eng.Rep. 168. The court had to determine
whether the jury should consider the
provocation from the perspective of a person
of C’s age.
In Commonwealth v. Carr, 398 Pa.Super. 306,
580 A.2d 1362 (1990), C became inflamed
when he observed two women in lesbian
lovemaking at a camp site. C killed one of the
women and seriously wounded the other. He
sought to show at trial that the victims’
conduct was highly provocative to him, in part
because he had been traumatized earlier in life
when his mother may have had a lesbian
relationship.
(2) Law
The trend in the law, although far more evident in the
United Kingdom (which long ago abolished the wordsalone rule) but also taking place slowly in the United
States, is to consider a
258

defendant’s personal characteristics if it is considered
relevant in measuring the gravity of the provocation, but
not to include subjective characteristics in assessing the
level of self-control to be expected of the reasonable
person.
Examples:
An example of the old and more rigid
approach is Bedder v. Director of Public
Prosecutions, [1954] 38 Crim. App. 133, in
which B, an impotent male, sought to have
intercourse with V, a prostitute. When he
failed, she taunted him and struck him. The
court held that the issue before it was whether
V’s conduct would have provoked a reasonable
non-impotent man to act violently. A modern
approach would likely permit the jury to take
into consideration the defendant’s impotence
in measuring the gravity of the victim’s
taunting words and battery. His impotence
would not be relevant, however, in
determining the level of self-control to be
expected of a reasonable person.
In Camplin, supra, the facts of which are set
out above, the House of Lords held that the
jury should be instructed that the “reasonable
man referred to … is a person having the
power of self-control to be expected of any
ordinary person of the sex and age of the
accused, but in other respects sharing such of
the accused’s characteristics as they think
would affect the gravity of the provocation to
him.” Notice that this instruction not only
subjectivizes the “reasonable person” standard
in terms of the gravity of the provocation, but
in terms of capacity for self-control would
incorporate the defendant’s age and sex!

b. State of Passion
For the provocation doctrine to apply, the defendant must kill
the victim while in a state of passion, rather than after he has
cooled down. Although the typical “passion” is anger, any overwrought emotional state, including fear, jealousy, or even deep
depression, may qualify.

c.

Suddenness
The killing must occur in sudden heat of passion. That is, the
defendant must not have had reasonable time to cool off. Early
cases required proof that the defendant acted almost
immediately after the provocation. Modern courts leave the
issue to the jury to determine when a reasonable person would
have cooled down by the time of the homicide.

d. Causal Connection
A causal link between the provocation, the passion, and the fatal
act must be proved.
259
Example:
D intends to kill V, her business rival.
Coincidentally, her first opportunity to kill V occurs
when she discovers V in bed with her (D’s) husband. D
kills V. Even if D killed suddenly, while angry, and
although observing adultery ordinarily constitutes
adequate provocation, the decision to kill V antedated
the provocation. Therefore, the defense would not
apply.

C.

Involuntary Manslaughter: Criminal Negligence
1.

General Rule
A person who kills another person in a criminally negligent manner
is guilty of involuntary manslaughter.

2.

Murder Versus Manslaughter

This offense often blurs into the depraved-heart version of reckless
murder.
Example: In State v. Williams, 4 Wash. App. 908, 484 P.2d 1167
(1971), Ws, low-educated parents of V, did not take their
seriously ill child to a doctor until it was too late to save
his life. They behaved as they did, in part, because they
were unaware of the seriousness of the child’s condition,
although the jury determined that a reasonable person in
their circumstances would have realized that the child was
seriously ill. (They also feared taking their child to a
doctor because, as Native Americans living on a
reservation, they believed their child might be taken away
from them by the Welfare Department, which occurred in
those days.) As characterized, their conduct constituted
negligence. If they had been consciously aware that their
child had a life-threatening condition—and, thus, they
knew that they were taking a substantial and unjustifiable
risk of causing the death of their son by not seeing a
physician—their conduct would have constituted
recklessness and might have justified a depraved-heart
murder conviction.

D.

Involuntary Manslaughter: Unlawful-Act Doctrine
1.

General Rule
In an analogue to the felony-murder rule, at common law a person is
guilty of involuntary manslaughter if she kills another person during
the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act that
does not otherwise trigger the felony-murder rule.
Examples:
D1 unjustifiably pushes V1 in the chest (a simple
battery). V1, who is drunk, falls to the ground, strikes the
back of his head on the sidewalk, and dies. In a
jurisdiction that applies the unlawful-act doctrine, D1 is
guilty of manslaughter. State v. Pray, 378 A.2d 1322 (Me.
1977).

D2, a car driver, fails to stop at a stop sign, in violation of
a traffic law, and strikes and kills V2. (On the facts,
assume D2’s conduct did not constitute criminal
negligence.) D2 is guilty of
260
manslaughter because the accidental death occurred
during the commission of an unlawful act, a violation of
the traffic law. State v. Hupf, 48 Del. 254, 101 A.2d 355
(1953).

2.

Scope of the Rule
There are broad and narrower versions of the unlawful-act doctrine,
as well as many jurisdictions that have wholly abolished the
doctrine.

a.

Broad Version
Some states apply the doctrine to all misdemeanors, as well as to
any felony that is excluded from the felony-murder rule due to a
limitation on the felony-murder rule. A few jurisdictions go so
far as apply the doctrine if the conduct that causes the death is
wrongful (immoral), albeit not illegal.
Example:
C attempts to commit suicide. V intervenes to
prevent the suicide, but in the process mortally injures
herself and dies. If attempted suicide, although not
criminal, is considered morally wrongful, C may be
convicted of manslaughter of her rescuer! See People
v. Chrisholtz, 55 Misc.2d 309, 285 N.Y.S.2d 231
(1967).

b. Limitations
Some jurisdictions limit the rule to mala in se (inherently
wrongful) misdemeanors, such as petty theft, or to “dangerous”
misdemeanors, i.e., offenses entailing “a reasonably foreseeable

risk of appreciable physical injury.” Comber v. United States,
584 A.2d 26 (D.C. App. 1990).

IV.

Model Penal Code

A.

Criminal Homicide: Overview
The MPC provides that a person is guilty of criminal homicide if she
takes the life of another human being purposely, knowingly, recklessly,
or negligently. MPC § 210.1(1). Unlike the common law, the Code
divides criminal homicide into three, rather than two, offenses: murder,
manslaughter, and negligent homicide.

1.

“Human Being”
A human being is a person born alive. MPC § 210.0(1). The Code
does not indicate when a person ceases to be a human being, i.e.,
what the definition of death is.

B.

Murder
1.

Rule
In general, a homicide constitutes murder if the killing is
committed: (a) purposely; (b) knowingly; or (c) “recklessly under
circumstances manifesting an extreme indifference to the value of
human life.”
261

2.

Degrees of Murder?
Unlike many modern statutes, the MPC does not divide murder into
degrees. The drafters believed that there is no defensible way to
distinguish between first- and second-degree murder on the basis of
either dangerousness or culpability.
Example:
Compare an adult son who premeditates the mercy
killing of his terminally ill father, State v. Forrest, 321
N.C. 186, 362 S.E.2d 252 (1987), with a reckless drunk
driver who kills a pedestrian, or a person who, on whim

and without premeditation, throws a child over a bridge to
her death. Under traditional homicide statutes, the mercy
killing is first-degree murder, whereas the other two crimes
are second-degree murder, yet these outcomes probably do
not conform with our intuitions about the dangerousness or
culpability of the actors.

3.

Common Law Versus MPC
a. Types of Murder
The common law term “malice aforethought” is abandoned in
the Code. But, what about the underlying forms of malice
aforethought?

i.

Intent to Kill
This form is recognized under the MPC: As noted above, a
criminal homicide is murder under the Code if the killing is
committed purposely or knowingly. In essence, this is
equivalent to the common law “intent to kill” form of mens
rea. Because there are no degrees of murder, the Code—like
the common law, but unlike many modern non-Code statutes
—does not require proof of premeditation and deliberation.

ii.

Intent to Commit Grievous Bodily Injury
Most cases that would qualify as common law murder
according to this form of malice will fit under the MPC
“extreme recklessness” umbrella discussed below. However,
it does not exist as an independent form of murder.

iii. Depraved Heart
The MPC extreme recklessness provision is similar to the
depraved heart form of common law murder, except that it is
explicit in requiring proof of advertent risk-taking, and that
the risk-taking be “substantial and unjustifiable.”

iv. Felony-Murder

The Code abandons the felony-murder rule. However,
drafters of the Code feared that a felony-murder-less
criminal homicide code would be rejected by legislatures.
Therefore, as a compromise, the Code provides that reckless
indifference to human life may be presumed if
262
the person causes the death during commission of one of the
few felonies enumerated in the Code (robbery, arson,
burglary, kidnapping, felonious escape, or rape or deviate
sexual intercourse by force or threat of force). However, this
is not a true presumption: the burden of proof regarding
mens rea remains on the prosecution. The jury is simply
permitted to infer extreme indifference to human life from
the commission of one of these felonies. And, the defendant
may present evidence that she committed the felony in a
manner that does not manifest extreme indifference to
human life. If the jury has a reasonable doubt about the
matter, it must find her not guilty of extreme-reckless
murder, even if the defendant committed the felony.

C.

Manslaughter
Criminal homicide constitutes manslaughter (§ 210.3) in two
circumstances.

1.

Recklessness
A homicide committed recklessly constitutes manslaughter. The
difference between reckless manslaughter and reckless murder is
that here the conduct, although reckless, does not manifest an
extreme indifference to human life.

a.

Comparison to Common Law
The MPC definition of “recklessness” (§ 2.02(2)(c)), provides
that the actor must be aware that she is taking a substantial and
unjustifiable risk to human life. Therefore, the Code differs from
the common law in that the common law permits conviction for

involuntary manslaughter based on inadvertent risk-taking, i.e.,
the defendant may be convicted although she was unaware of
the risk she was taking.

2.

Extreme Mental or Emotional Disturbance
The Code recognizes a much broader version of the common law
provocation doctrine, and also allows states to recognize a “partial
responsibility” diminished capacity defense (see Part Seven), if they
wish to do so. MPC § 210.3(1)(b) provides that a murder constitutes
manslaughter if the actor kills under the influence of an “extreme
mental or emotional disturbance” (EMED), for which there is a
“reasonable explanation or excuse.” (Notice that the Code clearly
sees this defense as a partial excuse and not a partial justification.)

a.

Study Point
A common error of students is to say—and to believe—that the
issue is whether there is a reasonable explanation or excuse for
the homicide. Hardly so—if there were a reasonable explanation
or excuse for the homicide, the defendant should be acquitted of
any crime! Instead, the issue is whether there is a reasonable
explanation or excuse for the EMED.
263

b. Comparison to Common Law
i.

Common Law Rigidity/Narrowness Rejected
The EMED provision is far broader than the common law
version of heat-of-passion. The MPC permits a jury, if it
chooses to do so, to reduce the offense to manslaughter
without considering the rigid common law categories of
adequate provocation; also, “words alone” can qualify.
Indeed, the defense applies even if there is no provocation at
all, as long as the jury concludes that there is a reasonable
explanation or excuse for the actor’s EMED. There is also no
“reasonable cooling off” requirement.

ii.

Mixed Subjectivity and Objectivity
The Code provides that the reasonableness of the defendant’s
explanation or excuse for the EMED should be determined
from the perspective of a person “in the actor’s situation
under the circumstances as he believes them to be.” This
allows for considerable subjectivization of the objective
standard, although the Commentary to the Code concedes
that the words “in the actor’s situation” are “designedly
ambiguous,” so as to permit common law development of
the subjective/objective issue.

3. What Is “Missing”
Notice that there is no “unlawful-act” manslaughter provision under
the MPC. As for criminally negligent homicides, they represent a
reduced offense, discussed immediately below.

D.

Negligent Homicide
A criminally negligent killing—involuntary manslaughter at common
law—is the lesser offense of “negligent homicide” under the Code.
MPC § 210.4.

V.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, pages 303–305]

1. T or F. Homicide is a crime.
2. Carla, intending to kill Lisa, stabs her in the heart with a knife. Through
heroic medical care and a bit of luck, Lisa survives the assault. Two years
later, while playing basketball with her son in the backyard, she has a heart
attack and dies. The coroner reports that Lisa’s heart had been severely
weakened as the result of the wounds inflicted by Carla, and that, but for
Carla actions, Lisa would not have died. May Carla be prosecuted for
murder at common law?
3. What are the four states of mind that constitute common law malice
aforethought?

4. At common law, is an intentional killing first-degree or second-degree
murder?
5. In states that apply the Pennsylvania Model of murder, of what degree
of murder is a person guilty if, without justification, excuse, or mitigation,
she intentionally kills a person after a second or two of thought?
264
6. Why would it be that many commentators say that the second form of
“malice aforethought” (“intent to inflict grievous bodily harm”) tends to
merge into the third form (“depraved heart”)?
7. Doctor Alice conducts cardiac transplant surgery on 22-year-old Patient
Pat, who will die within days if the surgery is not conducted, but who may
live a normal life if the surgery succeeds. Doctor Alice knows (and has told
Pat) that there is a fifty percent chance that Pat will die during the surgery
because of his weakened condition. Pat does die. Based on these facts, is
Alice guilty of murder? Why, or why not?
8.
T or F. The common law felony-murder rule applies to all felonies,
even non-violent ones.
9. T or F. The most common argument in favor of the felony-murder rule
is that it is meant to deter felons from committing their felonies.
10. “Practicing medicine without a license constitutes a felony.” Is this
felony inherently dangerous in the abstract?
11. “Child abuse. Any person who, under circumstances likely to produce
great bodily harm or death, inflicts unjustifiable physical pain on any child,
is guilty of a felony.” Is this felony independent of a homicide, or would it
merge into the offense?
12. F burglarizes an apartment home (a felony). P, a police officer arrives
as F is leaving. A chase takes place over the roof the apartment building.
During the chase, P slips and falls off the roof and dies. Does the felonymurder rule apply to these facts?
13. Frank enters a liquor store to rob it. The cashier responds to the robbery
by pulling out a gun and shooting at Frank, but the bullet strikes and kills

Carla, a customer. May Frank be prosecuted for the death under the felonymurder rule?
14. Jack tells Jerry, “You are a stupid, lazy, piece of vermin. I am glad I had
sex with your whore of a wife.” Jerry, outraged, immediately kills Jack. At
common law, is Jack guilty of murder or manslaughter?
15. V sexually assaults ten-year-old C. V is arrested for the crime. In court
two months later, V testifies, admits the attack, and laughingly says, “I
enjoyed it.” C’s mother is in the court, hears his remarks, pulls out a gun
she smuggled into the court, and shoots and kills V. Murder or
manslaughter, under the common law? Model Penal Code?
16. Make a list of all of the ways the Model Penal Code criminal homicide
provisions differ from the common law and/or modern criminal homicide
statutes.

265

PART ELEVEN

Rape
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

Common Law: Forcible Rape
A.

In General

B. Actus Reus in Detail
C. Mens Rea
II.

Common Law: Rape by Nonforcible Means
Conversation with Students

III.

A.

Statutory Rape

B.

Rape by Fraud

Model Penal Code
Conversation with Students

IV.

A.

Forcible Rape

B.

Other Forms of Rape

C.

Gross Sexual Imposition

Review Questions

266

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
Few subjects in law school, if any, evoke more heated discussion and
controversy than rape. It is also true that the common law offense has
undergone the most extensive statutory (and even common law)

transformation in the past few decades. These changes cannot be
understood except in their social context: as social attitudes about sex roles
have changed, the law of rape has also evolved. It is worth remembering
that criminal laws manifest social attitudes. When attitudes change, criminal
laws usually follow.

I.

Common Law: Forcible Rape

A.

In General
Blackstone defined rape as “carnal knowledge of a woman forcibly and
against her will.” 4 Blackstone, Commentaries on the Law of England *
210 (1769). Today, it is more accurate to characterize this as forcible
rape. Rape is a general-intent offense.

1.

Statutory Law
The elements of the offense statutorily vary by jurisdiction.
Moreover, it is valuable to distinguish between traditional forcible
rape statutes—those enacted when states shifted from the common
law to statutory law, which generally did little more than codify the
common law—and modern reform statutes, adopted in many states
to deal with criticisms of the common law. Reform provisions are
noted below, but the traditional rape statute is apt to provide
something like the following: forcible rape is sexual intercourse by
a male, with a female not his wife, by means of force or threat of
force, against her will, and without her consent.

B. Actus Reus in Detail
1.

“Sexual Intercourse by a Male with a Female …”
The common law offense was not complete in the absence of
penetration by a male of the female’s vagina. Nonconsensual oral
and anal sexual penetration constituted the separate offense of
sodomy. In short, “sexual intercourse” means “vaginal intercourse”
and nothing else at common law.

a.

Modern Reform Statutes

Many states that have reformed their law have re-named the
offense “sexual assault” or “sexual battery.” These reform
offenses typically prohibit all forms of forcible sexual
penetration, and not simply vaginal intercourse, in a single
offense. They also tend to be gender-neutral: male-on-male and
female-on-female sexual penetration is included, as is
nonconsensual female-on-male sexual penetration. Also, some
states prohibit “sexual contact”—undesired contact that does not
result in penetration—as a lesser degree of the offense.

2.

“… Not His Wife” (Marital Immunity)
At original common law, a husband could not be convicted of
personally raping his wife. He could be convicted as an accomplice
in the rape of his wife (e.g., assisting X to rape the husband’s wife),
but he could not convicted for
267
personally committing the crime. On the other hand, he could be
convicted of assault or battery of his wife.

a.

Rationale
i.

Consent
According to common law scholar Hale, “by their mutual
matrimonial consent and contract the wife hath given up
herself in this kind unto her husband, which she cannot
retract.” 1 Hale, History of the Pleas of the Crown (1736). It
is unclear whether even seventeenth century jurists accepted
this remarkable argument. Even if they did, it is impossible
today to defend the principle that, upon marriage, a woman
(and only she) loses her personal liberty to refuse intercourse
with her husband on a given occasion.

ii.

Property Law
A female was considered the property of her father or
husband in very early English common law. Therefore, she

had no right to refuse her husband’s wishes in this regard.
This property-rights view was never accepted in the United
States. Nor is it consistent with the fact that the immunity
rule does not apply to the charge of assault or battery: If a
wife was the property of her husband, it would seem that he
could use his property any way he chose, and thus would be
immune from assault or battery prosecution, as well.

iii. Protect Marriage
The marital-immunity rule, it is argued, is needed to protect
against intrusion by the government into marital privacy, and
to promote reconciliation of the marital partners. This
argument is hard to defend: if the act of forcible intercourse
by the husband is an isolated act, it is unlikely the wife
would want to see her husband prosecuted for an offense that
will result in a prison sentence. If the husband is guilty of
ongoing physical abuse, there is little or no chance of
reconciliation. In any case, a wife’s safety should outweigh
any legitimate privacy concern.

b. Modern Law
England abolished the marital-immunity rule in 1991. The law
in this country is in transition. Some states have abolished the
rule outright, while some have repealed the exemption if the
husband and wife are legally separated or, at least, living apart at
the time of the rape.

3.

Nonconsent
The essence of rape is the nonconsensual nature of the sexual
intercourse. Notice, however, that “nonconsent” is an element of the
crime, rather than consent being a defense. This means that the
prosecutor must prove nonconsent beyond a reasonable doubt.
268

4.

Force

a.

General Rule
The crime of forcible rape is not complete simply upon proof of
nonconsensual intercourse. It must also be shown that the male
acted forcibly or, at least, threatened physical force. Nonconsent
and force are separate elements.
Example: In State v. Alston, 310 N.C. 399, 312 S.E.2d 470
(1984), F and M were involved in what the court
described as a six month “consensual sexual
relationship.” During this time, F had sexual relations
with M whenever he wished to have intercourse. At
times, F would “stand still and remain entirely passive
while [M] undressed her and had intercourse with her.”
On the particular occasion at issue, F had moved out of
M’s apartment. M accosted F in public, blocked her
path, and grabbed her by the arm. M let go when F said
she would walk with him if he released her. They
walked together. F told M that their relationship was
over. M said that he had a right to have intercourse
with her again. They went into a house where they had
previously had sexual relations. M had intercourse with
F. The appellate court held that the evidence
demonstrated that F did not consent to the intercourse,
but it reversed the conviction on the ground that the
state did not present substantial evidence of force.

b. How Much Force
At original common law, the prosecutor had to prove that the
male used or threatened substantial force upon the female in
order for a forcible rape prosecution to succeed. In this regard,
the common law developed a resistance requirement.

i.

Resistance Rule
As one court put it, “[f]orce is an essential element of the
crime and to justify a conviction, the evidence must warrant
a conclusion either that the victim resisted and her resistance

was overcome by force or that she was prevented from
resisting by threats to her safety.” Hazel v. State, 221 Md.
464, 157 A.2d 922 (1960). Essentially, this meant at
common law: if the male uses or threatens to use force likely
to cause death or serious bodily injury to the female, she is
not required to resist. If the male uses only “moderate” force,
the female is required to resist the rapist “to the utmost,” or
“until exhausted or overpowered.” Thus, in such
circumstances, rape is not “forcible” unless the male uses
force sufficiently great to overcome her resistance. The
resistance requirement has been sharply criticized: it forces
the female to escalate the danger to herself; it further
assumes that verbal resistance—saying no—is not enough;
and it ignores the fact that many females may freeze up out
of fear of the male aggressor.
269
Example:
In Commonwealth v. Berkowitz, 537 Pa. 143,
641 A.2d 1161 (1994), F, a female college student,
came to a male friend’s dormitory room. He was
not present, but M, the friend’s roommate, was
there. M asked F to stay, which she did, and asked
for a back rub, which she refused. F sat on the
floor, where M joined her and became sexually
aggressive. M lifted F’s blouse, and fondled her
breasts. Thereafter, the two rose to their feet, M
locked the door, and then he “put her” on the bed.
F testified that M did not throw her on the bed, but
that it was “kind of like a push.” During subsequent
oral sex and intercourse, in which M was on top of
F, F said “no” multiple times. The state supreme
court reversed M’s conviction, on the ground that
the facts did not support a finding of sufficient
force to constitute forcible rape. Another way of
looking at it in a common law context is that,

although F may have verbally resisted M’s
advances, she did not physically resist him, which
was legally required.

c.

Moving Away from Force
i.

Requiring Less Force
Many states, by judicial interpretation or legislative change,
have begun to reshape forcible rape law by requiring far less
proof of force, at least in cases involving atypical facts.
Example: F was asleep in a hospital bed. M entered the
room, pulled up F’s gown, pulled down her panties,
and inserted his finger in her vagina. F awoke just
before the last act; however, because she was still
half-asleep and believed that M was a nurse
performing an abdominal palpation, she did not
resist. In a prosecution for forcible rape, the court
held that the “actions in pulling back the bed
clothing, pulling up the victim’s gown, and pulling
her panties aside amount to actual physical ‘force’
as that term is to be applied in sexual offense
cases.” State v. Brown, 332 N.C. 262, 420 S.E.2d
147 (1992). This case may be limited to the fact
that F was surprised by M, and could not
realistically resist.

ii.

Changing the Resistance Requirement
Some states have abolished the resistance requirement
outright. Most states still retain the requirement in forcible
rape prosecutions, but the extent of resistance required has
been greatly reduced: resistance “to the utmost” is not
required now; only “reasonable resistance” is required,
which leaves it to the jury to determine the sufficiency of the
female’s resistance. The effect of these changes is to permit
rape prosecutions based on considerably less force by the
male than in the past.

270

iii. Abandoning the Force Requirement Altogether
The New Jersey Supreme Court has gone so far as to hold
that the force inherently involved in the sexual act itself is
sufficient evidence of “force” to permit a forcible rape
conviction. The effect of this decision is to make all cases of
sexual intercourse “forcible.” The only remaining issue is
whether the intercourse was nonconsensual. Furthermore,
the New Jersey court has held that forcible rape is proved
upon evidence of sexual intercourse, unless the complainant,
by words or conduct, reasonably appeared to give permission
for the intercourse. In re M.T.S., 129 N.J. 422, 609 A.2d
1266 (1992). In other words, not only is a “no” (in words or
conduct) by the complainant sufficient to prove forcible rape
under this rule, but the absence of “yes” (in words or
conduct) also constitutes forcible rape. This places the onus
on the person desiring intercourse to obtain permission
before proceeding.
Example: In M.T.S., D and V, two teenagers, had sexual
intercourse. V gave permission for kissing and
“heavy petting,” but she did not give permission
for intercourse. The New Jersey Supreme Court
held that a forcible rape conviction could be
supported on these facts.
(1) Observation
M.T.S. is controversial. As a matter of judicial
interpretation of a forcible rape statute—a statute that
expressly required proof of intercourse and force—the
case is hard to defend, even by those who like the
decision as a policy matter. As a matter of policy, those
who like the decision believe that the essence of rape is
the nonconsensual nature of the offense; force should not
be a prerequisite. Critics argue that nonconsensual

forcible intercourse is worse than nonconsensual
nonforcible intercourse; even accepting that the latter
should be a crime, it should not be equated with the
former. Other critics believe that a person alleging rape
should be required, at the least, to express nonconsent,
rather than for the law to require that affirmative
permission be obtained.

C. Mens Rea
1.

General Rule
Rape is a general-intent offense. Therefore, most jurisdictions
provide that a person is not guilty of rape if, at the time of
intercourse, he entertained a genuine and reasonable belief that the
female voluntarily consented to the intercourse. This is consistent
with traditional mistake-of-fact doctrine, as explained in Part Four
of this Outline. However, some courts, while accepting the rule just
stated, provide that a defendant is not entitled to an instruction on
mistake-of-fact in the absence of evidence at trial of equivocal
conduct on the alleged victim’s part. People v. Williams, 4 Cal.4th
354, 14 Cal.Rptr.2d 441, 841 P.2d 961 (1992). Thus, if the rape
defendant claims that the complainant quite willingly consented to
the intercourse, but she testifies that he had to
271
beat her to obtain intercourse, the defendant will not be permitted to
claim mistake-of-fact, as he has not introduced evidence of
equivocal conduct on her part. If the jury accepts his testimony, she
consented (and thus the actus reus of rape did not occur); if the jury
accepts her testimony, there is no basis for him to claim a reasonable
mistake on his part.

2.

Minority Rules
a.

No Mistake-of-Fact “Defense”

A very few states provide that even a defendant’s reasonable
mistake of fact is not a defense. E.g., Commonwealth v. Lopez,
433 Mass. 722, 745 N.E.2d 961 (2001). This rule effectively
converts forcible rape, an offense with very severe penalties,
into a strict-liability offense.

b. Unreasonable Mistake-of-Fact as a “Defense”
At the other end of the spectrum, the English House of Lords
ruled that even an unreasonable mistake of fact is a defense to
rape. Regina v. Morgan, [1976] A.C. 182. Essentially, the House
of Lords concluded that rape requires proof of intent, and that
this mens rea element modifies all of the actus reus elements of
rape, including the element of nonconsent. Therefore, a
defendant cannot be convicted unless he not only intends sexual
intercourse, but intends that it be nonconsensual. Effectively, the
House of Lords treated rape as a specific-intent crime. No
American state has adopted this reasoning. Moreover, the
English public was so upset with the Morgan decision that
Parliament redrafted its rape statute to permit conviction for rape
if the male was reckless in regard to the female’s lack of
consent.

II.

Common Law: Rape by Nonforcible Means
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

Forcible rape is the primary, perhaps exclusive, rape topic you will discuss
in class. In large part this is because, historically, most rape prosecutions “in
the real world” have been based on claims of force (even if the definition of
“force” has loosened over time). Another reason for the emphasis on
forcible rape is, simply, that the common law did not criminalize many
forms of nonforcible sexual intercourse; indeed, this is one of the criticisms
of the common law. Why should the law focus almost exclusively on
physical force and threats of physical harm, and not also consider other
forms of coercion—economic, reputational, and the like—used to obtain
sexual contact? Increasingly, sexual assault statutes are moving into these
areas. But, at this time, there is still relatively little case law. And few

casebooks get too deep into the the “non-force” areas. Therefore, what
follows is a brief discussion of two relatively “old” forms of nonforcible
sexual intercourse that may be covered in your casebook and class.

A.

Statutory Rape
1.

Statutory Background
All states provide that intercourse by a male with an underage
female to whom he is not married constitutes rape. Neither force nor
the underage female’s lack of consent is an element of the offense.
The definition of “underage” varies
272
considerably by jurisdiction. At its inception as a crime in 1275, the
“age of consent”—when voluntary consent would be recognized—
was twelve; in 1576, it was lowered to ten! In the early years in the
United States, the age of consent was also ten; it was raised over
time, in some jurisdictions to as high as eighteen or even twenty-one
years of age. Michelle Oberman, Turning Girls Into Women: ReEvaluating Modern Statutory Rape Law, 85 J. Crim. L. &
Criminology 15 (1994). Today, many states divide statutory rape
into degrees of offense, based on the age of the female and, often,
on the basis of the difference in age between the female and the
male. The most severe penalties are imposed when the male is an
adult and the female is pre-pubescent.

2.

Rationale
An early rationale of statutory rape laws, especially in the Victorian
era, was that such laws were needed to protect “chaste maidens”
from becoming “fallen women.” As explained in less colorful
language, “[a]n unwise disposition of [the young female’s] sexual
favor is deemed to do harm both to herself and the social mores by
which the community’s conduct patterns are established. The law of
statutory rape intervenes in an effort to avoid such a disposition.”
People v. Hernandez, 61 Cal.2d 529, 39 Cal.Rptr. 361, 393 P.2d 673
(1964). In recent years, statutory rape laws—which largely remain

gender-specific in that they protect only underage females, and not
young males—have been defended on a different ground: recent
studies reveal that there is a high pregnancy rate among underage
females as a result of sexual relations with adult males. At least in
these cases, prosecution of statutory rape laws arguably might serve
as a deterrent against adult exploitation and resulting pregnancies of
young females.

3.

Mistake of Fact Regarding Age
Nearly all jurisdictions treat statutory rape as a strict-liability
offense. Therefore, the defendant is guilty of the offense, even if he
reasonably believed that the victim was old enough to consent.

B.

Rape by Fraud
1.

Fraud in the Inducement
At common law, a seducer is not a rapist. More specifically, a male
is not guilty of rape even if he fraudulently induces the female to
consent to intercourse with him.
Examples: D1, a look-alike of a famous actor, induces V1 to have
intercourse with him by impersonating the actor. D1 is not
guilty of rape. Her consent, although fraudulently
obtained, remains valid.
D2 induces V2, a prostitute, to have intercourse with him
by offering her counterfeit money in exchange for sex. D2
is not guilty of rape.
D3 induces V3 to have intercourse with him, by falsely
claiming that intercourse will cure her of a serious illness.
D3 is not guilty of rape. Don Moran v. People, 25 Mich.
356 (1872); see
273
Boro v. Superior Court, 163 Cal.App.3d 1224, 210
Cal.Rptr. 122 (1985).

2.

Fraud in the Factum
In contrast to fraud-in-the-inducement, consent to engage in sexual
intercourse is invalid if, as the result of fraud, the victim is unaware
that she has consented to an act of sexual intercourse. Therefore, in
these so-called fraud-in-the-factum cases, consent is vitiated and a
rape prosecution will lie.
Example: V, a patient, signs a consent form in which she agrees to
permit P, a surgeon, “to insert an instrument” in her vagina
while she is under anesthesia. The instrument turns out to
be P’s penis. P is guilty of rape. See Pomeroy v. State, 94
Ind. 96 (1883).

III.

Model Penal Code
CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS

The Model Penal Code was drafted in the 1950s and adopted by the
American Law Institute in 1962. At that time, the MPC rape provisions, like
the rest of the Code, were perceived to be progressive in content. But, social
attitudes have changed so much in the intervening sixty years that the
sexual offense provisions of the Code now seem remarkably antiquated to
most people. This says more about attitudinal changes than it does about the
MPC. But, because the MPC feels antiquated, your professor may spend
relatively little time on the Code’s definition of rape. But, please note:
Change is coming. The American Law Institute is currently working on
revised sexual offense provisions. At some point in the fairly near future,
the MPC will become relevant again, but, for now, here is how the 1962
version of the Code deals with rape.

A.

Forcible Rape
Section 213.1, subsection (1), prohibits four forms of rape, of which one
form is forcible rape.

1.

Definition
“A male who has sexual intercourse with a female not his wife is
guilty if … he compels her to submit by force or by threat of

imminent death, serious bodily injury, extreme pain or kidnapping,
to be inflicted on anyone.” MPC § 213.1(1)(a).

2.

Clarification
As the preceding definition shows, the Code is gender-specific and
recognizes the marital immunity rule. The term “sexual
intercourse,” however, is defined elsewhere (§ 213.0(2)) to include
oral and anal sexual relations, which is broader than the common
law, which is limited to vaginal intercourse.

3.

Looking a Little Deeper
Notice that the Code does not use the term “nonconsent.” Instead, it
uses the word “compels.” Although, of course, compulsion by the
male implies nonconsent by the female, the intent of the drafters
was to shift the trial focus from the female to the male—a
perspective appreciated by later rape reformers. That is, the drafters
believed that, as with other violent crimes,
274
attention should be focused on the alleged perpetrator’s actions—
here, his acts of compulsion—and not on how the alleged victim
responded. Thus, the MPC does not include a resistance
requirement.

4.

Grading Rape
The Code grades rape as a felony of the second degree except in two
circumstances, in which it is aggravated to a felony of the first
degree. It is first degree if: (1) the male actually inflicts serious
bodily injury upon anyone during the course of the rape; or, very
controversially today, (2) the female was not a “voluntary social
companion of the actor upon the occasion of the crime and had not
previously permitted him sexual liberties.” In short, if a female is
voluntarily sexually intimate with a particular male and remains his
“voluntary social companion,” then her subsequent rape is

considered less serious than if such intimacies had never occurred
before.

B.

Other Forms of Rape
The Code also prohibits nonforcible sexual intercourse by a male with a
female not his wife in other circumstances: (1) if he “substantially
impaired her power to appraise or control her conduct by administering
or employing without her knowledge drugs, intoxicants, or other means
for the purpose of preventing resistance”; (2) if she was unconscious at
the time of the intercourse; or (3) if she is under ten years of age. MPC
§ 213.1(1)(b)–(d). In the latter case, it is no defense that the male
reasonably believed “the child to be older than 10.” § 213.6(1).

C.

Gross Sexual Imposition
The MPC drafters defined a new sexual offense, less serious than rape
(it is a felony of the third degree) to deal with three circumstances in
which a male secures sexual intercourse with a female not his wife: (1)
if “he compels her to submit by any threat that would prevent resistance
by a woman of ordinary resolution”; (2) if he knows that she suffers
from mental disease “which renders her incapable of appraising the
nature of her conduct”; or (3) “he knows that she is unaware that a
sexual act is being committed upon her or that she submits because she
mistakenly supposed that he is her husband.” MPC 213.1(2).

1.

Clarification
Notice that the first version of gross sexual imposition set out above
applies to compulsion by “any threat that would prevent resistance
by a woman of ordinary resolution.” This is intended to criminalize
less serious bodily threats than are encompassed under the rape
statute as well as non-bodily threats—economic, reputational, and
the like. The limitation—that the threat would prevent resistance by
a “woman of ordinary resolution”—is intended to reduce the risk
that criminal prosecutions will be brought in cases of relatively
trivial threats. Thus, “gross sexual imposition” is a definite reformist
provision, one which states did not generally follow in earlier years.

The third form above covers cases of fraud-in-the-factum and one
specific issue that bedeviled common law courts: cases in which a
female has intercourse with a man whom she incorrectly believes is
her husband. (For example, there are cases in which a stranger has
broken into a home at night, in the dark, and entered the bed of a
woman whom, he knows, mistakenly believes that he is her
husband.) The common law sometimes treated these cases as fraudin-the-inducement
275
(and, therefore, no crime, as discussed above); other courts felt that
the husband-wife relationship was so basic—no “good” wife would
knowingly have intercourse with anyone other than her husband—
that these cases should be treated as equivalent to fraud-in-thefactum. The MPC takes the latter approach.

IV.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, pages 305–306]

1. T or F. Forcible oral sex by a male of a female not his wife is prohibited
by common law rape.
2. T or F. At common law, if a male threatened to cause serious bodily
injury to a female unless she acceded to intercourse, she had to resist him to
the utmost, or else the subsequent intercourse did not constitute forcible
rape.
3. Al has sexual intercourse with Betty. Betty did not consent. Al believed
that she did. Assuming all of the other elements of a rape prosecution are
proved, in which the following circumstances, if any, is Al not guilty of
common law rape?
a. He reasonably believed that she consented;
b. He unreasonably but honestly believed that she consented;
c. In both a. and b.; or
d. In neither case.

4. Police Officer Predator lawfully stops Sally for a traffic violation. He
tells her that if she has intercourse with him, he will not give her a ticket. If
she refuses, he will give her the ticket and also take her into custody, saying
“you will be in jail overnight before anyone realizes you don’t belong
there.” Sally has intercourse with Predator. Of what sexual offense, if any, is
Predator guilty under the common law? Model Penal Code?

277

PART TWELVE

Theft
ANALYSIS
Conversation with Students
I.

Larceny
A.

General Principles

B. Actus Reus in Detail
C. Mens Rea: “Intent to Steal”
D.
II.

Special Problem: Lost or Mislaid Property

Embezzlement
A.

Elements of the Offense

B.

Larceny Versus Embezzlement

III. False Pretenses
A.
IV.

Elements of the Offense

Review Questions

278

CONVERSATION WITH STUDENTS
“Theft” is a shorthand term used to describe various property crimes, the
most important of which are common law larceny and the statutory offenses
of embezzlement and false pretenses.
In very early English history, the criminal law prohibited only the forcible
taking of property, i.e., robbery. Later, the law was extended to punish nonviolent takings, i.e., larceny. The law of larceny, however, has not
developed smoothly. Courts devised various complicated legal fictions

regarding the crime. On the one hand, they used the fictions to narrow the
scope of the crime in order to reduce the use of the death penalty, which
was the punishment for most larceny convictions. On the other hand, the
judges cooperated with the economic power interests of the time to expand
larceny law in certain contexts to meet changing economic conditions.
As the result of these conflicting trends, common law larceny is replete with
illogical rules and, at the same time, gaps in its coverage. To fill the gaps,
the English Parliament enacted the offenses of embezzlement and false
pretenses. These offenses, along with larceny, were carried over to this
country.
Today, many states have consolidated the three crimes into a single offense
of “theft.” The purpose of the consolidation was to repeal the paper-thin,
largely useless, distinctions between the crimes. Unfortunately, courts
sometimes interpret theft laws as if the reforms barely occurred: some
common law doctrines persist to this day. Therefore, like it or not (and you
probably will not like it) you need to learn the technical rules that
developed centuries ago.
One other point: the Model Penal Code, while consolidating many property
offenses under the category of “theft,” recognizes various theft offenses,
such as “Theft by Unlawful Taking or Disposition” (§ 223.2); “Theft by
Deception” (§ 223.3); “Theft of Property Lost, Mislaid, or Delivered by
Mistake” (§ 223.5); “Theft of Services” (§ 223.7); and others. Most
professors focus on the common law, with a more cursory look at the MPC
provisions. Therefore, we will emphasize the historic common law.

I.

Larceny

A.

General Principles
1.

Common Law Definition
Larceny is the trespassory taking and carrying away of the personal
property of another with the intent to permanently deprive the other
person of the property. For shorthand, lawyers often describe the
mens rea as “intent to steal” the property.

a. Actus Reus

As so defined, the actus reus of larceny is the trespassory taking
and carrying away of the personal property of another. That is,
the law prohibits the conduct of taking and carrying away
another’s property; the offense is complete at that instant.
Larceny is proved even if the property is not damaged,
destroyed, or converted to the personal use of the taker.
279

i.

Possession
Larceny is a crime of possession. That is, the actus reus of
larceny occurs when a wrongdoer trespassorily takes
possession of the personal property of another and carries it
away. Title to the property is not the key. If a wrongdoer
wrongfully obtains title to another person’s property, the
offense of false pretenses, discussed later, may be
implicated.

b. Mens Rea
Larceny is a specific-intent offense. The defendant is not guilty
of the crime unless he commits the actus reus with the specific
intent to steal the property. As discussed below, the intent to
steal must concur in time with the trespassory taking.

2.

Grade of the Offense
Common law larceny was a felony. However, the crime was divided
up between “grand” and “petty” larceny. The death penalty applied
to grand larceny. In modern statutes, petty larceny is a
misdemeanor; grand theft is a non-capital felony.

a. Value of Property Taken
At original common law, grand theft involved the taking of
property valued in excess of twelve pence, which was roughly
the value of a single sheep. Today, the line between petty and
grand larceny differs by state, e.g., the value set for grand
larceny is in excess of $2000.

i.

Thief’s Belief About Value
Case law is scant, but apparently a thief’s belief regarding
the value of property is irrelevant at common law. That is, a
thief is guilty of grand or petty larceny, depending
exclusively on the objective value of the property. In
contrast, the Model Penal Code provides that a person is
guilty of grand theft, even if the property is worth less than
$500 (the Code cut-off line), if he believed it was worth
more. MPC § 223.2(2).
Example: D1 steals an original Picasso painting, believing
it is a nearly worthless fake. This constitutes grand
larceny at common law, even though D1 would
have been guilty of only petty larceny if the
painting had been as he had believed.
D2 steals a nearly worthless fake Picasso, believing
it is an original. This would constitute petty larceny
at common law, although D2 thought its value was
such as would make the offense grand larceny. This
would constitute grand larceny, however, under the
MPC.
280

B. Actus Reus in Detail
1. Trespass
The taking of another person’s personal property is not larceny
unless the taking is trespassory in nature.

a.

Definition of “Trespass”
For purposes of larceny law, a trespass occurs if the defendant
takes possession of the personal property of another, i.e., she
dispossesses another person, without the latter’s consent or in
the absence of a justification for the nonconsensual taking.

Example:
D, a police officer, takes possession of X’s
automobile pursuant to a court order. This is a nontrespassory taking, as she was justified in taking the
property over X’s objections.

i.

Clarification
Notice that the term “trespass” in this context has nothing to
do with the tort or crime of trespass to land. The term comes
from the ancient writ of trespass be bonis asportatis
(trespass for goods carried away).

b. Taking Possession by Fraud
A person who secures property deceitfully acts trespassorily, i.e.,
the fraud vitiates the consent of the original possessor of the
property. Larceny by fraud is sometimes called larceny by trick.
Example: In the historically important case of King v. Pear,
168 Eng. Rep. 208 (1779), P rented a horse upon the
promise that he would return it in one day. In fact,
when P hired the horse, he did not intend to return it.
Later, he sold the animal. A majority of judges in Pear
held that, although the taking of the horse outwardly
appeared to be consensual, P’s hidden intent not to
return the horse rendered the taking nonconsensual,
i.e., trespassory in nature.

i.

Larceny Versus the Crime of False Pretenses
It is important to distinguish larceny by trick from false
pretenses, which is discussed in subsection III. The key
distinction is that larceny by trick involves the use of fraud
to obtain possession of personal property, whereas false
pretenses involves the use of deceit to obtain title to it.

2. Taking Possession (“Caption”)
Larceny implicates the trespassory taking (or “caption”) of personal
property. More specifically, a “taking” involves the wrongful taking
of possession, rather than mere custody, of property. This distinction

—possession versus custody—is critical to understanding larceny
law.
281

a.

Possession Versus Custody: Drawing the Distinction
i.

Possession
A person is in “possession” of property if she has sufficient
control over it to use it in a generally unrestricted manner.
Possession may be actual or constructive. It is “actual” if a
person has physical control over the property. It is
“constructive” if she does not have physical control over it,
but nobody else is in actual possession of it.
Example: X is in actual possession of her car when she
drives it. When she parks it on the street and
departs, she is in constructive possession of it,
since nobody else has actual possession.

ii.

Custody
A person is in “custody” of property if she has physical
control of the property, but her right to use it is substantially
restricted. In the ordinary situation, a person has custody
rather than possession of property if she has temporary and
limited right to use the property in the possessor’s presence.
Examples: A, a clothing merchant, permits B, a customer,
to try on a piece of clothing. B has custody of the
clothing, while A retains constructive possession
of it.
C, a car dealer, permits D to test-drive the vehicle
by himself. Because C is not in the car, D has
possession of it.
E, a car dealer, remains in the car during a test
drive by F. F has mere custody of the car, and E
remains in possession of it.

iii. Importance of the Custody/Possession Distinction
The question of whether and when a person obtained
possession of property is critical to determining whether a
larceny has occurred.
Examples:
In the C-D test-drive Example above, if D
decides during the drive to abscond with the car,
he would not be guilty of larceny because he took
possession of the vehicle the moment C let him
drive it alone. As that taking of possession was
consensual (he did not have a felonious intent at
that time), it was not a trespassory taking.
In the other test-drive Example, if F decided to
abscond with the car during the drive, and drove
away as soon as E, the auto dealer, got out of the
car, F would be guilty of larceny. This is because
F originally had mere custody of the vehicle
(because E was in the car with him); F took
possession at the moment E left the car and F
drove away; this act of taking possession was
nonconsensual, i.e., trespassory.
282

b.

Special Possession/Custody Rules in Employment
Relationship
i.

Employer to Employee
When an employer (the “master”) furnishes his personal
property to his employee (the “servant”) for use in the
employment relationship, the common law rule is that the
employer retains constructive possession of the property.
The employee has mere custody. This was a special rule
devised by the courts to assist the economic interests of
employers.

Example:
R, the owner of a pizza-delivery business,
allows E, his employee, to drive R’s car to deliver
pizzas. At common law, E has mere custody of R’s
automobile although R is not in the vehicle; R
retains possession. Therefore, if E takes the vehicle
beyond the scope of the job, she takes wrongful
possession of it from R.

ii. Third Person to Employee for Employer
When a person furnishes personal property to another
person’s employee, in order that it will be delivered to the
employer, he transfers possession of the property to the
employee.
Example: X hands her money to E, a bank teller, so that E
will deposit it in X’s account in R Bank. Because
there is no employment relationship between X and
E, E receives possession of the money from X. R
Bank does not have possession of the money until
E places the money in a bank drawer.
(1) Significance of This Rule
Because an employee obtains possession, not mere
custody, of property when he receives it from a third
person, the timing of the employee’s felonious intent is
critical.
Examples:
E, bank teller, receives money from X,
bank customer, for deposit. Assume that at that
moment, E intends to pocket the money, which
he does. If so, E is guilty of larceny by trick:
his felonious intent at the time of taking
renders the taking of possession trespassory, as
discussed in Pear, supra.
Assume the facts in the last example change
slightly: E takes the money from X with the
honest intention of depositing it in the bank

drawer, but seconds later decides to pocket it.
E is not guilty of common law larceny, as the
original taking was lawful. See King v.
Bazeley, 168 Eng. Rep. 517 (1799);
Commonwealth v. Ryan, 155 Mass. 523, 30
N.E. 364 (1892).
283
Change the facts still a little more. E properly
puts the money in the bank drawer, but at the
end of the day decides to take the money. This
is now larceny. Why? Notice: when the money
was put in the drawer, possession of it shifted
from E (who obtained possession from X) to
Bank R; when E returns to the drawer at the
end of the day and takes the money, E is now
taking trespassory possession of the property,
although this time from R, rather than X. If E
carries the money away with the requisite
mens rea, he is guilty of larceny.
(2) The Problem
Notice the unfair position the law places the prosecutor.
The line between larceny and non-larceny often depends
on whether an employee intended to steal property
before or only after he received it from the third person.
Yet, there is virtually no way to know when the intent
was formed; nor is there any difference in culpability or
dangerousness of the offender.
(3) The Solution
Because of the difficulty of obtaining larceny
convictions in cases of the sort described here (in
particular, as a result of the decision in Bazeley, supra,
involving a dishonest bank employee), the Parliament

enacted the offense of embezzlement, discussed below,
and the United States followed suit.

c.

Bailments: The Breaking Bulk Doctrine
When a bailee is entrusted by the bailor with a container for
delivery to another person, the bailee receives possession of the
container, but mere custody of its contents. Therefore, if the
bailee wrongfully opens the container and removes its contents,
i.e., “breaks bulk,” he takes possession of the contents at that
moment. Carrier’s Case, Year Book 13 Edw. IV pl. 5 (1473). As
with other areas of theft law, the precise facts of the case can
turn a larceny into a non-larceny, or vice-versa.
Examples: BE, the bailee, obtains a container from BR, the
bailor, to transport to X. Later, BE decides to sell the
unopened container to Y, rather than deliver it as
promised to X. BE is not guilty of larceny of the
contents because he obtained lawful (non-trespassory)
possession of the container, and at no time did BE
obtain possession of the contents. (He did not break
bulk.)
However, if BE opens the box and then sells the
contents to Y, BE is guilty of larceny: when he broke
bulk, BE wrongfully took possession of the contents
from BR at that moment.
If BE properly delivers the unopened container to X,
but then returns and takes the container from X
without X’s
284
knowledge, BE is guilty of larceny, but the “victim”
would be X, as X obtained possession of the container
and its contents when BE delivered it to him.

3.

Carrying Away (“Asportation”)

A person is not guilty of larceny unless he carries away the property.
This is sometimes described as the “asportation” requirement.
Virtually any movement of property away from the place where
possession was taken constitutes asportation.
Example:
D trespassorily takes possession of V’s parked
automobile. She is arrested at that moment. She is guilty of
attempted larceny, as no asportation occurred. If D drives
the car away, even an inch, she is guilty of larceny
(assuming the requisite mens rea).

a.

Clarification
The asportation must consist of “carrying away” movement.
Example:
D moves a box containing a television from the
floor onto a table, so that she can more easily open the
box and pull out the contents, which she intends to
steal. This act of moving the box onto the table is not a
“carrying away” act. Therefore, if D is arrested at this
moment, she is guilty only of attempted larceny.

4.

Personal Property of Another
a.

“Personal Property”
i.

Personal Versus Real Property
Larceny is not committed if a person takes property attached
to the land, such as trees and crops, because such property is
real rather than personal in nature. When real property is
severed from the land, however, it becomes personal
property, and the first person to take possession of it in that
form is in lawful possession of it!
Examples:
D wrongfully cuts down V’s tree and
immediately removes the timber. D is not guilty of
common law larceny. When D cut the tree down,
he acted wrongfully as to real property, which is a
tort, but not a common law theft crime. When the
tree parts were severed from the land, they became

personal property in D’s possession. As he did not
take possession of the personal property from
anyone, it was a lawful taking!
Suppose, however, that D leaves the timber he has
wrongfully severed on V’s land and returns the
next day to carry it away. D is now guilty of
larceny. D left the timber, now personal property,
on V’s land; therefore, V obtained constructive
possession of it. When D returned and carried
away the timber, this taking was trespassory.
285

ii. Animals
At common law, domestic animals were protected by larceny
law; animals in the state of nature (ferae naturae), such as
wild deer and birds, were not considered to be personal
property belonging to another.

iii. Intangible Property
Intangible personal property—property that, by definition,
cannot be taken and carried away—is not protected by the
common law of larceny. States now commonly prohibit the
exercise of control over intangible property. E.g., MPC §
223.2.
Example: D steals an “IOU” slip belonging to V. D has
stolen a piece of paper, which is tangible property.
Therefore, he is guilty of petty larceny of the paper.
But, he is not guilty of common law larceny of the
intangible right to secure the money owed.

b. “Of Another”
Larceny involves the taking of another person’s personal
property. For purposes of larceny law, the “another” is the
person who has lawful possession of the property. Ownership is
not the key.

Example:
D takes her watch to X for repair. When she
receives the bill, she decides not to pay for it. Instead,
she takes the watch without permission. D is guilty of
larceny: when she gave X the watch to be repaired, X
took lawful possession of it; when D took it back
without paying for it, she trespassorily took possession,
even though she owned the watch.

C. Mens Rea: “Intent to Steal”
1.

General Rule
A person is not guilty of larceny when he wrongfully takes and
carries away another person’s personal property, unless he possesses
the specific intent to permanently deprive the other person of the
property.
Example:
D takes V’s parked car without permission, with the
intention of keeping it for a day. D returns it later that day.
D is not guilty of larceny, as he lacked the specific intent to
steal the car. (Today, D would be guilty of a lesser
statutory offense such as “joyriding.”)

a.

Recklessness
Often, a court will find that the requisite intent is proven if the
actor takes property, and then abandons it under circumstances
in which he knows that the property will probably not be
returned to its owner. In such circumstances, it is more accurate
to describe the actor’s mens rea here as “reckless deprivation of
another person’s property.”
286
Example: D wrongfully takes V’s automobile in Los Angeles,
and abandons it in a high-crime area in another city. In
view of the likelihood that the vehicle will be re-stolen
or that it will “stripped” of its parts before it can be
recovered, a jury might convict D of larceny.

2.

Concurrence Requirement
In general, the intent to steal must concur with the taking of the
property.
Example: D lawfully borrows X’s car for one day, intending to
return it. During the day, she decides to keep the car, and
she drives out of town with it. D is not guilty of larceny:
the intent to steal did not concur with the taking, which
was lawful. That is, D’s felonious intent developed after
she took non-trespassory possession of the property.

a.

“Continuing Trespass” Doctrine
The concurrence requirement is subject to the “continuing
trespass” doctrine. This legal fiction provides that when a person
trespassorily takes possession of property, she commits a new
trespass every moment that she retains wrongful possession of it.
Therefore, even if the wrongdoer does not have the intent to
steal the property when she originally trespassorily takes
possession, the concurrence requirement is met if she later
decides to steal the property.
Example:
D takes V’s car without permission, with the
intention of returning at the end of the day. Later that
day, D changes her mind and decides to keep the car. D
is guilty of larceny. Notice: When D originally took the
car, she took trespassory possession of it—she had no
right to it—but she took possession without the
intention to steal. However, as the result of the
continuing-trespass doctrine, she “continued” to take
the vehicle as long as she retained it. Therefore, when
she later decided to keep the car—when her intention
to steal was formed—there was a concurrence of the
felonious intent with the trespass that occurred at that
moment!

D.

Special Problem: Lost or Mislaid Property

1.

Lost Property
The rights of a finder of lost property depend on two factors: the
possessory interest of the person who lost the property at the time
the property is discovered by the finder; and the finder’s state of
mind when he retrieves the lost property.

a.

Possessory Interest of the Owner
A person retains constructive possession of his lost property if
there is a reasonable clue to ownership of it when it is
discovered. A reasonable clue to ownership exists if the finder:
(1) knows to whom the lost property belongs; or (2) has
reasonable ground to believe, from the nature of the
287
property or the circumstances under which it is found, that the
party to whom it belongs can reasonably be ascertained.
Examples: F1 discovers a dollar bill lying on the street. If F1
observed O drop it, a reasonable clue to ownership
exists; therefore, O retains constructive possession of
it.
F2 discovers a dollar bill under a bush. It is unlikely
that there is a reasonable clue to ownership: it would
be very hard to discover the true owner. Therefore, the
true owner does not maintain constructive possession
of the property. When F picks it up, she is not taking
possession from anyone, so no larceny has occurred.

b. State of Mind of the Finder
As with other larceny cases, it is important to determine the
finder’s state of mind when he takes possession of the lost
property.
Examples: O accidentally drops her extremely valuable watch
on the sidewalk. It has her name and address etched
on the back. F observes the watch on the ground, and

decides to steal it. F picks up the watch. In view of the
etching, there is reasonable clue to ownership.
Therefore, O retains constructive possession of the
watch until F finds it, at which time possession
transfers to F. As F picked up the watch with the
intent to keep it, this taking was trespassory and
felonious. She is guilty of larceny.
The same example, except that when F picks up the
watch, she intends to find the owner. Later, however,
she decides to keep it. Now there is no larceny, as the
original taking on the street was nontrespassory. The
felonious intent did not concur with the taking.
The same example, except that when F picks up the
watch, she figures, “I am going to a fancy party
tonight. I’ll wear it, and then find the owner.” Now
the taking of possession is trespassory (wrongful), but
the intent to steal is absent. However, in light of the
continuing-trespass doctrine, F’s subsequent intent to
steal concurs with the “later” trespass.

2.

Mislaid Property
An object is “mislaid” if it is intentionally put in a certain place for
a temporary purpose, and then accidentally is left there when the
owner leaves. The two factors just discussed regarding lost property
also apply to mislaid property. However, in regard to the
“reasonable clue to ownership” factor, the common law is more
protective of the owner of mislaid property than of lost property.

a.

Reasonable Clue to Ownership
The common law provides that there is always a clue to
ownership of mislaid property: because it was misplaced, rather
than lost, the owner knows where it is, and is considered likely
to return to pick it up once he notices that he has forgotten it.
The implication of this is that the

288
lawfulness of the finder’s conduct depends entirely on his state
of mind when he takes possession of the property from the
owner: if he takes the property with the intent to steal it, he is
guilty of larceny; if he picks it up with honest intentions, he is
not guilty of larceny.

II.

Embezzlement

A.

Elements of the Offense
In 1799, shortly after the acquittal of a dishonest bank employee in the
Bazeley case, supra, the English Parliament enacted the first general
embezzlement statute. Under the statute, embezzlement was a
misdemeanor. Today, it is a felony or a misdemeanor, depending on the
value of the property embezzled. Because the offense is statutory in
nature, and differs from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, the precise contours
of the offense cannot be stated. However, in general the offense requires
proof of two or three elements:

1.

Manner of Obtaining Possession
Embezzlement occurs when the actor takes possession of the
personal property of another in a lawful—nontrespassory—manner.

2.

Conversion
After securing lawful possession of the property, the actor converts
the property to his own use, i.e., he uses the property in a manner
that manifests his intention to deprive another person of the property
permanently.

3.

Entrustment
Many embezzlement statutes provide that the actor must have
obtained possession as a result of entrustment by another person.
Examples: X hands D, a bank teller, cash that X expects D to give
to B, the bank, for deposit in X’s account. X has entrusted
the property to D for that purpose.

BR gives property to BE, a bailee, to be shipped to X. This
is an entrustment.
O loses property. F finds it. There is no entrustment.

B.

Larceny Versus Embezzlement
The line between these two offenses is very thin, and depends in large
part on the state of mind of the actor at the time he takes possession of
property.
Examples: E obtains a car from R, her employer, in order to deliver
pizzas. E absconds with the vehicle. E is guilty of larceny.
This follows from the fact that E originally had only custody
of the vehicle, because she obtained it from her employer.
When she violated the employment contract by driving the
car away, she trespassorily took possession of it with the
requisite mens rea.
BR, a bailor, entrusts a car to BE, the bailee, to deliver to X in
another city. BE takes the vehicle with the intention of
stealing it. BE is guilty
289
of larceny by trick: the taking of possession was trespassory
(see Pear, supra, discussed in section I.B.1.b. above).
The same as the last example, except that BE takes
possession with the intent to deliver it as requested. Later, BE
changes his mind and drives away with the car. BE is now
guilty of embezzlement: he was lawfully entrusted with the
property, and he converted it to his own use.
D finds lost property, for which there is a reasonable clue to
ownership. D intends to find the true owner, but later changes
his mind. Notice: D has taken lawful possession of the
property. Therefore, the continuing trespass doctrine does not
apply, so that the subsequent intent to steal does not concur
with the taking. Therefore, D is not guilty of larceny. But,

neither is it embezzlement, if the embezzlement statute
requires entrustment!

III.

False Pretenses

A.

Elements of the Offense
The crime of “obtaining property by false pretenses” is a statutory
offense, enacted in England in 1757. Originally, it was a misdemeanor.
Today, it is a felony or misdemeanor, depending on the value of the
property taken. As with embezzlement, the statutory nature of the crime
allows for only general description of the offense.

1. Title
With false pretenses, the victim transfers title, rather than mere
possession, to the wrongdoer. This is the key difference between
false pretenses, on the one hand, and larceny and embezzlement, on
the other.
Examples:
D drives to V’s “full-service” gas station (they still
exist in a few states!) for a fill-up. D has no intention of
paying for the gasoline. After V fills D’s tank, D speeds
away. This is larceny by trick. When V put the gasoline
into D’s car, V intended to transfer only possession of the
gasoline until he was paid. Therefore, false pretenses is
not involved. See Hufstetler v. State, 37 Ala.App. 71, 63
So.2d 730 (1953).
The same as the last example, except that D pays for the
gasoline with counterfeit money. Now the crime is false
pretenses. When D handed V the counterfeit money, title
to the gasoline transferred to D. This change in title
occurred as the result of fraud.

2.

Nature of Fraud
False pretenses involves a false representation of an existing fact.

a.

How the Misrepresentation Occurs

The misrepresentation may be in written or oral form, or can be
the result of misleading conduct. Silence—nondisclosure of a
fact—does not usually
290
constitute false pretenses, even if D knowingly takes advantage
of V’s false impressions.

b. Fact Versus Opinion
The misrepresentation must be of a fact and not of opinion.
Examples: D sells V a car after telling him that the car is “the
best automobile ever built.” D does not believe this
statement is true. The statement is pure puffery: it is a
statement that cannot realistically be proved or
disproved. Therefore, it is more in the nature of an
opinion.
D sells V a car after turning back the odometer, so that
it reads “100” instead of “1,000” miles. The act of
turning
back
the
odometer
constitutes
misrepresentation of a fact. Therefore, assuming the
other elements of the offense are proved, D is guilty
of false pretenses.

c.

Existing Fact Versus a Promise of Future Conduct
The majority rule is that, to constitute false pretenses, a factual
misrepresentation must pertain to an existing fact, and not
involve a promise of future conduct.
Example: D buys a car on an installment contract. At the time
of purchase, D does not intend to pay the monthly
installments. On these facts, D obtained constructive
title of the vehicle when she signed the contract; she
secured this title as the result of fraud. However, the
misrepresentation is in the form of a promise of future
conduct (future payment). The majority rule is that D
is not guilty of false pretenses.

i.

Rationale
A promise of future conduct is really a representation of an
existing fact: the fact of a present intention to live up to a
promise. Nonetheless, common law courts feared that is
would be too easy for a simple breach of contract to be
converted into a crime. Therefore, this special no-criminality
rule was devised.

ii.

Model Penal Code
The minority rule, led by the Model Penal Code, is that a
prosecution is permitted, even if the misrepresentation is in
the form of a promise of future conduct. However, the
intention to deceive cannot be proved solely on the basis of
the promisor’s failure to live up to his promise. MPC §
223.3(1).

3. Mens Rea
The deceiver must make the false representation “knowingly” and
with “the intent to defraud.” That is, the actor must know that the
representation is false; and he must make the false statement with
the specific intent of
291
defrauding the other person. This approximates the “intent to steal”
concept in larceny.

IV.

Review Questions
[Answers Provided in Appendix A, pages 306–307]

1. T or F. The purpose of common law larceny is to protect owners from
the wrongful taking of their personal property by someone who intends to
keep the property.
2. Jane finds a valuable ring on the street. She picks it up intending to find
the true owner. Gina comes to Jane and fraudulently convinces Jane that the

ring belongs to her. Therefore, Jane hands the ring to Gina, who leaves with
it. Larceny, embezzlement, false pretenses, or none of the above, by Gina?
3.
Unfortunately this is a real case: Lawyer tells Client, “You give me
$1000 and I will bribe Police Officer to change his arrest report on you.”
Client to Lawyer, “Geez, that is a lot of money. Okay, I’ll do it, but be sure
that you don’t give the cop the money until he makes the change in the
arrest report.” Lawyer agrees, but later decides to convert the money to his
own use. Larceny, embezzlement, false pretenses, or none of the above?
4.
Charles trespasses onto Larry’s land and digs up Larry’s beautiful
begonias from the garden, and leaves with them, intending to give them to
his girlfriend. Larceny, embezzlement, false pretenses, or none of the
above?
5. Pizza deliverer (and very hungry) Jason receives a hot pizza to deliver
to Sam from Jason’s employer. In the car, on the way to Sam’s, Jason eats a
slice of the pizza. Larceny, embezzlement, false pretenses, or none of the
above?

293

Appendix A

Answers to Review Questions
PART ONE: INTRODUCTORY PRINCIPLES
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGES 96–97]
1. There is no agreed-upon definition. The best definition, however, is that
a “crime” is conduct that “if duly shown to have taken place, will incur a
formal and solemn pronouncement of the moral condemnation of the
community.”
2. False. Thanks to the Double Jeopardy Clause (and, thus, the rule that
acquittals are unappealable), jurors have the raw power to nullify the law,
but they do not have the legal right to do so. After all, they take an oath to
obey the law, as instructed by the judge!
3. b. The speaker is using Albert’s punishment as an object lesson for
others, which is what general deterrence is all about.
4. False. Recidivist laws are generally defended on specific deterrence
grounds (incapacitation) and perhaps general deterrence grounds (create
fear in others of what happens if they continue to disobey the law).
Retributivism ignores the risk of future punishment, and punishes only for
the past action. Earlier crimes do not go into the calculation since the
defendant has already paid for that crime.
5. This is the principle that provides that a person may not be convicted or
punished unless there is a pre-existing law. Corollaries of the principle are
that statutes should be sufficiently clear to put reasonable people on notice
that their proposed conduct might violate the law; and statutes should not be
so broad or standardless that the police have undue discretion in enforcing
the law.
6. There are two incorrect statements.

c. This is wrong. The Constitution is silent in regard to the question of
who should carry the burden of persuasion regarding affirmative defenses.
It is up to the legislature to decide on whom to place the burden.
d. There are two errors here. The constitutional rule is that the
prosecutor must prove beyond a reasonable doubt (the first correction) any
fact other than the fact that the defendant was previously convicted (the
second correction) that increases the penalty for a crime beyond the
prescribed statutory maximum.
294

PART TWO: ACTUS REUS
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGE 108]
1. Voluntary act (or, sometimes, an omission); and social harm.
2.
The common law definition is a willed muscular contraction. The
Model Penal Code only gives examples of involuntary acts, but the
examples do suggest that the MPC follows the common law definition
fairly well.
3.
True. You need to be careful here. Alex would not be criminal
criminally responsible for stranger Bob’s death in ordinary circumstances,
even if he was glad to see Bob die! But here Alex would have a duty to act:
as a lifeguard he contractually has taken on the duty to come to the
assistance of swimmers in peril. But, remember: to be convicted of a
homicide offense, the prosecutor will also have to prove that Alex had the
requisite mens rea. This is a subject for later lessons.
4. a. The words here that constitute the actus reus of the offense are every
word except “intentionally,” the latter of which is the mens rea term.
b. The words that constitute the social harm of the offense are the same
words! How can this be? Because the other element of the actus reus is that
the social harm must occur as the result of conduct that includes a voluntary
act (or, rarely, an omission), but statutes almost never expressly state the
voluntary-act requirement in their definition of the crime. It is implied. We
can simply say that the taking of the life of another human being, which

constitutes the social harm, must be the result of conduct that includes a
voluntary act (such as firing a gun at the victim).
c. This statute has all three categories! We have a result: the death; we
have conduct: “by means of poison”; and we have attendant circumstances:
that the killer is a human being (and not, for example, an animal), and that
the victim is “another” person (not oneself). I know it may seem silly right
now to go through this process of categorization, but it will become
important as we proceed.

PART THREE: MENS REA
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGE 127]
1. The “culpability” meaning of mens rea is that the defendant committed
the actus reus of the offense in a morally culpable manner. No particular
culpable state of mind is required.
2. It means that Albert either wanted to kill Bob—it was his conscious
object—or he knew that his actions were practically certain to cause Bob’s
death.
3. False. This is a specific-intent offense: it requires proof that the person
not only raped the victim but that he had a further intention (to kill), which
goes beyond the actus reus of the offense. That is, this crime requires an
intention to cause a particular result that is not part of the actus reus of the
offense.
4.
Under the Model Penal Code and in most modern non-MPC
jurisdictions, the difference is that recklessness involves consciously taking
a substantial and unjustifiable risk, whereas the negligent actor is unaware
that he is taking a substantial and unjustifiable risk. The unjustifiable risktaking is equal, but the reckless actor was aware of the risk, whereas the
negligent actor was not. At early common law, there was
295
a different distinction: a person acted with criminal negligence if she should
have been aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk, whereas the reckless
actor should have been aware of a very substantial and justifiable risk.

Today, you are not likely to see courts using this latter distinction, but when
you read old cases, this will frequently be what they mean.
5. This is a tricky question (or is it a trick question?). The answer is no.
The Model Penal Code does permit strict liability for “violations,” which
are “offenses,” but not for “crimes,” which is what you were asked about!
As for crimes, Model Penal Code § 2.02(1) requires proof of some mens rea
as to each element of the offense.
6. a. Model Penal Code § 2.02(4) answers this question—mens rea as to
one term applies to all material elements unless a contrary legislation
intention plainly appears. This is a straight-forward case.
7. False. In the case of statutes with common law roots, courts presume
that legislatures intended to require a mens rea. But, this is just a judicial
presumption of legislative intent, which presumption can be rebutted. Strict
liability offenses are not, by their nature, unconstitutional.

PART FOUR: MENS REA AND MISTAKES OF FACT OR
LAW
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGE 138]
1. b. Burglary, as defined, is a specific-intent offense (“with the purpose
to commit a felony therein” is a “specific intent” because it involves an
intention to do some future act, after committing the actus reus of the
offense (“breaking and entering a dwelling house of another at night”).
Dennis’s mistake negates the “purpose” to commit a felony inside the house
—after all, he just thought he was breaking and entering his own home.
Therefore, even the most unreasonable mistake in the world (and this
sounds like one!) negates that purpose.
2.
b. Same answer and same reasoning. The common law applies an
elemental analysis to specific-intent offenses; the MPC applies an elemental
analysis to all offenses.
3.
True. We will delve into this issue more fully in Part Eleven (the
chapter on rape), but the starting point is in realizing that rape is a generalintent offense. Remember: If a crime is not specific-intent, as previously
defined, it is general-intent or (very, very rarely) strict liability. Rape, as

defined, clearly does not contain a specific intent. But, we also know that
strict liability is a deeply disfavored doctrine, particularly with crimes
derived from the common law, such as rape. Therefore, “rape” is a generalintent offense. Since D’s mistake was negligent, his mistake was
unreasonable. Thus D is culpable. He has “mens rea.”
4. An unreasonable mistake of law is potentially exculpatory when the
offense itself requires knowledge or understanding of some law, and the
defendant’s unreasonable mistake of law negates that knowledge or
understanding of the law. This is true at common law and the MPC.
296

PART FIVE: CAUSATION
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGE 147]
1. “But for the defendant’s voluntary act [or omission], would the social
harm have occurred when it did?”
2. Responsive intervening cause. It seems fair to assume that the fox is a
but-for cause of Bob’s death—Bob either was not going to die from the
gunshot wound or he would have died later than he did. The fox, at a
minimum, accelerated the death. As the fox’s causal involvement occurred
after Albert’s actions, the fox is an intervening cause. But, what kind? A
responsive one, because the fox did not just happen to show up on that rural
road by coincidence: the facts state that the fox smelled the blood and, as a
consequence, came to the scene. (If that had not been the case—if the fox
didn’t smell the blood and just happened to be sauntering down that road,
then the fox would be a coincidental intervening cause.)
3.
Who knows? Remember: the issue is one of justice, one of public
policy; there is no sure answer. But: if we consider the fox to be a
responsive intervening cause, under that analysis, Albert remains the
proximate cause of the death unless we consider the fox’s intervention not
only unforeseeable, but downright freakish. This was a rural road with a
“nearby forest,” so the fox’s intervention may not be freakish. Albert: you
are out of luck. But, what about the other factors? Under the intendedconsequences doctrine, Albert wanted Bob dead, but did he want him dead

this way? My sense of justice suggests that Albert should not get off under
these circumstances, but I assume Albert’s lawyer will make some
argument to the contrary. As for the “free, deliberate informed human
intervention” test—the fox obviously does not qualify, so we can get Albert
under that theory! And, under the “apparent safety” doctrine, Bob clearly
has not reached complete safety. So, it seems, Albert is in big trouble!
4.

(1) Voluntary Act
(2) Social Harm
(3) Mens Rea (usually)
(4) Actual Cause
(5) Proximate Cause

PART SIX: DEFENSES TO CRIMES: JUSTIFICATIONS
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGES 169–170]
1. “Imminent” force is force that will occur immediately, at virtually that
moment or instant.
2.
The MPC only requires that the defendant’s self-defensive force be
“immediately necessary … on the present occasion.” Thus, the issue is not
when the aggressor will use his force, but when the innocent party’s selfdefensive force is immediately necessary. That can prove to be a big
difference, and has the effect of broadening the scope of the defense.
3. False. Not quite. It is not so easy for a deadly aggressor to regain the
right of self-defense, although it is possible. Albert must wholly abandon his
deadly design and—don’t forget!—communicate this fact in some way to
Bob. Merely backing away, without
297
more, may be nothing more than a temporary defensive action. If Albert
had put his weapon down and fled, this would seemingly do the job.
4. False. Too many students think the answer is True, because MPC §
3.04(1) is written in terms of “belief” rather than “reasonable belief.” But,
this section expressly provides that § 3.09 of the Code applies as a limiting

feature, and the latter provision holds that a person who has a reckless
belief may be convicted of a crime of recklessness (e.g., manslaughter), and
a person with a negligent belief may be convicted of a crime of negligence
(e.g., negligent homicide).
5. b. Based on Donald’s understanding of the situation, Carla was about to
be the victim of an unlawful deadly assault. Therefore, based on Donald’s
understanding of the facts, Carla would have had a right of self-defense.
Although this was not, in fact, the case, Donald is entitled to act on the
basis of his reasonable belief that she was under real attack. A minority of
jurisdictions would deny Donald any defense, even if his mistake was
reasonable (in which case the answer would be a.).
6. True. Please notice that I did not specify whether I was talking about
the common law or Model Penal Code. But, here, the answer is the same.
Yes, the MPC does permit the use of deadly force in some circumstances,
but all of them pertain to entry of the dwelling, and not to property taken
outside the premises.
7. False. This question is almost true, but almost true adds up to false!
The one exception, which makes the statement false, is that a person may
use nondeadly force after dispossession, if he is in hot pursuit of the
dispossessor.
8. No. Assuming that the spring gun is intended to cause serious bodily
harm or death, or is simply known to create such a risk, then spring guns are
absolutely forbidden under the MPC. This is a sharp divergence from the
common law.
9.
The modern and majority rule limits the use of deadly force to the
prevention of felonies (as distinguished from misdemeanors), and then only
if the person using the force reasonably believes that (1) the other person is
committing an atrocious (violent or dangerous) felony; and (2) deadly force
is necessary to prevent commission of the offense.
10. If you compare the (majority) common law rules to the MPC crimeprevention defense (something I urge you to do generally), the biggest
difference is the MPC limitation that deadly force may not be exercised if,
to do so, it would present a substantial risk of injury to bystanders. If you
compare the felonies that fall within the rules, they are pretty much the

same: the Code limits the use of deadly force to felonies that involve a
substantial risk that the suspect will cause death or serious bodily harm if
the felony is not prevented. That comes pretty close to the “atrocious
felony” limitation of the majority common law rule.
11. No. It is true the officer could use deadly force at original common law,
since the defense applied to all felonies. But, most jurisdictions, including
the Model Penal Code, would not permit Officer Jane to end Embezzler’s
life. And, there is another reason why “No” is the right decision. The Fourth
Amendment can’t be ignored, and the cases in the Outline, especially
Tennessee v. Garner, would almost certainly hold that Officer Jane’s use of
force here is excessive, i.e., an unreasonable seizure of Embezzler.
12. Whatever one’s views about abortion may be, this claim should fail for
various reasons. First, based on the sparse description of the facts in this
question, Betty cannot prove that the harm she seeks to prevent is
imminent. Her stated purpose is to prevent “future abortions,” not even an
abortion taking place at that instant. She loses on that ground alone. We
really don’t have to go any further! Second, closely tied to the
298
imminency problem, can Betty show that her actions will causally prevent
the threatened future harm? If Dr. Abortionist doesn’t perform the
abortions, are there other physicians who will fill this need? Third, there is a
harm-balancing obstacle. The issue is not whether Betty thinks that fetuses
are human beings (and, therefore, that the killing of the doctor is a lesser
harm), but whether the society or, at least, the jury, would so conclude.
Presumably, if a fetus is not treated as equivalent to a live human being
(you have no reason to know this yet, but the common law does not treat a
fetus as a human being), the immediate killing of the doctor in order to
prevent possible future deaths of fetuses will create some significant
calculation problems (how many fetuses equals one human life?). A final
obstacle: remember that the defense does not apply if the law has already
considered the issue in some other context (re-read my Conversation at the
start of the Necessity section). Here, we have such an answer: at least as
this Outline goes to press: the Supreme Court rule is that a woman has a
constitutional right to have a licensed physician abort her viable fetus under

most circumstances. Therefore, Betty and, for that matter, the judge or jury,
may not properly substitute its judgment for the Constitution’s specific
current answer to this question.

PART SEVEN: DEFENSES TO CRIMES: EXCUSES
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGES 194–195]
1. False. The correct answer is exactly the opposite: justifications focus
on the act; excuses focus on the actor. This is an easy and useful sentence
to remember.
2. You might mention a number of points. (I wouldn’t be worried that you
did not come up with all of these differences, but the answer below may
help you to notice the differences.)
• The MPC defense unambiguously is an excuse defense; the common
law is more muddled (although most courts treat the defense, as it
should, as an excuse.)
•

The common law only applies to threats of future force, whereas the
MPC defense may be based on prior use of force, even in the absence
of a current threat.

•

The common law only applies to threats of imminent harm; the
MPC has no imminency requirement.

•

The common law only applies to deadly threats; the MPC has no
such limitation.

•

The MPC applies a “person of reasonable firmness” standard; the
common law has no equivalent test.

•

The MPC, but not the common law, permits the defense to be used
in murder cases.

•

There are some minor differences in the language relating to persons
who are at fault for getting themselves in the coercive predicament,
but I wouldn’t lose a lot of sleep over those differences!

3.
False. Caught you! Voluntary intoxication is never an excuse for
criminal conduct. Period. Be sure to distinguish an excuse claim from the

very different claim that the defendant should be acquitted because she
lacked the mens rea found in the definition of
299
the offense charged. Voluntary intoxication can serve to negate the specific
intent of a specific-intent offense.
4. a. and c.
In a., D1 should be acquitted because she believed she was killing a
polar bear; therefore, she did not have the specific intent to murder, since
murder involves the killing of a human being, not a polar bear.
In b., D2 is basically arguing temporary insanity—he knows he is
killing a human being, but does not realize it is wrong under the
circumstances (he thinks it is right, due to self-defense). Temporary
insanity, however, is no defense to voluntary intoxication.
In c., however, the temporary insanity claim will work because this is a
case of involuntary intoxication. (By the way, you have not yet studied
insanity, so some of this may be a bit confusing now, but should be clearer
soon.)
5. Durham or “product” test. The mental health professionals believed
that this test properly focused on the defendant’s mental illness, would
permit more persons to be found insane and, therefore, directed to mental
health care; and it also seemed to give psychiatrists the opportunity to
testify fully, without being compelled to fit their testimony into the
volitional and cognitive pigeonholes of prior insanity tests.
6.
d. Pretty clearly Alice is not insane under M’Naghten: there is no
indication she did not know what she was doing or that what she was doing
was wrong. (The fact that she planned to do it when she was alone with him
might even suggests her awareness of the illegality of her actions.) Nor is
there any evidence presented that she could not control herself. Indeed, she
waited a week to act out her plans, so a control test (like “irresistible
impulse”) fails. But, this also does not seem to meet Durham, or the product
test. Why not? Yes, she suffers from a mental illness, but there is nothing
about her hallucinatory mental condition that seems to be causally linked to

the crime. Indeed, there is no evidence she was hallucinating either when
she formed the plan or when she committed it!
7. b. Diminished capacity applies to any abnormal mental condition, so it
is unnecessary to worry whether Alzheimer’s is considered a “mental
illness.” That eliminates d. David believed he had entered his own home, so
he did not enter with the specific intent to commit a felony inside.
Therefore, he is not guilty of the specific-intent offense of burglary. But, he
is guilty of trespass. On its face, this misdemeanor is strict liability, so there
is no mens rea to negate. But, this may not be the case—remember the
common law bias against strict liability. But, at most this is a general-intent
offense, and diminished capacity does not apply to general-intent crimes at
common law.
8. Very False. The MPC is far more open to diminished capacity claims
than the common law. It not only permits the introduction of psychiatric
testimony to prove the absence of mens rea for any crime, but it also
recognizes the partial responsibility version of diminished capacity in the
homicide area: murder may be reduced to manslaughter if the defendant
suffers from an extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which there is
reasonable explanation or excuse.
9.

Subjective test. Enough said.

10. Objective test. Also, enough said.
300

PART EIGHT: INCHOATE CONDUCT
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGES 225–226]
1.
True. At original common law, an attempt was punished as a mere
misdemeanor, even if the target offense was a capital felony! Today, states
that have adopted common law principles treat an attempted felony as a
felony, but as a lesser one, with a lesser punishment than the completed
offense.
2. The purpose of this question is simply to re-enforce the point that you
should learn the various common law actus reus tests of attempt (last act;
dangerous proximity; physical proximity; unequivocality; probable

desistance). But, of course, the titles of these tests are far less important
than an understanding of the substance of the tests. So go back and learn
how the tests work.
3.
True. All crimes of attempts are specific intent, even if the target
offense is general intent.
4. c. This is a case of hybrid legal impossibility. If the facts had been as
Despicable believed them to be—that she was alive—then this would have
constituted a rape. So, that sounds like factual impossibility. But, it is also
true that what Despicable did—have sexual intercourse with a corpse—is
not a crime (or, more accurately, it is not the crime of rape), so this is also a
case of legal impossibility. Put differently, this is a hybrid case.
5. Unclear. If a court treats this as legal impossibility, then Despicable
will be acquitted. But, some courts will decide to treat this as a case of a
factual impossibility (see above), and convict Despicable. That is the
problem with “hybrid” cases: there is no way to predict for sure which way
a court will go.
6. Guilty. The MPC has abolished the legal impossibility defense. More
accurately, it has abolished the hybrid legal impossibility defense.
Therefore, Despicable is guilty. Period.
7. Not guilty under the MPC; probably guilty under the common law.
There seems to be little doubt that a jury would find that Denise’s conduct
constitutes a substantial step in the culmination of a murder under the MPC,
and lying in wait certainly is corroborative of her criminal intent. But,
Denise can avoid conviction here because her conduct appears to satisfy the
MPC “renunciation of criminal purpose” defense: her abandonment of her
criminal enterprise was voluntary and complete. The common law,
however, does not recognize this defense, so Denise’s last-moment
renunciation will do her no good. Assuming, therefore, that a jury finds that
Denise’s conduct constitutes an attempt according to one of the common
law tests of attempt, she will be convicted.
8. True. Using the example provided in the Outline, a person cannot be
convicted of the crime of defamation, as there is no such crime, although it
is a tort and wrongful act. But, an agreement between two persons to
defame another is a crime (of conspiracy)! So, apparently it is worse for

two people to agree to defame than it is for one to actually do it. Is that
crazy, or what?
9. Definitely “no” under the MPC, “probably no” under the common
law. Alex has knowledge of Bob’s plans, but there is no evidence presented
here that he wants the killing to occur. He did not sell the gun at an inflated
price or in any other way indicate that it was his conscious objective that
the crime occur. He may be an amoral or even immoral person, but under
the MPC there is no conspiracy, as he did not have the
301
purpose of promoting or facilitating the killing. The common law is less
clear, as there are some courts that will permit a conspiracy charge to be
based on mere knowledge.
10. No. Wharton’s Rule would bar prosecution. By definition, dueling
requires at least two willing combatants. It takes two to tango, and two to
tangle (by dueling). (Sorry. I couldn’t resist.)
11. Common law: Both are acquitted. MPC: Chester is convicted,
Donald is acquitted. Here is how to look at this. Donald, due to
involuntary intoxication, did not know what he agreed to. Therefore, he
lacked the specific intent to rob First State Bank. Therefore, he is not guilty
of common law conspiracy, which requires that a person not only intend to
agree, but intend that the target offense be committed. Since Donald gets
off, so does Chester because of the common law plurality rule. But, the
MPC rejects the plurality rule. So, Chester will be convicted of conspiracy,
although nobody else is guilty!
12. Common law: two counts of conspiracy. MPC: one count. At
common law the issue is simple to state: how many agreements were
formed? In most cases it will be nearly impossible to answer, but here I
have made the facts clear. They made one agreement on Day 1, and then
formed another agreement on Day 2. That is bad luck for them. If they had
agreed on Day 1 to rob both banks, they would be guilty of only one count
of conspiracy, not two. The MPC would probably say that there existed a
“continuing conspiratorial relationship” between Jack and Jill, so there is
just one conspiracy. (It would be different if they had robbed Bank 1 on

Day 1, divided the proceeds, and “broke up,” only to get back together at a
later date, in which case there would be two conspiracies under the MPC.)
13. Both are guilty. Notice, first, that as the facts are set out, there was no
overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. At common law, however, none
was needed. But, on an exam, if you are working with a statute, see if there
is such a requirement. Many statutes require it. If so, neither would be
guilty here unless you can point to some act in furtherance of the plan by
one of them. The facts show that Carl withdrew his support from the
conspiracy. At common law, however, this is no defense to the crime of
conspiracy based on withdrawal. (Carl’s withdrawal, however, would free
him from guilt for the President’s murder, if Roger went on without him.)
14. Yes, he is guilty of solicitation. That is the easy question: Alex asked
Richard to kill Carl, so the crime of solicitation occurred as soon as the
request was communicated. (However, please remember that his guilt
assumes that he genuinely wanted the killing to occur and wasn’t joking.)
As for the extra credit: Isn’t a solicitation by definition an “attempted
conspiracy”?! After all, if Richard had said yes, they would be guilty of
conspiracy. Alex wanted Richard to say yes, so this is an attempt to
conspire! Right? Right. But, the law just treats this as solicitation.
15. No. She did not intend to communicate with Bill. True enough, she
originally had the intent to communicate with Bill to encourage him to
commit a crime, but when she performed the voluntary act of pushing the
SEND button, she no longer had the requisite mens rea. By the time she
communicated her solicitation—the actus reus of the offense—she did not
have the mens rea. This requires sophisticated analysis, so if you got it
right, feel especially good. If you didn’t get it right, don’t feel badly.
16. Okay, okay. I put this question in as a sort of brain teaser to end our
discussion of inchoate crimes. Here is what I am getting at. At common
law, an assault is an attempted battery. So, an attempted assault would be an
attempt to attempt a battery! That does seem odd, and some courts have
said there is no such offense. Two counter-points. First, there is nothing odd
about “attempted assault” if “assault” is defined as it
302

is in tort law. Basically, that would mean that the wrongdoer tried, but
failed, to put the victim in apprehension of a battery. But, common law
assault did not include the tort definition. Second, even with the common
law definition of assault, there might be some logic to an attempted assault
charge: as I noted earlier, an assault ordinary requires that the defendant
perform the last act necessary to commit the battery. So, perhaps an
attempted assault would be a way to punish a person who has not
committed the last act.

PART NINE: COMPLICITY
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGES 238–239]
1. a. Carl is not guilty of rape (duress). Bob has used Carl as his innocent
instrumentality. Therefore, Bob is the principal in the first degree.
2.
b. This is a tough one. It requires you to remember what you
(hopefully) learned about the duress defense: the common law does not
recognize the duress defense in homicide cases. Remember? So, Carl is
guilty of the murder (as a principal in the first degree) despite being
coerced. That means he is not an innocent person. Therefore, Bob is a
principal in the second degree (since the facts say he was present when the
killing occurred).
3. True. Mere presence at the scene of a crime is not enough to make one
an accomplice. Presence plus the intent to aid is also not enough! The intent
proves Joshua had the mens rea to be an accomplice, but to be an
accomplice you must aid in some way, and he didn’t. We can’t even prove
encouragement here, as Carla has no idea that Joshua was aware of her
intentions. Joshua may not be a good guy, but he is not guilty of robbery.
4. Negligent homicide. (If you have not yet studied Criminal Homicide in
class, you can’t answer this question. But, most of you will have covered
this by now, so I will proceed.) Janice clearly assisted in the crime by
handing over the keys to her car to Xavier. The issue is her mens rea. She
intentionally committed the act of assistance; but what was her mens rea in
regard to the outcome (the death)? The facts suggest she was negligent, not
reckless. (The facts tell us she was unaware of Xavier’s condition, so she is
not reckless; she is negligent.) So, she is not guilty of murder (which

requires purpose, knowledge or extreme recklessness) or even manslaughter
(non-extreme recklessness) under the Model Penal Code. The MPC (§
2.06(7)) provides that an accomplice can be convicted of a different crime
or degree of crime than the principal, so she is guilty of negligent homicide,
even though Xavier is guilty of murder.
5.
You bet she is! The legislative-exemption rule gets Camille off the
hook—she cannot be an accomplice in her own statutory rape—she is
considered the victim. But that doctrine does not apply to Kelli. She is not
the victim here. So, Kelli, an underage female can be convicted (via
accomplice liability) of statutory rape of another underage female.
6.
You bet she is, under the Pinkerton doctrine, but not under the
MPC. You can’t convict Nellie as an accomplice in any of those nonChicago crimes. The facts say she did not assist in any way. But, she can be
convicted as a member of the broad conspiracy, assuming a jurisdiction
chooses to apply Pinkerton: those other crimes are very much a part of the
conspiracy—a conspiracy to sell drugs results in the sale of drugs! And
violence with one’s drug customers is hardly unforeseeable. But, as for the
303
MPC, the MPC rejects the Pinkerton doctrine, so the only way to convict
Nellie of these crimes is if she aided, agreed to aid, or attempted to aid in
the specific offenses that occurred in the other cities, and none of this
happened.
7.
Yes. Abandonment is a defense under the MPC, but only if the
accomplice neutralizes his assistance (here, by retrieving the gun), calling
the police, or otherwise preventing the crime from occurring. Here, Carlos
didn’t do any of this.
8. Yes, attempted murder. This is where MPC § 5.01(3) comes into play.
Carlos did commit an act—furnishing the gun—that would have made him
an accomplice if Zelda had committed the offense (or attempted it).
Therefore, Carlos attempted to aid in a murder. Therefore, he is guilty of
attempted murder, although no murder or attempted murder occurred!

PART TEN: CRIMINAL HOMICIDE

[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGES 263–264]
1. False, as stated. The only point I want to register by this question is
this: “homicide” is a neutral term. Many homicides are not criminal (for
example, a killing in self-defense; an execution by the State; the taking of
life in war).
2.
No. The year-and-a-day rule would bar prosecution. Realistically,
today, a coroner could make the type of causal determination involved here,
but not at common law, so the rule was strict—366 days after the homicide,
a prosecution is barred.
3.
First, intent to kill (a human being). Second, intent to commit
grievous bodily injury. Third, depraved heart murder, which is an
extremely reckless killing. Fourth, the felony-murder rule, that is, a killing
(even an unintentional one) that occurs during the commission or attempted
commission of a felony.
4. Trick Question Alert: NEITHER. Remember. Remember. Remember.
There are no degrees of murder at common law. Also, remember that an
intentional killing need not constitute murder at all, if the intentional killing
is justified, excused, or the result of a mitigating factor (the provocation
doctrine).
5. Either first-degree or second-degree, but it ought to be the latter.
As the Outline points out, some courts have effectively negated the element
of premeditation by saying that “no time is too short” to constitute
premeditation. But, if the term is treated seriously, as many courts do, a
second or two would not be long enough to deliberate (to reflect
meaningfully and calmly on the pros and cons of committing the crime), so
this person would be guilty of a wilful killing that is neither premeditated
nor deliberate. So, the murder would be second-degree.
6. The reason is that any person who intends to inflict grievous bodily
injury upon another—not to kill the victim, but to inflict injury that
“imperils life” or “is likely to be attended with dangerous or fatal
consequences”—almost surely is acting in a manner that manifests an
extreme indifference to the value of human life. Anyone who tries to come
close to killing without killing (assuming, as will usually be the case, that
he has no good reason for such conduct) is taking a hugely unjustified,

foreseeable risk of causing death. And, such an actor almost certainly is
aware that he is taking such a risk. So, all of the elements of “depraved
heart” are proven.
7. No. Rather clearly Doctor Alice did not intend to kill or inflict grievous
bodily injury. Yes, she knew that her patient might die, but for the death to
be “knowingly”
304
committed (and thus “intended”), death must be a virtual certainty. To know
something has a fifty percent chance of happening is to know that one is
merely taking a risk. So, the only plausible basis for a murder claim here
would be “depraved heart.” (There is no felony, for felony-murder, so we
can skip right by that.) But, nothing here manifests an extreme indifference
to the value of human life—quite the opposite. Dr. Alice is trying to save a
life. We can see this by looking at the basic elements of depraved heart: Did
Dr. Alice consciously take a substantial, foreseeable, unjustifiable risk of
killing Patient Pat in doing the surgery? No. She was consciously taking a
justifiable risk. Weighing the options—letting Patient Pat die for sure in just
a few days versus taking a 50% chance of providing a heart that would
allow Pat a relatively normal long life—the risk here seems justifiable. So
this isn’t murder (or any crime).
8. True. It is worth remembering, however, that at original common law,
when the felony-murder rule developed, there were only a small number of
felonies (unlike today when most penal codes have tens or even hundreds of
felonies on the books), and all of them were considered serious enough at
common law to carry the death penalty.
9. False. The primary argument for the felony-murder rule is not that it
will deter felonies but that it will motivate felons to commit their felonies in
a less dangerous manner, thereby reducing the number of accidental or
negligent deaths.
10. No. In the abstract we look, simply, at the statute as defined. It does not
matter whether the unlicensed defendant practiced medicine by
“prescribing” aspirin for a headache or sought to diagnose a child for
cancer. (The facts would matter if the jurisdiction applies the “the

circumstances of the case” test.) Looking, then, at the statute, we ask: can
this offense be committed without creating a substantial risk of death? Quite
clearly, this offense can be committed without carrying that high a risk.
First, the defendant might be trained as a physician but simply lack the
license. And, even a charlatan can act reasonably safely, as long as she
practices medicine on people who are not seriously ill.
11. This offense merges. This is basically the statute interpreted by the
court in People v. Smith, 678 P.2d 886 (Cal. 1984). This is essentially a
crime of assault, even though the label is “child abuse.” There is no
independent felonious purpose here.
12. Yes. True, the felony burglary is over. (in fact, it was over as soon as F
broke into the apartment in question). However, the felony-murder rule
extends to the flight after the felony, as long as there is a causal connection
between the felony and the death. Here there is the requisite causal link.
13. No, if the jurisdiction, as most states do, applies the agency theory
of felony-murder; yes if it applies the proximate causation theory. Here,
the shooter is not one of the felons. If a court applies the agency theory of
felony-murder, because the cashier is not the felon’s agent, Frank is not
responsible for the homicide. He cannot derive his guilty from someone
who is trying to stop the felony! But, he did proximately cause the death—
but for being in the liquor store to rob it, this would not have occurred; and
the cashier’s response was a foreseeable response to the robbery—so in a
minority of jurisdictions, the felony-murder rule would apply.
14. Murder. This is obviously an intentional killing, so this is murder
unless the provocation doctrine comes into play. At common law, however,
this does not constitute adequate provocation. This is a case of “words
alone,” which the original common law, and the great majority of non-MPC
states today, do not recognize as adequate. As for the adultery—Jerry must
observe it for the provocation to be considered adequate. (In a jurisdiction
that divides murder into degrees, this ought to be second-degree murder: the
305
killing seems unpremeditated and, in any case, it lacks the characteristics of
a “cold-blooded” first-degree killing).

15. Murder under the common law; manslaughter under the MPC.
(This is based on a real case from California.) As sympathetic as the
mother’s case seems, I would hope you would see the potential obstacles.
First, is the provocation adequate? No, if the words-alone rule applies here.
But, what if a court looks at this as a case of “sexual assault of child +
words”? Now, it is not a case of words alone. The problem with that
analysis, however, is that the sexual assault happened months earlier, so the
mother had a reasonable time to cool off (another element of the defense).
Finally, the premeditated act of smuggling the gun into the court (no easy
matter these days, but easier when the real case occurred) suggests the
mother planned to kill V, laugh or no laugh, when she got the chance in the
courtroom. That means that the causal element of the defense is also absent.
The Model Penal Code analysis would look very different. Here, the
first issue is whether, at the time of the killing, the mother experienced an
“extreme mental or emotional disturbance.” It seems highly likely: she was
extremely angry from the laugh, and doubtlessly she was experiencing other
deep emotions from the sexual abuse of her child. As for the second issue,
in view of these awful facts, it seems highly likely a jury would find that
there was a reasonable explanation or excuse for her emotional turmoil.
16. Hmmm. Let’s see. (Of course, your list and mine may differ, depending
on whether you subdivide some of the differences.) Here is my list: (1) The
MPC divides criminal homicide into three crimes, rather than two. (2) The
critical distinction between common law murder and manslaughter—the
presence or absence of “malice aforethought”—does not apply under the
Code. (3) There are no degrees of murder in the MPC, unlike many nonCode statutes. (4) The MPC does not have the felony-murder rule. (5) The
MPC does not recognize unlawful-act manslaughter. (6) The MPC treats
inadvertent risk-taking homicides as “negligent homicide,” whereas the
common law treats such homicides as involuntary manslaughter. (7) The
EMED provision of the MPC differs considerably from the common law
provocation doctrine in that: (a) the common law forms of adequate
provocation are rejected; (b) the “words alone” rule is abolished; (c) the
“reasonable cooling off” rule is abolished; (d) the issue is simply whether
there is a reasonable explanation or excuse for the actor’s EMED; and (e)

the MPC invites somewhat more subjectivization of the “reasonable
person” test.

PART ELEVEN: RAPE
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGE 275]
1.
False. At common law, the crime of rape only prohibited vaginal
intercourse. More modern statutes have sometimes expanded the definition
to include oral (and anal) intercourse.
2. False. This statement would be true if the male did not use force to
compel intercourse, or used only “moderate” force (or moderate threatened
force). But, a female did not have to resist a male’s use (or threatened use)
of force likely to cause death or serious bodily injury.
3. a. Rape is a general-intent crime at common law. Therefore, the general
rule is that a reasonable mistake of fact is a defense, but an unreasonable
one is not a defense.
306
4. At common law, no sexual offense. Under Model Penal Code, rape
is a long shot. It is more likely gross sexual imposition or nothing. With
the common law: Predator did not use physical force, or even threat of
physical force, to secure Sally’s consent to intercourse. Nor was fraud
involved. Rather, he threatened her with unlawful loss of liberty. This does
not constitute forcible rape at common law. Predator may be guilty of
various non-sexual offenses (for example, battery), but not a sexual offense,
which is what the question asked. (Some modern statutes today would treat
this as sexual assault, and some courts might expend the definition of
“force” to include these facts, but the common law would not.)
As for the MPC, looking first at the rape statute, Predator did not
compel the intercourse by use of any force. The rape provision also covers
threats of “imminent death, serious bodily injury, extreme pain or
kidnapping.” He did not threaten imminent death, imminent serious bodily
injury, or imminent extreme pain. A closer issue is whether he threatened
her with kidnapping. You have not looked at that statute, but here is what
one learns if one looks at it. (Study lesson: don’t assume you know what

“kidnapping” is—look at the specific statute! Sometimes you cannot
determine if Crime 1 [here, rape] has been committed without deciding
whether Crime 2 [here, kidnapping] has occurred.) Kidnapping (§ 212.1) is
limited to confining another “for a substantial period in a place of
isolation”—does overnight in a jail with other prisoners qualify?—for any
of the following reasons: in order to hold her for ransom (nope), facilitate
commission of some other felony (nope), interfere with the performance of
a governmental function (nope), or inflict bodily injury or to terrorize the
victim (hmmm, maybe). My own sense is that Predator is guilty of false
imprisonment (§ 212.3), which is defined as “knowingly restrain[ing]
another unlawfully so as to interfere substantially with his liberty.” If I am
right in this regard, a rape charge won’t work. What, then, about gross
sexual imposition? The issue—one for the jury—is whether his threat
“would prevent resistance by a woman of ordinary resolution.” By the way,
I would argue that his offer not to give her a ticket if she had intercourse
with him is just that—an offer, not a threat—and should drop out of the
picture. The issue is not what he will do for her if she accedes, but what he
will do to her if she refuses.

PART TWELVE: THEFT
[ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS ON PAGE 291]
1. False. Most obviously, this statement is false because it suggests that
larceny law protects ownership rights, but it actually protects a person’s
possessory interest in property, even at the expense of the owner. A second,
far more subtle, point: the intention of a larcenous wrongdoer is to
permanently deprive the original possessor of the property; it is not
necessary that the wrongdoer intend to keep the property himself. If a thief
takes your property intending to destroy it or bury it underground never to
be seen again, he intends to permanently deprive you of your property. He
does not intend to keep the property, but, he is still guilty of larceny.
2. Larceny (by trick). The first matter to ask yourself is whether Jane
intended to transfer title to the ring or mere possession of it. This is a good
place to start because the answer to this question will either put you on the
false pretenses side of the line (in which case you can analyze that offense
to see if Gina is guilty), or the larceny/embezzlement side (in which case

you can drop the false pretenses analysis). The answer, at first blush, seems
to be title: after all, Jane believed that Gina was the owner of the ring. But,
that is exactly the point: Jane did not intend to transfer title, as
307
she knew that she did not have the title to transfer. So, out goes false
pretenses! So, we must now decide if it is larceny or embezzlement. What
we know from the facts is that Jane took possession of the ring when she
picked it up. Gina then took possession from Jane when Jane gave it to her.
That possessory taking was trespassory because of fraud, so it is larceny by
trick, and not embezzlement, by Gina.
3. Embezzlement. This is not false pretenses: Client did not transfer title
to the money when he handed it over. Notice from the facts that he did not
intend to part with the money until a condition was satisfied, so when the
money changed hands from Client to Lawyer, all that Lawyer received was
possession. Since Lawyer intended at the time of taking possession to live
up to the deal, that taking was lawful, so that eliminates larceny. This seems
to be embezzlement: lawful possession; entrustment by Client to Lawyer;
later conversion of the money.
4. None of the above. Of course, title did not transfer, so false pretenses
is out. The key here, however, is that Charles took real property—the
begonias are part of the land. Larceny and embezzlement involve the taking
(and in the case of embezzlement, conversion) of personal property. So,
none of these crimes are implicated.
5. Petty pizza larceny! Jason, as an employee, received mere custody, not
possession, of the pizza from the employer. Once he ate the slice, he took
trespassory possession of that piece. (It is pretty obvious he intended to
deprive Sam of that slice on a permanent basis!) I guess the eating is a
“carrying away” act, although I must admit I have not quite seen a case like
this, and if I were Jason’s lawyer, I would argue that weird point. (And I
would wonder why the prosecutor brought criminal charges, and even more
wonder why Jason paid big bucks for me to represent him on this really
petty larceny misdemeanor case!)

309

Appendix B

Sample Essay Questions
[Before you answer these sample essays, I urge you strongly to read (or reread) my exam-taking advice found in the Perspective section at the start of
this Outline.]
ESSAY ONE (One hour)
On January 15, Donald borrowed $100 from a friend in order to
purchase a small quantity of cocaine for personal use. He ingested some of
the cocaine and placed the remainder of the cocaine in his dresser drawer.
(His continued possession of this small quantity of cocaine constituted a
felony.)
On January 30, an exceedingly cold day, Donald lit up a torch made up
of rolled newspapers in order to thaw frozen water pipes beneath his
kitchen floor. He feared that if he did not thaw the pipes, they would burst,
a common problem with frozen pipes. Although the newspapers quickly
stopped burning vigorously, a very small amount of the newspapers
smoldered under the kitchen floor. Donald was unaware of this. Shortly
thereafter, Donald’s friend called and demanded repayment of the $100.
Donald left the house to go to repay the debt. Fifteen minutes later, during
Donald’s absence, the house suddenly and quickly became engulfed in
flames and smoke. His two-year-old son, left alone sleeping, became
trapped in the house and died of smoke inhalation. Donald returned home
two hours later.
It never occurred to Donald (who was emotionally devastated by the
loss of his beloved son) that a house fire might start from his efforts to thaw
the pipes.
Question

These events occurred in a state with the following criminal homicide
statute:
§ 750.316 First-degree murder
A person who commits any of the following is guilty of first-degree
murder and shall be punished by imprisonment for life:
(a) Murder perpetrated by means of poison, lying in wait, or any other
willful, deliberate, and premeditated killing.
(b) Murder committed in the perpetration, or attempt to perpetrate,
arson, criminal sexual conduct, robbery, breaking and entering of a
dwelling, home invasion in the first or second degree, larceny of any
kind, extortion, or kidnapping.
§ 750.317 Second-degree murder
All other kinds of murder shall be murder of the second degree, and
shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for life, or any
terms of years, in the discretion of the court trying the same.
310
§ 750.321 Manslaughter
Any person who shall commit the crime of manslaughter shall be guilty
of a felony punishable by imprisonment in the state prison, not more
than 15 years or by fine of not more than 7,500 dollars, or both, at the
discretion of the court.
Discuss Donald’s criminal responsibility, if any, for the death of his son
pursuant to this homicide statute. You may assume that the state otherwise
applies common law doctrine. You may also assume that no affirmative
defenses apply to these facts.
ESSAY TWO (One hour)
Albert was a 24-year-old male, 6′2″ tall, muscular, and weighed 220
pounds. Albert earned money on the street by selling drugs. Albert often
had fist fights in bars and on the streets. A false rumor on the street was that
he had once cut a woman with a knife when she refused to have sex with
him in exchange for drugs.

Albert was attracted to Francesca, a 19-year-old, 5′0″, 105-pound clerk
in a liquor store in the area in which Albert sold drugs. In the past,
Francesca had rebuffed Albert’s efforts to spend time together. However,
Francesca was addicted to cocaine, which she purchased from Albert on
occasion. One day, when Francesca sought to buy more cocaine from
Albert, he said, “I will give it to you free, if you will sleep with me.”
Francesca refused and offered him cash for the drugs. Albert angrily said,
“You either have sex with me or you are out of luck. No sex, no drugs now
or ever.” The addicted Francesca, desperate, and fearful of Albert because
of the false rumor that he had used violence with another female drug
addict, agreed to have intercourse with him. They had intercourse at
Albert’s apartment later that night.
The next day, Louis, Francesca’s father, learned what happened.
Outraged, Louis obtained a knife and went looking for Albert. When he
discovered Albert on the street, he pulled the knife on him, said, “You are
going to pay for what you did to my daughter.” Albert laughed, pulled out a
gun, and intentionally killed Louis.
Question
Discuss Albert’s criminal responsibility, if any, for the intercourse with
Francesca and for the death of Louis. Apply the Model Penal Code. For
your information, these are the pertinent sexual offense and criminal
homicide statutes to use:
Section 213.1.

Rape and Related Offenses

(1) Rape. A male who has sexual intercourse with a female not his wife
is guilty of rape if:
(a) he compels her to submit by force or by threat of imminent
death, serious bodily injury, extreme pain or kidnapping, to be
inflicted on anyone; or
(b) he has substantially impaired her power to appraise or control
her conduct by administering or employing without her knowledge
drugs, intoxicants or other means for the purpose of preventing
resistance; or
(c) the female is unconscious; or

(d) the female is less than 10 years old.
(2) Gross Sexual Imposition. A male who has sexual intercourse with a
female not his wife commits a felony of the third degree if:
311
(a) he compels her to submit by any threat that would prevent
resistance by a woman of ordinary resolution; or
(b) he knows that she suffers from a mental disease or defect which
renders her incapable of appraising the nature of her conduct; or
(c) he knows that she is unaware that a sexual act is being
committed upon her or that she submits because she mistakenly
supposes that he is her husband.
Section 210.2.

Murder

(1) Except as provided in Section 210.3(1)(b), criminal homicide
constitutes murder when:
(a) it is committed purposely or knowingly; or
(b) it is committed recklessly under circumstances manifesting
extreme indifference to the value of human life. Such recklessness
and indifference are presumed if the actor is engaged or is an
accomplice in the commission of, or an attempt to commit, or flight
after committing or attempting to commit robbery, rape or deviate
sexual intercourse by force or threat of force, arson, burglary,
kidnapping or felonious escape.
Section 210.3.

Manslaughter

(1) Criminal homicide constitutes manslaughter when:
(a) it is committed recklessly; or
(b) a homicide which would otherwise be murder is committed
under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance for
which there is reasonable explanation or excuse. The
reasonableness of such explanation or excuse shall be determined
from the viewpoint of a person in the actor’s situation under the
circumstances as he believes them to be.

Section 210.4.

Negligent Homicide

(1) Criminal homicide constitutes negligent homicide when it is
committed negligently.

313

Appendix C

Answers to Essay Questions
ESSAY ONE INITIAL COMMENTS
1. Notice that you are given a statute here, perhaps one you have never
seen before. Professors often do this on an examination. Why? Because the
professor wants you to demonstrate that you can use and adequately
interpret a statute, an extremely important legal skill. And, even if the
statute is new to you, it is likely to look like some statute you have seen in
class (maybe a variation on the Model Penal Code), or the statute will use a
lot of common law terms, so you will end up bringing common law analysis
into the statutory discussion.
The statute here comes verbatim (with a few deletions to save time) from
the Michigan Penal Code. Notice that “murder” is not defined in the statute:
you are simply told what constitute first-degree and second-degree murder.
Second-degree murder, it says, is “all other kinds of murder” (meaning that
everything that is not first-degree murder is second-degree). But, that does
not tell us what “murder” is. So how do you resolve this? The rule you will
have learned by the end of the semester is: when a statute uses common law
terminology without defining the terms, you ordinarily use common law
definitions. That is precisely why you learned the common law in class.
So, on this examination (as a lawyer in Michigan would do), you apply the
common law definition of murder, and then apply the statute to determine
whether the murder is first-degree or second-degree. Likewise, notice that
the manslaughter provision of the Michigan Penal Code provides the
punishment for manslaughter, but doesn’t even define the crime. So, again,
you apply the common law!
2. Notice that you are told to “assume that no affirmative defenses apply
to these facts.” So, of course, you should not spend even one minute
discussing affirmative defenses. This points up my advice in the Perspective

section about reading the call of the examination question with great care,
so you don’t waste valuable and limited time on non-issues.
3. Some professors (including me) want students to discuss each element
of a crime—voluntary act/omission; social harm; mens rea; actual cause;
and proximate cause—even if some of these issues can be handled briefly.
Other professors will tell you, “just talk about the real issues.” These
professors will argue that an issue that only requires a sentence or two is not
a “real” issue. To the extent that you can, ask your professor in advance
which approach he or she prefers.
4. What follows is not intended as a model answer. I am simply going to
lead you through the basics of the question, giving you advice as I go along.
314
STATE VERSUS DONALD (CRIMINAL HOMICIDE)
[Remember the advice I gave in Perspectives about examination taking.
When a question calls for you to discuss criminal homicide, I urge you to
“start at the top”—murder—and then work your way down to
manslaughter, if relevant. Also, I suggested that this is the one place where
it makes sense to discuss both crimes—murder and manslaughter—together
under the title “Criminal Homicide.” The only difference between the two
crimes comes when you discuss mens rea. That is where 90% of your
answer here will likely come.]
You should write something like this at the start of the exam:
Because this statute does not define murder, the common law definition
applies. Murder is the “killing of a human being by another human being
with malice aforethought.” Manslaughter is the “unlawful killing of a
human being without malice aforethought.” Further clarification will be set
out below, as needed. [Notice: this introduction shows your professor that
you know the definitions of murder and manslaughter, and that the common
law definitions apply here.]
1. VOLUNTARY ACT/OMISSION
[I would suggest you clearly identify the element you are discussing, as I
have done immediately above. This helps you remember what you are

discussing (and, thus, if you begin to stray into improper discussion, you
have a self-reminder) and, as importantly, this helps your professor follow
your answer (and reasoning).]
As first glance, there is nothing difficult here. After all, a voluntary act is a
willed muscular contraction, and Donald did this when he lit the
newspapers to thaw the frozen pipes. However, there is more to this matter
than initially meets the eye, and you will see this from later discussion (and
if you think out your answer before starting to write, as I recommend in the
Perspective, you will be aware of this already, and can avoid problems).
After all, what is the “conduct” that would most bother the prosecutor (or
us) about Donald’s behavior? Is it the act of lighting the torch under the
house (a voluntary act), or is it that he left his child in the house alone? Of
course, we can focus on both, but notice: if you focus on the act of lighting
the newspapers, Donald’s conduct is, at worst, negligent (the facts say the
danger of a house fire never occurred to him, so recklessness will be
eliminated), and perhaps it is not even that. After all, accidents do happen.
Isn’t the main criticism we have (and, thus, the prosecutor would focus
upon) that Donald left his two-year-old child unattended for two hours,
which is dangerous in any case!
Therefore, I think the latter is the real basis for the prosecution. If so, I
would see this as a case involving an omission, and not a voluntary act:
Donald failed to take proper care of his son by leaving his two-year-old in
the house. As a father, he has a duty to act in the best welfare of his
children, which duty he breached by leaving him home alone. So this is the
relevant place to start!
2.

SOCIAL HARM

This is straight-forward: the social harm of criminal homicide is the death
of another human being. Here we have a death of the child. No more needs
to be said.
3.

MENS REA
A.

Murder

This state does not define murder, so the common law definition will be
used. Murder requires proof of malice aforethought. A person acts with

malice aforethought if he possesses any one of four states of mind: (1)
intent to kill; (2) intent to commit grievous
315
bodily harm; (3) depraved heart; or (4) intent to commit a felony, in which a
death occurs. [Notice, I have defined the key term (malice) here—I have
defined it fully, to show the professor I know the definition. Defining legal
terms on an exam is critical.] Turning to these four categories, can the
prosecutor prove any one of them beyond a reasonable doubt?
Intent to kill. There are no absolutely facts to support a claim that Donald
intended to kill his son. The facts suggest a terrible tragedy; the facts also
tell us that Donald was devastated by the loss of his child, whom he loved
deeply. So, you would note these facts and quickly demonstrate that intent
to kill is missing.
Intent to commit grievous bodily harm. Again, this can be ruled out on the
same basis as intent-to-kill.
Depraved heart. Aha, this is a viable issue. Essentially, “depraved heart” is
the common law’s way of talking about extreme recklessness, that is,
manifesting an extreme indifference to the value of human life. At common
law, as with the MPC, basically we ask whether the actor consciously took
a substantial and unjustifiable risk of causing the death of others. [This is
not the only way to define “depraved heart” at common law—unfortunately
there is no single accepted definition. But, this is probably the best one,
unless your professor provides a different one.] There is a lot one can do
here. But, notice now what I mentioned earlier: was he reckless when he
tried to thaw his frozen pipes in the manner in which he did? How depraved
was this? This won’t work because the facts state explicitly that it never
occurred to Donald that his actions would start a fire. So, since recklessness
requires a conscious awareness of a risk, this risk-taking cannot constitute
depraved heart. (And, frankly, once we put aside the 20:20 vision of
hindsight, I suspect many people would not have foreseen the fire.)
But, wait! We have a second theory to the case: that he left his two-year old
alone for two hours! This surely was risky. As a father, don’t you think he
must have been aware that doing this created some risks, even if a fire was

not in his mind: a dire medical emergency, a burglary in which his son
might be harmed or kidnapped, a fire caused in some other manner, etc.?
Also, we have to consider his reason for leaving his child alone: he wasn’t
leaving, for example, to go next door to help a neighbor who was having a
heart attack. He was going to pay back a friend for his drugs. This is where
the depraved heart analysis, if it will work at all, almost certainly must
focus. This is where your discussion must go. Of course, your professor will
not care much, if at all, how you resolve the issue, as long as you provide
full analysis. Ideally, you would break down your analysis into: (a)
magnitude of the foreseeable risk; (b) likelihood of the foreseeable risk
occurring; (c) reason for taking the risk; and (d) Donald’s awareness of the
risk of leaving his infant home alone. Ultimately, I think a jury might—not
necessarily would—find depraved heart murder. (As a loving father, that
tends to undercut the “depraved heart” argument.)
If we go with this, this constitutes second-degree murder. How do we
know this? Because we know that depraved heart killing is murder; and,
according to the statute, first-degree murder is limited to a killing
committed by poison (not here), lying in wait (not here), or “any other
willful, deliberate, and premeditated killing” (not here). It is also firstdegree murder if the killing occurs during the commission of one of the
enumerated felonies. That means that a depraved-heart killing is not firstdegree murder, but it is murder (if we decide that this was a depraved heart
killing), so it second-degree murder (“all other kinds of murder shall be
murder of the second degree”).
316
Felony-murder. Did Donald commit any of the felonies listed in the firstdegree murder statute. Is this arson? No. Arson is the malicious destruction
of another person’s dwelling. This is a non-starter.
We are told, however, Donald committed the felony of cocaine possession.
As this is a felony, and at common law the felony-murder rule applies to
any felony, this would seem to make Donald guilty of second-degree
murder under the felony-murder rule, even if the depraved-heart theory
fails! But, a few matters must be noted here. Can we say that the killing
here occurred “in the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate” the felony? At

first blush, the answer would seem to be no. But, notice: the crime is not the
purchase of the cocaine, which occurred 15 days earlier, but possession.
Possession is a continuing act: it continues from the moment that Donald
obtained the cocaine until the moment when all of the cocaine had been
disposed of. Therefore, in a purely technical sense, any death that occurs
during that period of time (lasting 15+ days already) is a death that
occurred during the commission of the offense.
But, that seems crazy, doesn’t it? Here is a place where you can, and I
believe should, focus on the potential unfairness of the felony-murder rule,
and to see whether a defense attorney can avoid its use. One very possible
legal argument is to suggest that there is no causal connection between the
wrongdoing of the felony—possession of cocaine—and the death. As noted
in the Outline, this involves the so-called “res gestae” potential limitation of
the felony-murder rule. After all, we are not dealing here with, for example,
someone who died using cocaine. We are not even dealing with the death of
the child because, say, Donald was under the influence of cocaine and,
therefore, failed to notice the fire. The prosecutor would say that, but for the
purchase of the drugs, Donald would not have been out of the house paying
the debt and, therefore, unable to save his son. True. But, that argument
should fail because the crime in question is not the purchase of the drugs,
but possession. In this case, “possession” is nothing more than the passive
“act” of having cocaine in the house. How is there any causal link between
that and the deaths? I think the defense has a strong argument here.
Also, a student might raise the issue of whether the jurisdiction in question
limits the felony-murder rule to inherently dangerous felonies. If so,
analysis of that limitation on the felony-murder rule merits discussion. This
analysis will likely take this felony outside the felony-murder rule.
So, to conclude: This clearly is not first-degree murder. It arguably
constitutes second-degree murder if a jury finds depraved heart extreme
recklessness. There are arguments to support this, but it is far from a sure
thing. A second way to find second-degree is through the felony-murder
rule, but there are pretty good arguments for not using that doctrine here, as
we have seen. But, it is a possibility. Your professor is not likely to care too
much how you come out, as long as you raise the issues mentioned here.

B. Manslaughter
Why discuss manslaughter when you have found two potential bases for
finding murder? The reason is that it is not a sure-thing that a jury will
convict of murder. Particularly if Donald comes across to the jury, either in
testimony or just in body language, as a grieving father, the jury might
choose not to find depraved heart, etc. On the other hand, they may be so
angry that a father would leave his two-year-old son unattended, especially
to pay off a drug debt, that they will convict of murder. But, a good lawyer
(and good law student) will cover all of the reasonable possibilities, and one
possibility is that murder won’t work.
317
The statute provides no definition of manslaughter, so we must use the
common law. The common law, as we learned, consists of voluntary
manslaughter (heat of passion) and involuntary manslaughter (criminal
negligence, and unlawful-act doctrine). This clearly cannot be voluntary
manslaughter, but it might be (involuntary) manslaughter. Indeed, if Donald
did not act recklessly (murder), he can very likely be convicted of
manslaughter. The case for criminal negligence seems strong (remember:
we are focusing on his omission of leaving his son unattended, not
negligence for causing the fire), and you would show why, bringing to bear
much of the discussion you already provided in your depraved heart
discussion.
4. ACTUAL CAUSATION
Your brief analysis here should coincide with your discussion of “voluntary
act/omission” above. Don’t switch in midstream! Notice: it is true that, but
for Donald’s voluntary act of starting the fire to thaw the water pipes the
lethal blaze would not have occurred, and thus his son would not have died.
But, as we have seen, the prosecutor is apt to be arguing omission. So, but
for this omission of leaving his child unattended for two hours, would the
child have died? We can’t know the answer for sure. If Donald had been
home, as he should have been, perhaps he would not have been able to save
his child, given that the fire “suddenly and quickly” engulfed the house.

But, this is the question that must be considered, at least if the prosecutor
wants to get a depraved heart conviction.
5.

PROXIMATE CAUSATION

Technically, the fire itself is not an intervening event if we focus on
Donald’s omission. The facts state that the fire was unseen, but it was there
before his omission of leaving his son in the house alone. Thus, there is no
proximate causation issue—there is a direct link from Donald’s omission to
the death.
So, putting aside any defenses that might have existed, but which you were
instructed to ignore, Donald is likely guilty either of second-degree murder
or manslaughter.
ESSAY TWO INITIAL COMMENTS
Most casebooks provide the MPC in an Appendix. A professor who asks
you to answer an examination question based on the Model Penal Code will
either allow you to bring your casebook to class so you can use the
Appendix or will otherwise provide you with the pertinent provisions
(unlike here, where I only gave you the definitions of the relevant crimes).
You will never be expected to memorize the Code, although a professor
who has emphasized the MPC during the semester will certainly expect you
to come to the exam sufficiently familiar with the Code to use it with
reasonable facility.
STATE VERSUS ALBERT (RAPE)
1. VOLUNTARY ACT
This is not a major issue. Your professor might say skip it. If it counts at all,
it is worth only a few moments of your time. If you had the MPC in front of
you, you would note that § 2.01 provides that a person is not guilty of any
offense in the absence of a voluntary act (or an omission, where that is
relevant). Here, there is nothing to suggest that the intercourse was other
than voluntary.
318
2.

SOCIAL HARM

Here is where you take the rape statute and apply the actus reus elements.
Section 213.1(1) defines rape. Obviously, we have a male (Albert) who had
sexual intercourse with a female not his wife (Francesca). The heart of the
issue is subsection (1)(a): did he compel her to submit by force or by threat
of imminent death, serious bodily injury, extreme pain, or kidnapping?
Compel. As discussed in the Outline, “compel” is the other side of the coin
of “nonconsent,” and is intended to focus our attention on what the male
did, not what the female did or did not do (resist). One can certainly argue
that Francesca did not want to have intercourse with him: she had
previously rebuffed him; she sought to pay for her drugs; she feared Albert
based on the false rumor. Of course, she was also deeply addicted. Although
all of this may show that her consent here was less than free, the law
requires that the “compulsion” be the result of something that the defendant
did (not just her addicted condition). That leads us to the remainder of the
actus reus.
Compel … by force or by threat of imminent death, serious bodily injury,
extreme pain, or kidnapping. There is no evidence whatsoever of the use of
“force” to obtain intercourse. So, we turn to the threat issue. Here, too, we
have a serious problem: he did not threaten imminent death. He did not
threaten imminent serious bodily injury. He did not threaten imminent
kidnapping. The only threat here was: “no sex, no drugs ever.” Can we
make a case for arguing that he was threatening “extreme pain”? I would
hope you would raise this (a prosecutor might try), but I think it loses. First,
the imminency aspect is missing. Second, he is not threatening to impose
extreme pain on her, i.e., to torture her; rather, he is threatening not to
provide her with illegal drugs that might reduce the extreme pain she is
feeling from her own addicted condition! So, as I see it, the actus reus of
rape, as defined here, is missing.
The other approach is to say the following: she was compelled by an
implicit—unstated—threat, perhaps on the ground that he would cut her
with a knife if she refused him, as Francesca believed had happened before
to another woman who refused him sex (the false rumor). Or, is there an
implied threat of violence on his part simply from his fist fights on streets
and in bars? One problem: Does the Code apply to an implicit threat?
Perhaps, but notice how unfair that is—we would be prosecuting the

defendant on the basis of something he didn’t do (he didn’t use a knife on
another woman). It would be one thing if she had said to him, “If I say no,
will you hurt me like you did that other woman?” That would put him on
notice of her belief in the false rumor. If he just smiled and said nothing in
response to her question, we would have an implied threat. But, we have
nothing here. Nor does it seem proper to find an implied threat from the fact
that he gets into unrelated fights on the street and bars.
Now, of course, you could try to bring this under one of the other
subsections of (1). But look at them. None of them apply here. (He did not,
for example, administer drugs to her to prevent her resistance; it was the
opposite—he failed to administer drugs, etc.)
3.

MENS REA

Frankly, I think the case for rape has been pretty solidly ruled out above.
You might stop there and move on to the next crime. But, when I gave this
as an exam question, about 25% of my students thought that the actus reus
was proven or provable. Therefore, if you found the social harm above, or if
you think there is some plausible argument there, you should assume
arguendo the actus reus, and move on to the mens rea. Don’t burn bridges
on an exam unless you are very, very sure the bridge can be burned safely
to you!
319
On mens rea, the statute does not identify any mens rea. But, you should
know by the end of the semester from learning the MPC that the Code
generally requires proof of a mens rea as to each material element of an
offense. Also, when no mens rea is listed, we are supposed to incorporate
“purposely, knowingly, or recklessly” into the statute. (Go back to MPC §
2.02 in this regard.) Therefore, he is not guilty unless he purposely,
knowingly, or at least recklessly compelled Francesca by force or threat
(etc.). If you found a threat of “imminent extreme pain” (I think unlikely, as
explained above), it seems clear he did compel her purposely in that matter.
If you found an implied threat above (less unlikely still), the issue would be
whether he purposely, knowingly, or recklessly compelled her by the
implied threat, which would mean the prosecutor would have to prove

beyond a reasonable that Albert was consciously aware of the risk that she
feared him, either due to the rumor (was he aware of the rumor?) or his
violent character.
4.

CAUSATION

No serious issue.
So, did you find rape? I would say no, but some might say yes. There is a
backup:
STATE VERSUS ALBERT (GROSS SEXUAL IMPOSITION)
In a case like this, where you are discussing a second crime based on
precisely the same facts, there is really no reason to repeat what you just
said about issues such as “voluntary act” or “causation.” Get right to the
heart of the question. Here, we are changing crimes so we are changing the
discussion of the social harm/actus reus.
1.

SOCIAL HARM

This offense can be proved if Albert compelled Francesca “by any threat
that would prevent resistance by a woman of ordinary resolution.” Aha!
There was a real threat here—perhaps not one that fits rape, but a threat: no
drugs ever if you do not have sexual intercourse. That creates a jury issue of
whether a woman of ordinary resolution would be compelled to have sexual
intercourse by this treat. Your answer should do more than spot this issue or
reach some bald conclusion—you should discuss this, and the arguments
that might be made, which could include policy issues about what we have
(or don’t have) a right to expect of a “woman of ordinary resolution.”
Notice, by the way, the extra problem: is the standard what a drug addicted
woman would do? Is that a woman of ordinary resolution? I doubt it. It
merits discussion.
2.

MENS REA

There seems to be no problem here. Albert purposely used the threat in
order to compel her to have intercourse.
STATE VERSUS ALBERT (CRIMINAL HOMICIDE)
Your discussion here should proceed through the requisite elements. But, it
should be very easy to prove the prima facie case.

There is a voluntary act here—firing the gun.
There is the social harm: Louis’s death.
320
As for mens rea, this is also clear: The facts state Albert killed Louis
intentionally, which is equivalent to “purposely” or “knowingly” killing
Louis, and that is murder under the MPC.
Nor is there any basis to reduce the offense to manslaughter—Albert was
not experiencing an extreme mental or emotional disturbance at the time of
the crime. Louis was, but he is not the defendant! So mens rea for murder is
proven; and there are no serious causal issues here.
So, you can move rather quickly to the defenses, and the obvious defense
issue here is self-protection (§ 3.04). On a real exam you would have that
section in front of you. You would want to handle this just like you do
everything else—go through each relevant element of the defense, as set out
in the MPC, and discuss them.
The Code permits deadly force when the actor believes that force is
immediately necessary on the present occasion to protect himself against
death or serious bodily harm (among other grounds). § 3.04(1) and (2)(b).
Albert should be able to make this argument given Louis’s knife threat.
Other issues: Can we make Albert the aggressor, by the fact that he
compelled Francesca into intercourse? No, as the Code only treats one as an
aggressor if “the actor, with the purpose of causing death or serious bodily
harm, provoked the use of force against himself in the same encounter.” §
3.04(2)(b)(i). Albert may have provoked Louis in some sense, but it was not
with the purpose of causing death or serious bodily harm to Louis, nor was
it “in the same encounter.”
The Code also requires retreat if the actor “can avoid the necessity of such
force with complete safety by retreating … ” § 3.04(2)(b)(ii). This might
work for the prosecution. This altercation happened on the street, so the
castle exception does not apply. Louis had a knife, not a gun, so retreat is
more realistic. Why couldn’t Albert have retreated—run away from Louis?
Louis is Francesca’s father, presumably a lot older than 24-year-old Albert,

so it seems plausible to think that Louis could not have outrun Albert. If
retreat works, then the self-protection defense is lost, and a murder
conviction would stand! But, note that this provision only applies if Albert
knows—actually knows, not simply should have known—that he can
retreat in complete safety. We would need to know more facts to decide this
issue. It is enough for you to make these points, and leave it there.

321

Appendix D

Glossary
A
Accessory before the fact. At common law, she is a person who intentionally assists in the
commission of an offense, but who is not actually or constructively present during its commission.
Actus reus. The physical, or external, component of a crime.
Adequate provocation. In voluntary manslaughter cases, it is provocation that might render an
ordinary person, of average disposition, liable to act rashly, or without due deliberation or reflection,
and from passion, rather than judgment.
Aggressor. In self-defense context, it is a person who commits an unlawful act reasonably calculated
to produce an affray foreboding injurious or fatal consequences.
Atrocious felony. A forcible felony, i.e., a felony that involves the use or threatened use of force or
carries a substantial risk of physical harm to another.
Attendant circumstance. A fact in existence at the time of the conduct and/or result that constitutes
the social harm, of an offense, and which is required to be proven in the definition of the offense.

B
Bench trial. A trial in which a judge, rather than a jury, is the factfinder and renders a verdict.
Burden of persuasion. The obligation of the prosecutor or the defendant, as the case may be, to
persuade the factfinder regarding a particular legal issue.
Burden of production. The obligation of the prosecutor or the defendant, as the case may be, to
introduce evidence on a given legal issue, so that the issue may be properly be considered by the
factfinder.

C
Common law. Judge-made law.
Conspiracy. In general, an agreement between two or more persons to commit a crime or unlawful
act. A conspiracy is an inchoate crime, and also a theory of complicity (a basis for holding a person
accountable for the actions of another).
Crime. Conduct that, if shown to have occurred, deserves to incur a formal and solemn
pronouncement of the moral condemnation of the community.
Criminal homicide. A homicide committed without justification or excuse.

D

Deadly force. Force likely to cause, or intended to cause, death or serious bodily harm.
Direct cause. An actual cause of resulting harm in which no other actual cause occurs to intervene
between it and the resulting social harm.

322
E
Excuse defense. An excuse defense is one that indicates that, although the actor committed the
elements of the offense, and although his actions were unjustified—wrongful—the law does not
blame him for his wrongful conduct.

F
Felony-murder rule. The rule that provides that a person is guilty of murder if she kills another
person, even accidentally, during the commission or attempted commission of a felony.

G
General-intent offense. Any offense that requires proof of a culpable mental state, but which does
not contain a specific intent, is a “general intent” offense.
Grievous bodily injury. Injury that imperils life, is likely to be attended with dangerous or fatal
consequences, or that gives rise to the apprehension of danger to life, health, or limb.

H
Homicide. The killing of a human being by another human being. A homicide may be criminal or
lawful.
Human being. A “human being” is a living person; at common law, this status begins when a fetus is
born alive; it ends either when the individual experiences an irreversible cessation of breathing and
heartbeat (the common law definition), or suffers from “brain death syndrome,” which occurs when
the whole brain permanently loses the capacity to function.

I
Imminent. In self-defense context, threatened force is imminent when it will occur immediately, at
the present moment, almost instantly.
Inchoate. Incomplete or unsuccessful. The crimes of attempt, solicitation and conspiracy are
example of inchoate criminal conduct.
Intentional. As to a result, a person acts intentionally if it is the individual’s conscious object to
cause the result or if the person knows that the harm is virtually certain to occur.
Intervening cause. An actual cause of social harm that arises after another person’s causal
contribution to the result.
Intoxication. A disturbance of an actor’s mental or physical capacities resulting from the ingestion
of a foreign substance, most notably alcohol or drugs (including lawfully prescribed medication).

J

Jury nullification. When a jury decides that the prosecution has proven its case beyond a reasonable
doubt, but for reasons of conscience disregards the facts and/or the law and acquits the defendant.
Justification defense. A defense that indicates society believes that the defendant’s conduct was
morally good, socially desirable, or (at least) not wrongful.

K
Knowingly. As to an attendant circumstance, one knows a fact if the person is aware of the fact,
correctly believes it exists, or suspects that it exists and purposely avoids confirming the suspicion.

323
L
Legality. A basic principle of American law that no crime or punishment should be imposed in the
absence of pre-existent law defining and setting the punishment for such conduct.

M
Malice. Generally, one acts with malice if she intentionally or recklessly causes the social harm of an
offense. There is a special definition in the context of murder.
Malice aforethought. At common law, in murder prosecutions, a person acts with “malice” if she
unjustifiably, inexcusably, and in the absence of any mitigating circumstance, kills a person with any
one of four mental states: (a) the intention to kill a human being; (b) the intention to inflict grievous
bodily injury on another; (c) an extremely reckless disregard for the value of human life (often called
“depraved heart” at common law); or (d) the intention to commit a felony during the commission or
attempted commission of which a death accidentally occurs (the “felony-murder rule”).
Malum in se conduct. Conduct that is (morally) wrongful in itself, i.e., inherently immoral.
Malum prohibitum conduct. Conduct that is wrongful only because it is prohibited by law.
Manslaughter. Common law manslaughter is an unlawful killing of a human being by another
human being without malice aforethought.
Mens rea. The mental, or internal, component of a crime.
Model Penal Code. A penal code drafted by the American Law Institute in 1962, and intended to
serve as a model for state legislative penal code reform.
Murder. At common law, a killing of a human being by another human being with malice
aforethought.

N
Negligence. When a person should know that he is taking a substantial and unjustifiable risk of
causing harm.

O
Omission. A failure to act where there is a legal duty to act.

P

Principal in the first degree. At common law, he is the person who, with the requisite mens rea,
personally commits the offense or who uses an innocent human instrumentality to commit it.
Principal in the second degree. At common law, she is the person who intentionally assists the
principal in the first degree to commit an offense, and who is actually or constructively present
during its commission.

R
Rape. In Blackstone’s time, it was “carnal knowledge of a woman forcibly and against her will.”
Statutes typically define forcible rape as sexual intercourse by a male, with a female not his wife, by
means of force or threat of force, against the will, and without her consent.
Recklessness. Modern view: when a person consciously takes a substantial and unjustifiable risk of
causing harm.
Retribution (retributivism). A theory of punishment that holds that punishment is justified as a
deserved response to wrongdoing and should be imposed even if it will not reduce future crime.

324
S
Social harm. The destruction of, injury to, or endangerment of, some socially valuable interest.
Specific intent. Any one of three states of mind set out in the definition of an offense: (a) the
intention to commit some act over and beyond the social harm set out in the definition of the offense;
(b) a special motive for committing the social harm; or (c) awareness of an attendant circumstance.
Strict liability offense. An offense that can be committed without proof of any mens rea.

U
Unlawful. Morally wrongful or illegal.
Utilitarianism. A theory of punishment that holds that the general object of all laws is to augment
the total happiness of the community by excluding, as much as possible, everything that subtracts
from that happiness. Punishment, a form of pain, is only permitted to the extent that it will reduce a
greater amount of pain, in the form of crime.

V
Voluntary act. A willed, muscular contraction or bodily movement of an actor.

325

Table of Cases
Alston, State v. ............ 268
Anderson, People v. ............ 176, 246
Apprendi v. New Jersey ............ 96
Bailey, United States v. ............ 176
Balint, United States v. ............ 126
Banks v. State ............ 248
Banks, In re ............ 92
Bazeley, King v. ............ 282
Bedder v. Director of Public Prosecutions ............ 258
Berkowitz, Commonwealth v. ............ 269
Blumenthal v. United States ............ 214
Bonner, State v. ............ 253
Boro v. Superior Court ............ 273
Braverman v. United States ............ 216
Brawner, United States v. ............ 185
Brown, State v. ............ 269
Bruno, United States v. ............ 214
Burton, People v. ............ 252
Carr, Commonwealth v. ............ 257
Carrier’s Case ............ 283
Carroll Towing Co., United States v. ............ 115
Ceballos, People v. ............ 162
Cheek v. United States ............ 136
Chestnut v. State ............ 189
Chicago, City of v. Morales ............ 93
Chrisholtz, People v. ............ 260
Clark v. Arizona ............ 189
Coker v. Georgia ............ 90
Comber v. United States ............ 260
Cornell v. State ............ 106
Crenshaw, People v. ............ 247
Crenshaw, State v. ............ 184
Decina, People v. ............ 103
Direct Sales Co. v. United States ............ 212
Director of Public Prosecutions v. Camplin ............ 257

Dlugash, People v. ............ 204
Don Moran v. People ............ 272
Dowd, State v. ............ 200
Dudley and Stephens, Regina v. ............ 167
Duncan v. Louisiana ............ 86
Durham v. United States ............ 185
Ewing v. California ............ 91
Falcone, United States v. ............ 212
Forrest, State v. ............ 261
Fuller, People v. ............ 249
Girouard v. State ............ 256
Goetz, People v. ............ 155
Graham v. Connor ............ 165
Hampton v. United States ............ 194
Harmelin v. Michigan ............ 91
Harrison v. United States ............ 209
Harrison, State v. ............ 250
Hazel v. State ............ 268
Henderson, People v. ............ 251
Henry, State v. ............ 211
Hernandez, People v. ............ 272
Hopkins v. State ............ 137
Howard, People v. ............ 250
Howe, Regina v. ............ 176
Hufstetler v. State ............ 289
Hupf, State v. ............ 260
Iannelli v. United States ............ 217
Ireland, People v. ............ 251
Jackson v. State ............ 247
Jacobson v. United States ............ 191
Jaffe, People v. ............ 204
Keeler v. Superior Court ............ 84, 92, 242
Kelley, Commonwealth v. ............ 200
Kelly, State v. ............ 156
Kennedy v. Louisiana ............ 90
King v. Commonwealth ............ 246
Knoller, People v. ............ 248
Kotteakos v. United States ............ 213
Krulewitch v. United States ............ 209
Lambert v. California ............ 137
Lawrence v. Texas ............ 85
Lopez, Commonwealth v. ............ 271
Lopez, United States v. ............ 234

Love, People v. ............ 248
M.T.S., In re ............ 270
M’Naghten’s Case ............ 182
Maher v. People ............ 256
Malone, Commonwealth v. ............ 248
McCloskey, Commonwealth v. ............ 209
McCoy, People v. ............ 234
McDonald v. United States ............ 186
Meagan R., In re ............ 234
Michael, Regina v. ............ 146
Miller, People v. ............ 201
Montana v. Egelhoff ............ 180
Morgan, Regina v. ............ 271
Morissette v. United States ............ 111, 126
Morrin, People v. ............ 246
Mullaney v. Wilbur ............ 95
Navarro, People v. ............ 131
O’Neil, State v. ............ 137
Parsons v. State ............ 185
Patterson v. New York ............ 95
Pear, King v. ............ 280
Pears v. State ............ 248
Pembliton, Regina v. ............ 117
Peterson, United States v. ............ 152
Phillips, People v. ............ 250
Pinkerton v. United States ............ 235
Pomeroy v. State ............ 273
Powell v. Texas ............ 102
Pray, State v. ............ 259
Preslar, State v. ............ 146
Prince, Regina v. ............ 132
Rex v. Scofield ............ 198
Rizzo, People v. ............ 200
Robinson v. California ............ 85, 102
Rogers, Commonwealth v. ............ 185
Russell, United States v. ............ 190
Ryan, Commonwealth v. ............ 282
Sandstrom v. Montana ............ 245
Scott v. Harris ............ 165
Serné, Regina v. ............ 249
Sherman v. United States ............ 190
Smith, People v. ............ 304
Sorrells v. United States ............ 190

Stamp, People v. ............ 249

326
Sullivan v. Louisiana ............ 85
Tennessee v. Garner ............ 165
Texas v. Johnson ............ 85
Thousand, People v. ............ 203
Twitchell, Commonwealth v. ............ 136
Unger, People v. ............ 176
Wainwright v. Stone ............ 93
Wanrow, State v. ............ 155
Washington, People v. ............ 249
Wellar v. People ............ 247
Williams, People v. ............ 270
Williams, State v. ............ 105, 259
Winship, In re ............ 85
Yermian, United States v. ............ 120

327

Index
ACCOMPLICE LIABILITY
(See COMPLICITY, this Index)
ACTUS REUS
Definition, 100
Omission, 104–106
Social Harm, 106–108
Voluntary Act, 100–104
ASSAULT, 224
ATTEMPT
Common law, 198–205
Model Penal Code, 205–209
BURDEN OF PROOF
Burden of persuasion, 95–96
Burden of production, 94
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt, 85
BURGLARY, 224–225
CAUSATION
Actual cause, 140–142
Proximate cause, 142–147
COMPLICITY
Accomplice liability
Common law, 228–234
Model Penal Code, 235–238
Conspiracy (Pinkerton) liability, 235
CONSPIRACY
Common law, 209–218
Pinkerton doctrine, 235
Model Penal Code, 218–221
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
Burden of proof, 95–96
Entrapment, 194
Generally, 84–85
Jury nullification, 86
Jury right, 85–86
Legality, 91–94
Mistake of law, 137–138

Proportionality of punishment, 90–91
CRIMINAL HOMICIDE
Generally, 242–243
Manslaughter
Common law, 254–260
Model Penal Code, 262–263
Murder
Common law, 244–254
Model Penal Code, 260–262
“Wilful, Deliberate, Premeditated,” 245–247
Negligent homicide, 263
CRIMINAL LAW GENERALLY
Civil law distinguished, 82
Limitations of, 84–85
Sources of, 83–84
DEFENSE OF HABITATION
Common law, 161–162
Model Penal Code, 162
Spring guns, 162
DEFENSE OF PROPERTY
Common law, 159–160
Model Penal Code, 160–161
Spring guns, 162
DEFENSE OF THIRD PARTIES
Common law, 158–159
Model Penal Code, 159
DIMINISHED CAPACITY
Generally, 187–188
Mens rea version of defense, 188–189
Partial responsibility, 190
DURESS
Common law, 175–176
Intolerable prison conditions, 176–177
Model Penal Code, 177–178
Rationale, 174
EMBEZZLEMENT, 288–289
ENTRAPMENT
Due Process Clause, 194
Generally, 190, 193–194
Objective test, 192–193
Subjective test, 190–192
EXCUSE DEFENSES, GENERALLY, 173–174

EXTREME MENTAL OR EMOTIONAL DISTURBANCE, 262–263
FALSE PRETENSES, 289–291
FELONY-MURDER RULE, 248–254
INSANITY
Durham (product test), 185–186
Irresistible impulse test, 185
M’Naghten, 182–185
Model Penal Code, 187
Rationale of defense, 182
INTOXICATION
Defined, 179
Involuntary, 181
Voluntary
Common law, 178–180
Model Penal Code, 180
JURY
Constitutional right to, 85–86
Nullification, 86
JUSTIFICATION DEFENSES, GENERALLY, 151
JUSTIFICATION-EXCUSE DISTINCTION
Duress, 174–175
Generally, 174
Intolerable prison conditions, 176–177
LARCENY
As inchoate offense, 225
Common law, 278–288
LAW ENFORCEMENT DEFENSES
Arrest
Common law, 164
Constitutional law, 165–166
Model Penal Code, 164–165
Crime prevention
Common law, 163
Model Penal Code, 163–164
LEGALITY, PRINCIPLE OF, 91–94

328
MENS REA
Common law
“Intentional,” 113–114
“Knowingly,” 114–115
“Malice,” 117–118

“Negligently,” 115–117
“Recklessly,” 115–116, 117
Specific and general intent, 118–119
Generally, 111–112
Model Penal Code, 121–124
Statutory interpretation of, 119–121
Strict liability, 125–126
MISTAKE-OF-FACT
Common law, 130–133
Model Penal Code, 133–134
MISTAKE-OF-LAW
Due Process Clause and, 137–138
General principles, 134–135
When mistake exculpates, 135–138
MODEL PENAL CODE
Attempt, 205–209
Causation, 140, 143
Choice-of-evils, 168–169
Complicity, 235–238
Conspiracy, 218–221
Criminal homicide, 260–263
Defense of arrest, 164–165
Defense of crime prevention, 163–164
Defense of habitation, 162
Defense of property, 160–161
Defense of third parties, 159
Diminished capacity, 188, 190
Duress, 177–178
Extreme mental or emotional disturbance, 262–263
Generally, 84
Gross sexual imposition, 274–275
Insanity, 187
Intoxication, 180, 181
Mens rea, 121–124
Mistake of fact, 133–134
Mistake of law, 135–137
Omissions, 104
Rape, 273–274
Self-protection, 156–158
Solicitation, 222, 223, 224
Strict Liability, 126
Voluntary act, 191
NECESSITY DEFENSE
Common law, 166–168
Intolerable prison conditions, 176–177
Model Penal Code, 168–169

OMISSIONS
Exceptions to general rule, 105–106
General rule, 104
Rationale of general rule, 104–105
PUNISHMENT
Hybrid approach, 88–89
Proportionality of, 89–91
Retribution, 88
Utilitarianism, 87–88
RAPE AND OTHER SEXUAL OFFENSES
Forcible, 266–271
Fraudulent, 272–273
Gross sexual imposition, 274–275
Model Penal Code, 273–275
Statutory, 271–272
RETRIBUTION
(See PUNISHMENT, this index)
SELF-DEFENSE
Battered women and, 156
Common law, 151–156
Model Penal Code, 156–158
SOCIAL HARM
Categories of, 107–108
Defined, 106–107
SOLICITATION, 222–224
SPRING GUNS, 162
UTILITARIANISM
(See PUNISHMENT, this index)
VOLUNTARY ACT
Constitutional law, 102
Defined, 101
Rationale, 103–104

