[]

[Stevenson_JustMercy.jpg]

[image]

Sign up for our newsletter to discover more ebooks worth reading.

[image]

[Image]

EARLY BIRD BOOKS

FRESH EBOOK DEALS, DELIVERED DAILY

LOVE TO READ?

LOVE GREAT SALES?

GET FANTASTIC DEALS ON BESTSELLING EBOOKS DELIVERED TO YOUR INBOX EVERY
DAY!

[Image]

Summary and Analysis of

Just Mercy

A Story of Justice and Redemption

Based on the Book by Bryan Stevenson

[Image]

The summary and analysis in this ebook are meant to complement your
reading experience and bring you closer to a great work of nonfiction.
This ebook is not intended as a substitute for the work that it
summarizes and analyzes, and it is not authorized, approved, licensed,
or endorsed by the work’s author or publisher. Worth Books makes no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this ebook.

Contents

Context

Overview

Summary

Timeline

Cast of Characters

Direct Quotes and Analysis

Trivia

What’s That Word?

Critical Response

About Bryan Stevenson

For Your Information

Bibliography

Copyright

Context

When Just Mercy was published in the fall of 2014, America’s first black
president was nearing the midpoint of his second term. Despite President
Barack Obama’s monumental achievement, the legacy of America’s painful
racial past was far from resolved. In 2014—as in 2008, when Obama was
elected to his first term—blacks convicted of capital offenses were
significantly more likely to receive the death penalty than white
Americans. The same was true for poor Americans without the means to
hire a lawyer, who were more likely to wind up in prison to begin with.

The Obama administration’s acknowledgment of race- and class-based
disparities in the criminal justice system marked a new commitment to
reforming the institution of mass incarceration, but government works
slowly. Beginning around 2013, the emergence of new activist groups
organized by young people, such as Black Lives Matter, reflected the
growing sense of frustration with a spate of interactions between law
enforcement and African Americans that ended in the use of deadly force.
As a result, many Americans are now aware of the racial and class
disparities that continue to bedevil the criminal justice system. In
Just Mercy, veteran defense attorney and criminal justice reformer Bryan
Stevenson chronicles just how far the country has come—and how much
further it has to go.

Overview

Just Mercy documents the career of Bryan Stevenson, the founder of the
Equal Justice Initiative (EJI) and an indefatigable advocate for the
accused. The book is framed around the pivotal case of Walter McMillian,
a black Alabama man falsely accused of murdering an 18-year-old white
woman. Despite remarkably flimsy evidence, he was convicted and
sentenced to death. With the help of Stevenson and the EJI, McMillian
was eventually exonerated and freed. Many of Stevenson’s other clients
were not. Threaded through the narrative are stories about other
prisoners Stevenson represented, young (often juvenile) and old, black
and white, male and female. The people Stevenson works with have had
incompetent or no representation, little outside support, and few
resources—financial or otherwise. Many are mentally or physically
disabled. Often, they can barely read. Most have suffered unimaginable
trauma in childhood—and while in prison. And many are guilty of the
crimes of which they were convicted.

Stevenson’s mission is not to convince people to dismiss their crimes,
or the consequences of their actions. Rather, his goal is for people to
recognize the humanity and suffering of those caught up in the criminal
justice system, and the ways our courts and legal system are stacked
against the poor, the disabled, and people of color, particularly
members of the black community. We cannot morally imprison for life or
execute those, Stevenson argues, who never stood a chance.

Summary

Introduction: Higher Ground

In 1983, while interning for the Southern Prisoners Defense Committee
(SPDC), a legal aid nonprofit based in Atlanta, Stevenson meets, for the
first time, someone on death row. Henry has been housed in the
maximum-security Georgia Diagnostic and Classification Center for two
years, despite having no access to a lawyer.

The meeting is awkward and intense—and has lasting effects for the young
law student. Stevenson, all of 23 years old, is on break from Harvard
Law School, where he felt disconnected and put off by the abstract
nature of his studies. His task now is far from abstract: He has been
sent to inform Henry that the SPDC is looking into his case, and—more
importantly—that no execution date will be scheduled during the next
year.

An openly hostile guard escorts Stevenson to the visitation room, where,
filled with panic about meeting a condemned prisoner, he awaits Henry,
who is brought into the room in shackles and handcuffs. After he is
unchained, Stevenson greets him with a stammering apology. He is put at
ease by the prisoner, who is grateful for SPDC’s intervention.
Eventually, the two begin to speak about normal things like music and
family, turning away from the case to ordinary conversation for three
hours.

Like Stevenson, Henry is 23 and black. To the young lawyer, he looks
just like any other peer—a regular person rather than a frightening
criminal. He also, for Stevenson, personifies the injustice of the
American criminal justice system. In the span of that short meeting,
Stevenson is put on the path that leads to his career fighting for the
unjustly accused and incarcerated.

This fight will be deeply connected to Stevenson’s own history. Born and
raised in a racially segregated town in coastal Delaware, Stevenson grew
up in a town where black people “worked hard all the time but never
seemed to prosper.” Using his own experiences, and the even more
traumatic experiences of his parents and grandparents, he draws a line
from America’s history of oppressive racism to the current era of mass
incarceration.

In its current form, he says, the criminal justice system has created
far more problems than it has addressed. He enumerates its many
disastrous policies: the abolition of parole in many states; “three
strikes” laws that send nonviolent offenders to prison for decades;
child offenders charged as adults; drug addicts prosecuted as criminals;
and the great number of poor people—many of them black—tried and
convicted without decent counsel.

Federal and state governments now dole out approximately $80 billion a
year to build and maintain jails and prisons. Stevenson looks at the US
justice system and sees a colossal waste of human, financial, and
spiritual resources. “The true measure of our character is how we treat
the poor, the disfavored, the accused, the incarcerated, and the
condemned,” he writes. This humane reflection sums up Stevenson’s
philosophy, and explains what motivates tireless work.

Chapter One: Mockingbird Players

Walter McMillian is a black Alabama man convicted of murder and on death
row. His particular case made national news, and Bryan Stevenson’s work
on McMillian’s behalf garnered widespread attention for himself and for
his organization, the Equal Justice Initiative (EJI).

During his fourth year at the SPDC, where he had returned to work after
graduation, Stevenson and a legal aid colleague working in Alabama
secured federal funding to represent people on death row, many of whom
had no legal representation at all. By this point, the young lawyer had
achieved many victories, including stays of execution for a number of
men, some only minutes away from being electrocuted. At their meeting on
Alabama’s death row, Stevenson is struck by McMillian’s emotional
insistence on his innocence. Still, overworked and overwhelmed,
Stevenson tries to keep his client’s expectations realistic.

A few weeks after he meets with McMillian, Stevenson receives a phone
call at his office from Robert E. Lee Key, the judge who had presided
over McMillian’s trial. He tries to warn Stevenson off the case by
asserting, alternately, that McMillian was a drug lord and possible
member of the “Dixie Mafia”; that he couldn’t appoint a lawyer to
represent McMillian who wasn’t a member of the Alabama bar (Stevenson
was); and that McMillian wasn’t actually indigent because he had drug
money stashed all over Monroe County. All of the judge’s objections were
false or hollow, and Stevenson had agreed to serve as McMillian’s lawyer
voluntarily—he wasn’t seeking official appointment. But this
disingenuous exchange provided an illuminating (and depressing) glimpse
at the massive resistance Stevenson would encounter during his work with
McMillian, and throughout his career.

The hostility Stevenson faced was a function of two things: The woman
McMillian was accused of murdering was white, and his past relationship
with a married white woman, Karen Kelly, was looked on by the white
community with hostility. Born outside Monroeville, Alabama—ironically,
the setting of the classic novel on miscegenation, racism, and our legal
system, To Kill a Mockingbird—McMillian was a successful businessman in
a town where that alone was suspicious. In 1986, while he was in a
relationship with Kelly, hostility towards interracial relationships was
so great it was still outlawed in the state’s constitution.

This hostility was central to McMillian’s eventual conviction for the
murder of Ronda Morrison, a white 18-year-old college student found dead
at the cleaning business where she worked. Months after the murder
investigation, which failed to turn up any leads, a prisoner named Ralph
Myers claimed McMillian was responsible. Myers was being held for his
involvement in the murder of a woman named Vickie Lynn Pittman; his
codefendant was McMillian’s previous girlfriend, Karen Kelly. That was
not all: Myers claimed McMillian was involved in the Pittman murder as
well. Myers’s shocking allegations quickly fell apart as “it soon became
apparent that Walter McMillian had never met Ralph Myers, let alone
committed two murders with him.” When the Alabama Bureau of
Investigation brought Myers to a store where McMillian was shopping,
Myers was unable to even identify him. Still, with only Myers’s
accusation to go on, the newly installed County Sheriff Thomas Tate,
under considerable pressure from the community, arrested McMillian for
Morrison’s murder.

Chapter Two: Stand

At the same time he was fielding legal complaints about police
misconduct in minor traffic incidents that had led to black men being
imprisoned or, worse, killed, Stevenson had his own encounter with the
police while simply sitting outside his Atlanta apartment in his car.

After a long day of prisoner visits, Stevenson was in his 1975 Honda
Civic, listening to Sly and the Family’s Stone’s “Stand!” on a radio
that rarely worked. When a SWAT team suddenly appeared, he exited his
car to tell them everything was okay—only to have an officer draw his
weapon and shout, “Move and I’ll blow your head off!” Fighting an urge
to run, Stevenson calmly and repeatedly insisted he lived on the
premises while the policemen conducted an illegal search on the vehicle.
(One went so far as to sniff into a bag of M&Ms, looking for
contraband.) Neighbors appeared on balconies and the street to watch and
mutter about burglaries in the area.

The encounter leaves Stevenson shaken and angry, and worried for the
young men routinely harassed in such incidents. On his seat, during
their search, had been the case file of a black teenager shot and killed
by the police after running a red light. If even a law-abiding,
Harvard-educated lawyer is subject to this kind of treatment, he can
only imagine how much worse it was for his clients.

Stevenson begins to give presentations to churches, youth groups, and
community organizations about the incarceration system, and how the
presumption of guilt harms the poor and people of color. After an event
at a small African American church in rural Alabama, an elderly man
takes Stevenson aside and shows him the scars from beatings he’d
received while registering to vote and marching for civil rights. They
are, he said, his “medals of honor.” This encounter is a sign to
Stevenson that it is time to open a full-time legal aid office in
Alabama.

Chapter Three: Trials and Tribulations

How does a hardworking tree-cutter with no criminal record and an
airtight alibi come to be convicted of two murders? It begins with a
specious charge, the use of a jailhouse “snitch,” and a stay on death
row used to force a confession from a witness who has recanted.

Ralph Myers, playing on the sensational nature of the case, began to
hint that in addition to making him an accomplice to the murder of Ronda
Morrison, Walter McMillian had sexually assaulted him. Since
nonprocreative sex was illegal in Alabama, this gave investigators a
pretext to arrest McMillian. Over a dozen law-enforcement officers, led
by Sheriff Tate, detained McMillian on his way home from work. McMillian
laughed incredulously at the charge; he didn’t even know what sodomy
meant.

Tate responded with racial epithets, another sign that the arrest was
motivated by race, not evidence.

Myers’s description of the events of the crime was impossibly
convoluted. But McMillian’s arrest allowed investigators to use a
notorious jailhouse snitch, Bill Hooks, who was promised release and
reward money for his assistance. Hooks eagerly identified McMillian’s
truck as the one he had seen pulling away from a crime scene Myers had
entirely invented. It didn’t matter that, at the time of the murder,
Walter was holding a fish fry at his house, where his presence was
confirmed by dozens of witnesses, including a police officer who had
noted stopping by in his log book.

The black community was up in arms, but Tate was unmoved. Soon
thereafter, Ralph Myers recanted, realizing that in accusing Walter,
he’d made himself a party to the Morrison murder (one he actually had
nothing to do with).

But Tate did not suspend the investigation. In an unprecedented move, he
placed both Myers and McMillian on death row before a case had even gone
to trial. Crippled by the pressure of death row, Myers reaffirmed his
accusations of McMillian. The money raised by Walter’s church for his
defense instead served as confirmation of a suspicious money hoard.

The district attorney moved forward and scheduled the case, which was
delayed nearly a year and a half due to further recanting by Myers.
Walter spent the entire time on death row. At the trial, despite Myers’s
“nonsensical” testimony, a nearly all-white jury took only three hours
to send him back there.

Chapter Four: The Old Rugged Cross

In early 1989, Stevenson and his colleague Eva Ansley opened a nonprofit
law clinic in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. After a rocky start—the University of
Alabama and the state each pulled their financial support; recruiting
lawyers proved challenging—Stevenson and Ansley moved their operations
to Montgomery, where they would lay the foundation for the EJI. Changes
in the Supreme Court’s appeal process and a zealous attorney general,
Stevenson explains, were accelerating the pace of executions in Alabama,
and his clinic was too late to help many, including Michael Lindsey and
Horace Dunkins, two prisoners facing execution that spring. Their
volunteer lawyers reached out to Stevenson’s burgeoning clinic for help,
but Stevenson’s eleventh-hour advocacy proved fruitless: Both men were
executed—in Dunkins’s case, in a botched and “cruelly mishandled”
electrocution.

Though deeply overextended, Stevenson takes on the case of Herbert
Richardson, a traumatized Vietnam War veteran whose execution date is
approaching. In the “tragically misguided” plan Stevenson describes,
Richardson constructed a bomb to set off so he could then “rescue” his
ex-girlfriend (thereby winning her back). It instead killed her
ten-year-old niece. Because a child was killed, Richardson was sentenced
to death, in spite of the fact that he had no intention of killing
anyone, let alone a little girl.

Despite his efforts, Stevenson is not able to save Richardson on any
legal pretext. But the veteran’s grace in the face of death, as well as
that of his family and the victims’ families, amplifies Stevenson’s
understanding of the role trauma plays in criminal acts. The legal
system, especially in the cases of indigent blacks, is not working to
secure justice for perpetrators or victims, Stevenson decides.

Chapter Five: Of the Coming of John

When Stevenson visits the large McMillian family after a day of going
over the case with Walter, their profound frustration is a painful
reminder of how devastating incarceration is to those left behind. As
one relative sums up, “What do we tell these children about how to stay
out of harm’s way when you can be at your own house, minding your own
business, surrounded by your entire family, and they still put some
murder on you that you ain’t do and send you to death row?”

But a potential break comes in the form of Darnell Houston, a young
witness who claims he was working with Hooks—the supposed eyewitness—at
another location on the morning of the murder, an assertion that Judge
Key had dismissed during McMillian’s previous motion for a new trial.
Stevenson files a motion asking the court to reconsider the denial, and
Darnell is promptly thrown in jail for perjury. Stevenson writes,
“Police and prosecutors had found out that Darnell was talking to us and
they decided to punish him for it.”

Stevenson meets with Tom Chapman, Monroe County’s new district attorney.
He quickly realizes Chapman is as convinced of McMillian’s guilt as his
predecessor, and, though the DA drops the charges, Darnell is still
shaken by the experience. They attempted to intimidate him, and they
succeeded.

Chapter Six: Surely Doomed

Late at the office, Stevenson receives a frantic phone call from the
grandmother of 14-year-old Charlie, who has been placed in the adult
county jail awaiting trial for killing his mother’s boyfriend, a police
officer who was a violent, abusive alcoholic. Stevenson discusses how
changes in states’ laws have made juveniles an increasingly large
portion of his caseload. The United States is one of the few countries
in the world that tries juveniles as adults, including giving them the
death penalty.

When Stevenson meets Charlie, the tiny boy is nearly catatonic with
fear. Charlie finally reveals he has been repeatedly sexually assaulted
during his nights in the adult facility. Stevenson leaves the jail in a
rage and demands that the sheriff move Charlie to a protected single
cell, and, after a visit to the judge, secures Charlie’s transfer to a
juvenile facility a few hours later.

Chapter Seven: Justice Denied

The denial of Walter’s appeal devastates Stevenson, who was convinced
that even the state of Alabama could no longer uphold it after reviewing
the full slate of judicial and investigatory misconduct. He goes back to
the drawing board.

A new hire at EJI, Michael O’Connor, one of the many top-flight
graduates they have attracted, digs into the case and finds that Tate
paid Hooks “reward money” for his testimony. They also discover that
Hooks was released from prison immediately after giving the police his
statement. The state is required to inform the defense if a witness has
charges dropped in exchange for cooperation, but they never told
McMillian’s counsel.

Out of the blue, Ralph Myers contacts Stevenson from prison. At a
meeting with Stevenson and O’Connor, he confesses, “everything I said at
McMillian’s trial was a lie.” Group therapy at prison had convinced him
to come clean. He also asserts he knows nothing about Morrison’s murder,
and had been coerced to testify against McMillian by the sheriff and
ABI. Stevenson and O’Connor then visit Karen Kelly, who is serving time
in prison for the murder of Vickie Pittman. Kelly confirms Myers’s
story, and expresses regret for her role in McMillian’s imprisonment.

Despite their progress, Stevenson and O’Connor can go only so far
without access to police records. They file a petition for a new
hearing, which would make police records available to them as part of
the discovery process. They are somewhat shocked when the petition is
granted. This is an important victory, Stevenson explains, because it
means the Alabama Supreme Court has signaled that they agree there could
be an irregularity in McMillian’s case.

Chapter Eight: All God’s Children

Three clients serving life sentences without the possibility of parole
for crimes they committed as minors provide a portrait of common factors
that lead to such juvenile convictions. In all three cases, the clients
led childhoods marked by poverty, violence, sexual abuse, and neglect.
They all suffer from mental disabilities and post-traumatic stress.
Their lawyers were all largely incompetent, and, in two of the cases,
the crimes were nonhomicidal. We first meet Trina Garnett, now
fifty-two, convicted of second-degree murder at age fourteen for
accidentally setting fire to a house and killing two boys sleeping
inside. In prison, Trina’s abuse continued: She was raped by a guard and
subsequently became pregnant. Trina gave birth in handcuffs, and the
child was taken away and put in foster care. The cases of Ian Manuel and
Antonio Nuñez are nearly as heartbreaking. Ian was imprisoned at age
thirteen for shooting a victim, who later recovered, in a robbery.
Because the prison had no separate housing for juveniles, Ian spent
eighteen years in solitary confinement. Even pleas for relief from his
former victim went unanswered.

Antonio Nuñez, who had watched his brother die of a gunshot wound on the
streets of South Central Los Angeles, was lured into a robbery at age
fourteen. Though no one was injured in the crime, the judge asserted he
was a “dangerous gang member,” and he was condemned to die in one of
California’s most violent adult prisons.

Stevenson links his clients’ predicaments to the fear of juvenile
delinquency that arose in the 1980s and ’90s after spiking crime and
murder rates. Criminologists warned that young killers—
“superpredators”—were on the cusp of taking over cities. As a result,
several states changed their laws to allow kids, even as young as eight
years old, to be tried as adults. The prediction never came to pass—by
the early 2000s, crime had dropped precipitously—but many juveniles were
swept up into the system.

Chapter Nine: I’m Here

It is 1992, and at McMillian’s hearing in Monroeville, family members
and friends fill the courtroom. Stevenson notches a number of
victories—most important, the testimony of Ralph Myers, who asserts on
the stand that “anything that was told about McMillian was a lie” and
insists he didn’t see McMillian at all on the day of the murder. Clay
Kast, a white mechanic, refutes Hooks’s identification of McMillian’s
truck, since he’d converted that truck to a “low-rider” only months
after the murder. Woodrow Ikner, the Monroeville police officer who was
first on the scene after Morrison’s death, explains that Morrison’s body
had been found in the back of the cleaners, contrary to Myers’s initial
statement. Ikner also testifies that the prosecutor had pressured him to
testify that the body had been dragged to the back, and, after he
refused, dismissed him from the police force shortly thereafter.

On the second day of the hearing, Stevenson arrives at the courthouse to
find McMillian’s family members and friends standing outside. They have
been refused entry to free up seats for (white) supporters of the
state’s case. Just inside the door Stevenson finds a new metal detector
and police dog, further attempts at intimidating McMillian’s supporters.
It works: One elderly black woman finds herself unable to enter,
terrified by the dog, which triggers her memories of police attacks
during the civil rights movement.

Despite this outrage, Stevenson presses on. A number of doctors who saw
Myers shortly after his confession confirm his testimony, as do tapes
from Myers’s initial interrogation. The woman who has previously been
unable to enter overcomes her fear of the dog, and, once in the
courtroom, triumphantly shouts, “I’m here!” Stevenson understands that
this is a triumph for her—she refuses to be intimidated.

Chapter Ten: Mitigation

The case of Avery Jenkins illustrates how prisons became “warehouses”
for the mentally ill once psychiatric institutions were largely
dismantled in the 1980s. While drug laws and prolonged sentences have
exacerbated the problem, Stevenson writes, “The internment of hundreds
of thousands of poor and mentally ill people has been a driving force in
achieving our record levels of imprisonment.” Over 50 percent of prison
and jail inmates have been diagnosed with mental illness, five times
that of society at large.

Avery Jenkins has been imprisoned for the stabbing of an older man, a
brutal crime that strongly suggests mental illness, though there is no
record of that in his case files. At their first meeting, Stevenson
finds a grinning, childlike man who repeatedly asks him for a chocolate
milk shake. Stevenson is also harassed and forced to do a strip-search
by a guard who tells Stevenson to look at his truck, which is decorated
with Confederate symbols. Stevenson, in a brief history, writes that
such imagery appears all over the south as a tacit approval of white
supremacy.

Further research reveals Jenkins has had numerous psychotic episodes,
starting at age 15, and a childhood of physical, emotional, and sexual
abuse in a number of foster homes. Stevenson wins a new hearing for
Jenkins, arguing that Jenkins’s previous lawyer had failed him by not
presenting evidence of Jenkins’s obvious mental illness, or the
mitigating factors of his childhood. Jenkins is taken off death row and
put into a mental health facility.

The guard, who has overheard the testimony detailing Jenkins’s
childhood, apologizes to Stevenson, confessing that he too grew up in
foster care. On the way back from the trial, he tells Stevenson, he
pulled off the interstate and bought Jenkins a chocolate milk shake.

Chapter Eleven: I’ll Fly Away

Stevenson is “more disappointed than devastated” to learn that the judge
who presided over McMillian’s hearing remains unconvinced by Myers’s
testimony, given the resistance the case has encountered so far. As they
push the case to a higher-level appeal, EJI receives a number of bomb
threats, as do similar organizations all over the South. Despite the
danger, they continue to attract staff and are winning an increasing
number of death penalty reversals in the state of Alabama.

Meanwhile, an in-depth 60 Minutes profile on McMillian’s case raises
concerns about his guilt, and Stevenson learns that DA Chapman has asked
the ABI to review the case. These agents’ findings are unequivocal.
“There is no way Walter McMillian killed Ronda Morrison,” one agent
tells Stevenson. Approximately six weeks after the ABI sends Stevenson
their report, the court of criminal appeals rules that McMillian is
entitled to a new trial.

The atmosphere at the new hearing is remarkably different. Local and
national reporters stand outside the courthouse. The presiding judge is
warm and friendly, and no police officers keep McMillian’s supporters
from entering. After a brief summary by Stevenson, the judge grants his
motion to dismiss all of the charges against McMillian.

Stevenson, however, finds himself suddenly angry. Why did Walter
McMillian and his family and friends have to go through this? How many
other innocent people are trapped in the same situation, unable to get
the legal assistance they need?

Chapter Twelve: Mother, Mother

Poor mothers are far more likely to be charged with murder after
delivering stillborn babies than their affluent peers. At the same time,
they have the greatest challenges receiving adequate prenatal and
gynecological care.

Stevenson’s client Marsha Colbey, a 43-year-old white woman and mother
of six children from rural Baldwin County in Alabama, found herself
imprisoned for life after giving birth to a stillborn that she named and
buried, with family, on her own property. After a neighbor, suspicious
that Colbey was no longer pregnant but had no new baby, notified the
authorities, Colbey was drawn into a legal tangle. The grave was
exhumed, and a forensic pathologist autopsied the baby and reported that
it had been born alive, then drowned. Though obstetricians serving as
expert witnesses explained that Colbey’s age made the pregnancy very
high risk and the defense witness, Dr. Werner Spitz, testified that he
would “absolutely not” consider the delivery a live birth, Colbey was
convicted, an outcome that added trauma to grief.

Stevenson attributes the zeal to prosecute Colbey to national panic over
“dangerous mothers.” In the 1990s and early 2000s, a number of lurid
stories involving mothers who killed their children made the news. As a
result, Stevenson writes, poor women without medical and financial
resources are particularly vulnerable to accusations of child abuse,
even while pregnant. With the EJI’s assistance, Colbey is granted a new
trial, and in 2012, she is released from prison.

Chapter Thirteen: Recovery

The media shines a spotlight on McMillian’s exoneration and release, and
his case brings widespread attention to the fact that there may be more
innocent people sitting on death row. McMillian often accompanies
Stevenson on trips to discuss the case, and even appears with Stevenson
before the Senate Judiciary Committee to speak on innocence and the
death penalty. Public opinion about capital punishment is beginning to
shift.

Still, Stevenson worries about McMillian’s reintegration back into
Monroeville, where many still believe he is guilty, or that he is
seeking outrageous recompense for his time in prison. The EJI does in
fact file a civil suit on McMillian’s behalf, but immunity laws and
other protections make it is almost impossible to hold the authorities
in Alabama responsible for their misconduct. The state and county press
back against the suit, and McMillian’s case for reparations goes to the
Supreme Court. After a year of litigation, he is awarded a few hundred
thousand dollars, which he uses to restart his pulpwood business.
However, an injury renders him unable to continue, and he turns to a
used car parts business, with mixed results.

Meanwhile, Stevenson is awarded a prize for his work that takes him to
Stockholm. During his visit, footage from a Swedish news crew that
interviewed McMillian airs all over the country. As he watches McMillian
breaking down on television, Stevenson becomes increasingly concerned
about his former client.

Chapter Fourteen: Cruel and Unusual

Stevenson’s arguments in defense of juvenile lifers begin to turn to
neuroscience: the actual differences between the brains of adolescents
and adults. Brain chemistry causing impaired judgment, plus
dysfunctional environments, can lead kids to make terrible, sometimes
even violent, decisions, Stevenson writes. Joe Sullivan, at thirteen,
was sentenced to life for breaking into the home of an elderly woman in
Pensacola, Florida, and later raping her. Joe admitted to taking part in
the burglary, but adamantly denied assaulting the woman, as his
accomplices alleged. Though the state had destroyed blood and semen
samples before the defense could test them, these self-serving
allegations were enough to try Joe as an adult for burglary and sexual
battery, and sentence him to life in prison without parole. Joe’s
defense lawyer spoke only twelve transcript lines at his sentencing.

The EJI is alerted to Sullivan’s case after another inmate writes to
them on his behalf. In Stevenson’s words, the inmate describes Sullivan
as “disabled, horribly mistreated, and wrongfully condemned to die in
prison for a nonhomicide crime at thirteen.” After he arrived in adult
prison, Sullivan was sexually abused over and over, and he tried to kill
himself numerous times. He eventually developed multiple
sclerosis—likely induced by trauma—which confined him to a wheelchair.

The man Stevenson encounters is childlike, profoundly mentally and
physically disabled. At their first meeting, officers are forced to
spend several minutes removing him, wheelchair-bound, from a cage.
Stevenson files a petition on behalf of Joe, arguing that his punishment
was cruel and unusual, and thus unconstitutional.

Stevenson’s work with juvenile lifers, he tells us, is ironic. When
Stevenson was 16 years old, his grandfather was murdered by two
teenagers who wanted to steal his television. Stevenson and his family
were shocked by the senselessness of the violence. But this painful
episode actually helps shape his deep empathy for children who have
committed terrible crimes. These children, he writes, have been failed
by their parents and by society—and the growing scientific consensus
that adolescent brains are undeveloped means they should not be tried as
adults.

Chapter Fifteen: Broken

McMillian has developed dementia and is declining rapidly, but finding a
facility that will accept a former felon proves yet another obstacle.
Eventually the EJI finds McMillian a temporary placement at a nursing
home in Montgomery, but when Stevenson visits him, a confused McMillian
often believes he’s been placed back on death row.

The EJI is busier than ever—but this isn’t a positive development. While
executions are declining nationwide, Alabama in 2009 has “the nation’s
highest execution rate per capita.” Caught in a race to stop one
execution after the next, they are unable to save Jimmy Dill, a mentally
disabled man who had shot someone after a drug dispute.

One night at work, Stevenson breaks down. His office is filled with case
records containing unimaginable misery, and the idea that he could fix
this broken system seems ludicrous. His anguish, however, leads him to a
profound insight. Society either punishes those who are “fatally
broken,” or leads them to embrace the fact that we all are. He believes
that admitting our own brokenness permits us to be compassionate and
kind to others who have also suffered. He can accept his sense of
brokenness, because it’s what ties him to his clients and to the rest of
humanity.

Chapter Sixteen: The Stonecatchers’ Song of Sorrow

In 2010, the EJI and other organizations working for criminal justice
reform receive very good news: the US Supreme Court has ruled that
sentencing juveniles who had committed nonhomicide crimes to life in
prison without parole is unconstitutional. In 2012, the court extends
this ban to children convicted of homicide.

As a result, many of Stevenson’s clients, including Joe Sullivan,
Antonio Nuñez, and Ian Manuel, have the opportunity to be released. This
is not the only good news: While the overall rate of incarceration has
begun to decline nationwide, the EJI have taken 100 clients off death
row, and Alabama has gone 18 months with no executions. They expand
their work to include a race and poverty initiative, and continue to
attract talented new lawyers. Still, society has much to do. “It seems
to me we’ve been quick to celebrate the achievements of the civil rights
movement and slow to recognize the damage done by that era,” Stevenson
writes. Stevenson continues to handle his cases personally, shuttling
around to different courthouses in the South.

During one trip to a court in New Orleans, an elderly black woman whom
he has seen at several trials approaches him. She is not there for a
case she is personally involved in: Her grandson had been murdered 15
years earlier. However, when the boys who killed him were sentenced to
life without parole, she says, “it actually made me feel worse.”

Her wrenching experience inspired her to come to the courthouse and
support anyone who needed support. “I decided that I was supposed to be
here to catch some of the stones people cast at each other,” she
explained to Stevenson, referencing the famous parable in the Bible. “I
know you’re a stonecatcher too.”

Epilogue

In 2013, Walter McMillian fractures his hip, is placed in hospice, and
dies. Stevenson reflects on his former client. He sees, in McMillian,
everything that is wrong with the current system, but also his
inspiration for trying to improve it. Without hope or compassion,
Stevenson says, McMillian couldn’t have recaptured his life, or kept his
humanity. “In the end, it was just mercy towards others that allowed him
to recover a life worth celebrating,” writes Stevenson. That mercy is
what we all must strive for. Without it, Stevenson argues, we will be
unable to move on.

Timeline

November 1, 1986: Ronda Morrison, an 18-year-old white college student,
is found dead at the cleaners shop where she worked, in Monroeville,
Alabama.

June 8, 1987: Walter McMillian, a black man and the owner of a small
logging business, is arrested for Morrison’s murder.

August 1, 1987: McMillian and Ralph Myers, the state’s key witness, are
transferred to death row for pretrial detention despite not having been
convicted of a crime.

August 15, 1988: McMillian’s trial begins. It lasts a day and a half,
and he is found guilty after three hours of jury deliberation. He is
sentenced to life in prison.

September 19, 1988: The judge overseeing the trial, Robert E. Lee Key,
overrides the jury’s decision and confers a sentence of death.

1989: Stevenson founds the EJI after a brief internship working with men
on death row alerts him to just how severely the deck is stacked against
America’s poorest and most socially excluded citizens.

1991: McMillian’s conviction is affirmed on appeal.

February 23, 1993: McMillian’s conviction is reversed by the Alabama
Court of Criminal Appeals; the court orders a new trial.

March 2, 1993: All charges against McMillian are dismissed, and he is
released from prison.

September 11, 2013: McMillian dies.

Cast of Characters

Tom Chapman: One of the district attorneys of Monroe County, Alabama.
Chapman was not in office when Walter McMillian was wrongfully convicted
for the murder of Ronda Morrison, but resists many of Stevenson’s
efforts to prove McMillian’s innocence. After the extremely shaky
evidence convicting McMillian finally collapses, Chapman supports
McMillian’s release.

Marsha Colbey: A poor white woman from rural Alabama whom Stevenson
represents and eventually frees from prison. Colbey was charged with
murder and sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole
after delivering a stillborn at home.

Trina Garnett: A prisoner who Stevenson represents. Garnett had been
sentenced to life in prison without the possibility of parole for a
crime that she committed at the age of 14. Like so many other youth
offenders, she had an unfathomably abusive childhood.

Bill Hooks: One of the witnesses called by Monroe County during Walter
McMillian’s trial. Hooks claimed that he had seen McMillian’s
“low-rider” truck at the location where Ronda Morrison was killed the
day of her murder, but it was later discovered that Hooks—who had been
at work at the time of the murder—had been paid for his false testimony.
It was also later revealed that McMillian’s truck hadn’t been converted
to a “low-rider” until months after the murder.

Avery Jenkins: A mentally disabled man who is sent to death row for
committing a murder while he was having a psychotic episode. After
arguing that Jenkins’s severe childhood abuse and mental illness were
never presented during his trial, Stevenson gets Jenkins removed from
death row and placed into a mental health facility.

Karen Kelly: The white woman with whom Walter McMillian was having an
affair, and the link between McMillian and Ralph Myers. Kelly, with
Myers, is convicted for killing Vickie Pittman, and in prison, asserts
McMillian’s innocence in Ronda Morrison’s death.

Walter McMillian: The black Alabama man falsely accused of killing Ronda
Morrison, a white 18-year-old college student. McMillian was sentenced
to death, but with the help of Stevenson and the Equal Justice
Initiative, he was released from prison approximately 6 years later.

Ralph Myers: A career criminal and the state’s key witness against
Walter McMillian during Ronda Morrison’s murder trial. Myers eventually
admitted that he had been coerced into making false statements against
McMillian, though, in fact, he had never seen or met McMillian.

Bryan Stevenson: The founder of the Equal Justice Initiative, the
storied legal aid clinic and civil rights organization based in
Montgomery, Alabama.

Sheriff John Tate: The newly elected sheriff of Monroe County during
Ronda Morrison’s murder and Walter McMillian’s conviction for the crime.
McMillian was eventually released from death row after it came to light
that Tate had coerced or paid state’s witnesses Ralph Myers and Bill
Hooks to testify against McMillian with fabricated stories.

Direct Quotes and Analysis

“Capital punishment means ‘them without the capital get the
punishment.’”

Steve Bright, the director of the Southern Prisoners Defense Committee
(SPDC), makes this darkly humorous remark to Stevenson before the young
lawyer begins working for his organization. His point is that poor
people cannot afford good legal counsel—or frequently, any counsel at
all—and are therefore much more likely to be killed by the state.

“No judge wants to deal with attack ads that highlight the grisly
details of a murder case in which the judge failed to impose the most
severe punishment. Seen in that light, it’s not surprising that judge
overrides tend to increase in election years.”

Stevenson explains why the practice of electing judges has such terrible
consequences for the criminal justice system. In this arrangement,
sentencing becomes political. Specifically, Stevenson is referring to
the practice of overriding a jury-imposed life sentence with a death
sentence, which a judge may do to show voters how tough on crime he or
she is.

“Incarceration became the answer to everything—health care problems like
drug addiction, poverty that had led someone to write a bad check, child
behavioral disorders, managing the mentally disabled poor, even
immigration issues generated responses from legislators that involved
sending people to prison.”

Stevenson makes this observation in one of his chapters on child
imprisonment. He laments the fact that so many different crises in the
country are so often prescribed the same solution: prison. It’s an easy
way out, and for some, a profitable one.

“We’re supposed to sentence people fairly after fully considering their
life circumstances, but instead we exploit the inability of the poor to
get the legal assistance they need—all so we can kill them with less
resistance.”

With this analysis, Stevenson reveals the hypocrisy of the current
criminal justice system. If “justice” were truly the goal, everyone—the
poor especially—would be treated fairly. Too often the system seems
designed simply to punish the poor and exonerate the rich.

“Today, our self-righteousness, our fear, and our anger have caused even
the Christians to hurl stones at the people who fall down, even when we
know we should forgive or show compassion.”

Stevenson says this while speaking to a church group in Alabama about
McMillian’s case. It is a veiled criticism of some of the members of the
community whose support for McMillian is tepid because he had an affair.
His message, however, applies to anyone who denies compassion or
sympathy to the those unjustly caught up in the criminal justice system.

Trivia

1.  The United States has the highest rate of incarceration in the
    world.
2.  1 of every 3 African American male babies born in the 20th century
    is expected to be incarcerated.
3.  Although the federal government struck down anti-miscegenation
    statutes in its landmark 1967 decision Loving v. Virginia, in
    Alabama interracial marriage was technically against the law
    until 2000. The state’s ban, which had gone unenforced for decades,
    was overturned by a referendum.
4.  As of 2014, the state of Pennsylvania had the country’s largest
    population of child offenders sentenced to life in prison without
    parole. Nearly five hundred offenders were sentenced to die in
    prison for crimes they had committed between the ages of 13 and 17.
5.  Juvenile offenders held in adult prisons are 5 times more likely to
    be sexually assaulted.
6.  Between 1980 and 2010, the population of women in prison in the
    United States increased 646%—a rate 1.5 times higher than the rate
    for men.
7.  As of 2014, 22 states did not offer any compensation to people who
    had been wrongly imprisoned.
8.  In 2010, the US Supreme Court ruled that imposing life imprisonment
    on child offenders convicted of nonhomicide offenses constitutes
    cruel and unusual punishment. In 2012, the court extended this ban
    to children convicted of homicide.
9.  Of the 1,446 executions in the United States since 1976, 1,175 have
    been carried out by states in the South; nearly half (538) occurred
    in Texas, far and away the national leader in death penalty
    application. During the same time period, 178 executions were
    carried out in the Midwest, 111 in the West, and 4 in the Northeast.
10. In 2016, 20 people were executed in the United States, the lowest
    yearly total since 1991.

What’s That Word?

Alabama Bureau of Investigation (ABI): The investigative branch of the
state of Alabama. The organization’s assistance must be solicited by
local law enforcement agencies within the state.

Anti-miscegenation laws: Statutes that prohibited sexual relations and
marriage between people of different races. The landmark 1967 Supreme
Court case Loving v. Virginia declared anti-miscegenation laws to be
unconstitutional.

Appeal: In a legal context, an appeal is an attempt to have a case—or
aspects of a case—retried or reexamined. The hope of the appeal filer is
that they will have a new chance to prove their innocence.

Capital case: A murder trial that includes the possibility of a death
sentence if the defendant is found guilty.

Jim Crow: A system of laws put in place in the South after
Reconstruction that were intended to enforce racial segregation. The Jim
Crow laws remained in place until the civil rights movement in the
1960s.

Lynching: The act of murder committed by a mob in the name of perceived
justice, although no trial, jury, or authority is involved. The term is
generally used to describe the hanging of black men in the Jim Crow
South.

Parole: The term for supervised release from prison before a full
sentence is completed.

Peremptory strike: A technique used by lawyers during jury selection to
disqualify potential jurors who they feel may be biased against their
client. The book recounts how lawyers would often use peremptory strikes
to maintain all-white juries.

Superpredators: A term used by criminologists to describe a wave of
violent juvenile criminals they foresaw arising in the 1980s and 1990s.
This wave never came.

Critical Response

- A New York Times bestseller
- A Wall Street Journal bestseller
- 2014 Kirkus Prize finalist
- 2014 NAACP Image Award for Nonfiction winner
- An Esquire Most Important Book of 2014
- An American Library Association Notable Book

“The message of this book, hammered home by dramatic examples of one
man’s refusal to sit quietly and countenance horror, is that evil can be
overcome, a difference can be made. Just Mercy will make you upset and
it will make you hopeful.” —Nicholas Kristof, The New York Times

“Bryan Stevenson is America’s young Nelson Mandela, a brilliant lawyer
fighting with courage and conviction to guarantee justice for all.”
—Desmond Tutu

“Thanks in significant part to Stevenson’s brilliance and dedication to
a cause that hasn’t always been popular, the situation in Alabama and
across the land is improving.” —The Washington Post

“Just Mercy is every bit as moving as To Kill a Mockingbird, and in some
ways more so. Although it reads like a novel, it’s a true story and, in
that sense, is infinitely more troubling.… While Stevenson’s account is
not as naive as Scout’s, he brings to its telling a faith in the human
spirit that, like Scout’s narrative, casts in sharp relief the cruel
injustices they relate.” —The New York Review of Books

“Emotionally profound, necessary reading.” —Kirkus Review

“[Stevenson] is taking on the incompetence, inequities, and the simple,
confounded clumsiness of an overworked system that grinds up too many
people and delivers far too little of what it’s supposed to deliver,
both to the people caught up in it, and to the country that takes such
unwarranted pride in it.” —Esquire

“Just Mercy: A Story of Justice and Redemption should be on the short
list as must-read for every lawyer.” —Above the Law

About Bryan Stevenson

Bryan Stevenson is the founder and executive director of the Equal
Justice Initiative, an acclaimed legal aid and civil rights organization
based in Montgomery, Alabama. The EJI provides critical—and free—legal
assistance “to people who have been illegally convicted, unfairly
sentenced, or abused in state jails and prisons.” The organization is
one of the United States’ most prominent opponents of the death penalty
and advocates for criminal justice reform.

Stevenson founded the EJI in 1989 after graduating from Harvard Law
School. He grew up in rural, segregated coastal Delaware, an experience
that prepared him for his work in small towns in Alabama and other areas
of the Deep South. Within a few years, Stevenson’s work fighting against
the death penalty and on behalf of indigent clients began to attract
national attention. In 1992, the celebrated national news program 60
Minutes came to Alabama to examine the case of Walter McMillian, a black
Alabama man who had been falsely accused of murdering Ronda Morrison, an
18-year-old white woman. With Stevenson’s assistance, McMillian was
released from death row after six years of imprisonment.

Since 1998, Stevenson has been a professor at the New York University
School of Law. He has received dozens of honors and awards for his
efforts at the Equal Justice Initiative, including a MacArthur
Fellowship, an ACLU Medal of Liberty, and the Olof Palme Prize, a
humanitarian award given by the Swedish Social Democrat Party.

For Your Information

Online

“10 Unapologetic Books About Race in America.” Early Bird Books.

“History of the Death Penalty.” PBS Frontline.

“The Inhumanity of the Death Penalty.” The Atlantic.

“The Legacy of Lynching, on Death Row.” The New Yorker.

“One Lawyer’s Fight For Young Blacks And ‘Just Mercy.’” NPR.

“The slow death of the death penalty.” The Economist.

“Where the Death Penalty Still Lives.” The New York Times Magazine.

Books

Actual Innocence: Five Days to Execution, and Other Dispatches from the
Wrongly Convicted by Barry Scheck, Peter Neufeld, and Jim Dwyer

Between the World and Me by Ta-Nehisi Coates

Convicting the Innocent: Where Criminal Prosecutions Go Wrong by Brandon
L. Garrett

Crime and Punishment in America by Elliott Currie

False Justice: Eight Myths that Convict the Innocent by Jim Petro and
Nancy Petro

The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness by
Michelle Alexander

Picking Cotton: Our Memoir of Injustice and Redemption by Jennifer
Thompson-Cannino, Ronald Cotton, and Erin Torneo

Surviving Justice: America’s Wrongfully Convicted and Exonerated
compiled by Lola Vollen and Dave Eggers

Bibliography

Death Penalty Information Center, updated February 1, 2017.
http://www.deathpenaltyinfo.org/number-executions-state-and-region-1976.

Equal Justice Initiative. http://eji.org/about-eji.

Stevenson, Bryan. Just Mercy. New York: Spiegel & Grau, 2014.

All rights reserved, including without limitation the right to reproduce
this ebook or any portion thereof in any form or by any means, whether
electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter invented, without the
express written permission of the publisher.

This Worth Books ebook is based on the 2015 paperback edition of Just
Mercy by Bryan Stevenson, published by Spiegel & Grau.

Summary and analysis copyright © 2017 by Open Road Integrated Media,
Inc.

ISBN: 978-1-5040-4476-9

Worth Books

180 Maiden Lane

Suite 8A

New York, NY 10038

www.worthbooks.com

[Image]

Worth Books is a division of Open Road Integrated Media, Inc.

[Image]

So much to read,
so little time?

Explore summaries of bestselling fiction and essential nonfiction books
on a variety of subjects, including business, history, science,
lifestyle, and much more.

[Image]

More Smart Summaries from Worth Books

[Image] [Image]

[Image] [Image]

[Image]
