Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

Property Outline
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

FUNDAMENTALS
HOW CAN PRIVATE PROPERTY CREATE PROBLEMS?
ACQUIRING PROPERTY
○ FIRST POSSESSION
○ WATER RIGHTS
○ AD COELUM
○ SEQUENTIAL POSSESSION
○ ADVERSE POSSESSION
○ OWNERSHIP OF BODY PARTS
WHEN DO WE HAVE THE RIGHT TO EXCLUDE?
○ TRESPASS TO LAND
○ CONTINUAL (REPEATED) TRESPASS
○ CONTINUOUS (UNINTERRUPTED) TRESPASS
○ CRIMINAL & CIVIL ENFORCEMENT
○ SELF-HELP ENFORCEMENT
○ LIMITS ON RIGHT TO EXCLUDE (NECESSITY, PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION, PUBLIC POLICY, ANTI DISCRIMINATION)
CEDING SOVEREIGNTY
○ LICENSES AND THEIR EQUITABLE ENFORCEMENT
○ BAILMENTS
○ ABANDONMENT
○ DESTRUCTION
○ TRANSFER OF PROPERTY (STATUTE OF FRAUDS, DELIVERY, LAND TRANSACTIONS, NEMO DAT, GOOD FAITH
PURCHASERS, PROVING OWNERSHIP)
SERVITUDES
○ EASEMENTS (CREATION, TERMINATION, MISUSE)
○ COVENANTS (EQUITABLE SERVITUDES, REAL COVENANTS, RUNNING WITH THE LAND, NOTICE, TERMINATION)
NUISANCE
○ BASICS
○ DISTINGUISHING FROM TRESPASS
○ SCOPE OF RIGHT OF NON-INTERFERENCE
ZONING
DIVIDING OWNERSHIP
○ PRESENT + FUTURE INTERESTS AND WASTE
○ CO-TENANCIES (SEVERANCE, PARTITION)
○ LEASES (INDEPENDENT/DEPENDENT COVENANTS, IMPLIED WARRANTY OF HABITABILITY, CONSTRUCTIVE
EVICTION, SURRENDER, DUTY TO MITIGATE)
TAKINGS
○ EMINENT DOMAIN (PUBLIC USE + JUST COMPENSATION)
○ REGULATORY TAKINGS

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

FUNDAMENTALS
Property
● It concerns a bundle of sticks!! (Possession, right to exclude, etc.)
○ BUT property can be unbundled into discrete rights for purposes of legal analysis (think of the Takings Clause)
● Property law aims to mitigate (not resolve) the tragedy of the commons through utilitarian justifications
● Real property (a restaurant, a parcel of land + attached structures) does not move!! Personal property (a car) moves!!
● Standing in line hypo
○ Externalities: effects on other people (ex: 4 people adding to 1 person standing in line)
■ It seems that no one behind suffers from a 1 v. 1 swap, BUT the swap has externalities when multiple
people who can afford it act on it (this affects who benefits)
● Philosophers
○ Margaret Radin might consider a high school yearbook signed by classmates to be “personal” property (under
ordinary circumstances)
○ Hayek: those without respect for spontaneous order seek to impose “a synthetic system of morals” to implement
their plans
Common question in property law
● Is the legislature or the judiciary responsible for updating property law? (Moore v. Regents says legislature)
○ A lot of people think the legislature should be making policy decisions!
Rules vs. Standards
● Rules (think Jaque v. Steenberg Homes, encroachment cases)
○ Simple & rigid → Example: Speed limits!
○ Includes time limits!
○ Decisional devices (if x, then y)
○ Pros: simple/general, apply to everyone, advantages, generate conclusions at low costs/cheap application
○ Cons: inflexible, insensitive to nuances of particular situations (Yoda on rollercoaster example lol), developing
optimal rules are expensive/difficult/more work upfront
● Standards (think State v. Shack → wellbeing of workers on land > employer’s ownership rights)
○ Much looser → Example: Drive at a safe speed!
■ “Drive at an appropriate speed” does not tell you anything
○ Pros: more open-ended (like a caution sign), includes purpose of law (like to promote safety), more flexible,
sensitive to peculiarities of a particular situation, generate appropriate results at a wider span of circumstances,
relatively inexpensive to create (optimal speed limit not needed; just say “caution”!)
○ Cons: generating conclusions is higher cost and more expensive because you must consider more (what is “safe”
under the circumstances?), you might have to get a ruling on what a standard means in a new case (harder for
citizens to guess what standards require them to do…”caution” sign is not that helpful!), unfair biases affect
standards more than rules
○ Standards change!!

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

HOW CAN PRIVATE PROPERTY CREATE PROBLEMS?
●

●

●

The tragedy of the commons (coined by Garrett Hardin); example: cow grazing commons
○ Everyone uses common resources for little/no cost, which can harm/benefit a third party/society
○ Elinor Ostrom (part of the New Institutional Economics school of thought) notes various solutions
■ Leviathan (state control)
● Inherently coercive (state punishment for lack of adherence)
● Problem of information (Hayek)
○ The knowledge problem
○ Coordination to produce is more than any one person can do
■ E.g. apple/Microsoft example of central planning
■ Private Property
● Competition is no longer a competition against each other, it becomes man v. nature.
● You can now internalize the benefits of forbearance and investment; same thing holds true for
pollution
● The theory is that this will lead to optimal decision making.
● Disadvantages:
○ Additional required costs
○ Risk mitigation (markets and insurance)
■ Alternative Solution
● Turkish fishing village example - monitoring, organization, and enforcement all handled privately.
● Concerns: is this any less coercive than the state?
○ Receiving benefit from common resources for little or no cost can be dangerous to society/environment
○ Some say socialism fixes this, others say establishing who owns property (privatization of the commons) fixes
○ No incentive to continue maintaining the commons; the benefit cannot be internalized to any one person!
○ POLICY: Taking things from the commons (including atmosphere) AND adding things (like trash) can be a problem!
The tragedy of the anticommons
○ Too many permissions/exclusions required = so no one can use resource
○ Some say could be a good thing! (ex: letting many veto developing over a park can preserve the park)
○ Easy to govern
○ Video/movie store problem: it takes forever to find something everyone agrees to watch, or you don't even find
one people agree on
■ Resource = movie, everyone has a veto, hard to agree and use resources efficiently!
■ Many people have ownership stakes
NOTE: Semicommons
○ Resource is excluded in some uses/purposes, but otherwise a commons/open-access resource
○ Incentivizes one to favor their part of the semicommons and trash other parts
○ Internet can be a semicommons
○ Easy to govern, hard to change (difficult to negotiate over/disentangle)

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

ACQUIRING PROPERTY
FIRST POSSESSION, WATER RIGHTS, AD COELUM, SEQUENTIAL POSSESSION, ADVERSE POSSESSION, OWNERSHIP OF BODY
PARTS

FIRST POSSESSION
●

●

●

How to establish ownerships when something is unowned (“a commons”)
○ You can own something if you are the first to possess it…but how does “possession” work?
○ Ideas are NOT subject to ownership via “first possession”
Pierson v. Post: disagreement over the PURPOSE of property law (fox case)
○ Possession in wild animals is acquired by occupancy (wounding or capturing/trapping)
○ Majority
■ You snooze, you lose! Focused on peace, minimize dispute!
■ Hunter = possessor if BOTH: mortally wound animal + hunter did not abandon pursuit
■ Trapper possessor if BOTH: Trapped animal of natural liberty + rendered escape impossible
■ Ratione soli: animals on possessed land belongs to possessor
■ For wild animals, first to possess is typically the owner
○ Dissent (Livingston)
■ Focused on incentive! Rewards effort!
■ Different proposed test: One must
● Show intent to get animal
● Animal is within reach OR there's a reasonable prospect of taking it
■ No mortal wounding required
■ Sportsmen should decide this case, not philosophers! → midterm question!
Custom can be determinative (sometimes)
○ Ghen: whales = property if person follows custom to possess carcass
■ Custom trumps Common Law here because people rely on it; it’s been around for awhile!
■ What if you’re out of town and don’t know the custom? It’s always evolving too!
● Custom’s ability to circumvent the common law could further entrench racism/classism
○ Outsiders would have no way of learning way the law is; universal customs should trump
local customs
○ Universal vs. local customs is the motivation for the decision Swift v. Gifford
■ Some think whales are moral persons; should that matter when deciding this case? Minds differ
● Whaling is illegal everywhere except Japan & Norway
○ Potential issue: custom’s ability to circumvent the common law can further enrich discrimination

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

WATER RIGHTS (Common Law of water)
●
●

●

Riparian rights: right to land = right to water on land; cannot sever the two!
○ Created from owning land bordering a watercourse…strict rule!
2 dimensions of water law:
○ (1) surface v. underground and (2) defined channel v. diffuses.
■ Focus will be on surface + defined channel
○ Surface water: Casual water under common enemy doctrine = landowners can protect land from surface water
even if it causes flooding to other landowners, but those landowners can try to repel the water back
○ Diffused water = pest to be eradicated (diffused surface water is undesirable)
○ Defined channel of water = valuable/coveted
Three approaches to water rights
○ 1: Natural flow theory (old English idea, not a basis for water allocation rights in US
■ Too strong a barrier to water use
■ One may remove water, but only to the extent that the natural flow is not disrupted
■ Everyone is entitled to the same amount of water (EQUALLY!! → egalitarian principle)
■ Disturbance of natural flow by upstream owners require the consent of each downstream owner
■ Policy concerns
● High costs (transfer or rights allowed, but expensive negotiations)
● Problem of holdouts (strategic to turn a profit or stubborn)
● Not efficient use of resource being used (anticommons)
■ Rejected in Evans v. Merriweather
○ 2: Reasonable use theory is more popular! (it resembles the law of nuisance)
■ Used in northeastern states where there is a lot of water
■ Allows for the use of some water
■ When property rights are allocated justly and reasonably, resources are used for socially valuable reasons
● Problem! Who determines what’s reasonable?
○ Bias exists in government/big companies, genuine disagreement
● Problem! Reasonableness changes over time
■ Accepted in Evans v. Merriweather (mill owners on river with dams)
● If waterstream would not individually satisfy everyone, only proportional use is allowed!
● Natural use (necessary, reasonable) trumps artificial use (for comfort & prosperity, unreasonable)
○ Some uses are natural in some countries but artificial in others
○ 3: First appropriation (promotes economic development)
■ Used in dry, arid, southwestern states where there is not a lot of water
■ Whoever gets to the water first, gets it! This severs riparian rights!
● The first to use/divert water for a beneficial use owns rights to it, no more than necessary
■ Upheld in Coffin v. Left Hand Ditch Company (which did NOT follow reasonable use)
● KILLS ~ think “coffin”!!~ the other person’s chances!
● Riparian rights never applied in CO, so inapplicable here (land and water ownership is SEPARATE)
● Same setup as Evans v. Merriweather, but opposite decision due to policy! (dam ok here)
○ Water = more valuable out west
■ Mirrors bright line rule from Pierson v. Post - whoever is first gets it for all time!
● Problem! Overcompensation because “use it or lose it!” No incentive to save it!
● Problem! First owner not always obvious! (Evans v. Merriweather)

AD COELUM
●

“Cujus est solum, ejus est usque ad coelum et ad inferos” = to whomever the soil belongs, he owns also to the sky & below

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
○ Invision a cone that extends to the center of the earth and into the atmosphere above/below you
○ Another example of the general principle of accession (you own things that go together, like fruit and tree)
● Great Onyx Cave (Edwards v. Sims)
○ Majority: ad coelum rule! Follows rules governing mines
○ Logan’s Dissent: landowners can own everything that may be taken from the earth and used for their
profit/happiness…but the landowner does not own things he cannot control himself!
■ Favors active, creative users!
■ The owner must (1) control it and (2) be able to benefit from it

SEQUENTIAL POSSESSION
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

Possession = prima facie evidence of property!
Usually through purchase or gift…but what if possession is not voluntary?
○ Either way, the first person wins!
○ How can Gifts be effective? (1) handed over & (2) accepted (CANNOT REFUSE!)
Three possible owners
○ 1: True owner = Original owner (could be unknown)
○ 2: Finder = Property belongs to true owner until SOL runs out, allowing finder to keep
○ 3: Convertor = Finder may be legally required to not convert property to own use & only deliver to the true owner
True owner → finder → convertor
○ If P finds & D converts, P wins
■ Armory v. Delamare (chimney sweep boy who was cheated out of diamond ring)
● Possession raises a presumption of title; but it can be rebutted by showing a superior title
● Finder’s rights are good against all the world EXCEPT true owner
● Finders don’t get full ownership; it still belongs to the true owner until SOL runs out
○ You have some duties to the true owner (including returning)
● Jus tertii: An argument made by a third party (not the rightful owner) which attempts to justify
property ownership based on showing who the rightful owner is
○ It doesn’t work as a defense!
● Duty to return if they know who owner is
True owner → finder → finder
○ If P finds & D finds, P wins
■ Clark v. Maloney (P must show floating logs were his property, & that D converted them to their own use)
● First finder wins over second finder (good against all EXCEPT true owner)
True owner → convertor → convertor
○ If P converts & D converts, P wins
■ Anderson v. Goldberg (steal from thief)
● First convertor’s rights are good against all others, EXCEPT those who have better titles
● One who possesses illegally acquired property may advance an action for replevin against one
who subsequently takes the property without the possessor’s consent
○ If B steals from A but then C takes from B, B can sue for replevin against C
Convertor = thief

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

ADVERSE POSSESSION
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

Original owner’s possession is displaced by an adverse possessor, whose rights are good against ALL THE WORLD
Ejectment is what you bring to STOP AP if you find it in time (protects your title)
Example: you own blackare but aren’t really using it, someone else starts trespassing on it, they are now an AP
Why AP is allowed: Endowment effects, cheaper to determine ownership, use (active users) > disuse (passive users)
○ Caveat: sometimes doing nothing for land is the best thing for it (pro for passive user)
AP doesn’t apply to a prescriptive easement (the permanent legal right to use someone else’s property…there is no SOL)
Scott v. Anderson-Tully Co → Blue tape on trees led to AP claim winning
○ Anderson-Tully Co was AP, so they could remove timber from Scott’s land
○ Adverse possession must be proved (by clear & convincing evidence) to be:
■ Actual: have control of land (NOT just solely for recreation like hunting/fishing)
■ Exclusive: sole possession (can’t share with anyone, even true owner, obvi)
■ Open, notorious, & visible (so as to give notice - even if constructive - of AP to community)
■ Continuous (Continual = repetitive → this is different!)
● Uninterrupted (minimum 10 years, but depends on jurisdiction)
● Howard v Kunto case he diagrammed in class
● Tacking is usually permitted!
○ Successive landowners can combine AP time so that the last owner can meet 10 year
requirement
● Property type considered when determining intermittent occupancy (summer homes are OK)
■ Adverse (hostile/no permission/under a claim of right/color of title)
● Permission defeats AP claim
● Taking possession of what is mistakenly believed to be valid title (awareness immaterial)
○ Finding incorrect deed in Grandma’s attic
● Wildland doesn’t need to be cared for!
■ For the statutorily required time! (if enough time has passed, you can own land via AP)
● Usually around 10 years, but SOL can be tolled if TO had disabilities when AP began!
○ Old age, insanity, etc….but not poverty!
Courts care about good faith, but it’s not explicitly required (“Connecticut Rule”)
○ Carpenter v. Ruperto, 1982 → woman extends land into corn field
■ No AP; if she had only been concerned about safety, then nuisance claim could’ve worked
■ Rule 1: Good faith matters! It is an essential component of claim of right
● NY requires AP have a reasonable basis to believe they are the TO (Squatters rights don’t apply)
■ Rule 2: AP can act in good/bad faith (the “Maine Rule” from a past decision)
● Maine doesn’t even follow this and most states don’t follow it anymore either
■ Rule 3: Good faith can be irrelevant since they just didn’t have permission (the “Connecticut Rule”)

OWNERSHIP OF BODY PARTS
●

Which body parts are subject to ownership?
Moore vs. Regents → UCLA (spleen, torts case)
○ No conversion claim once cells leave a patient’s body after surgery because no property interest in cells
○ State statutes greatly limit what can be done with excised cells
○ Medical research done on excised cells has high social value
○ Disclosure laws adequately protect patient autonomy
○ Legislatures are better situated than courts to decide what should be treated as property
○ Mosk’s Dissent - focuses on ethics & policy
■ “Property” = estate, real, personal, and everything one person can own/transfer

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
■ Moore owned rights to his tissue; he could have profited off of it instead
■ Unequal bargaining positions

WHEN DO WE HAVE THE RIGHT TO EXCLUDE?
TRESPASS TO LAND
●
●

●

Trespass = land is invaded by a tangible object that interferes with the right of exclusive possession
Jaque v. Steenberg Homes, Inc. (1997) → Civil Action/Enforcement
○ A property owner has an absolute right to exclude even when there is minimal or no damage to the property!
○ Nominal & punitive damages can’t coexist per Barnard (society doesn’t care to punish if no nominal damages)
■ TRESPASSING IS DIFFERENT! Society reeeeally cares about trespassing
■ Otherwise, people will trespass because they will only face nominal charges
○ The law is not as protective over personal property (harm must actually occur) as it is with land property
○ $100K punitive damages awarded to Jaques EVEN THOUGH no actual damage
■ Punitive damages 9x actual damages are wrong, but presumption can be overcome
Hinman v. Pacific Air Transport (1936)
○ Airplane case; Ad Coelum law rejected unless actual & substantial damage! Air ownership is insane!
■ Trespass is only available to possessors of land; people don’t possess land they can’t reach (like air above)
○ Distinguished from traditional trespass rule – it’s a use right, not a possessory right!
○ The owner of land owns as much of the space above him as he uses, but only so long as he uses it
○ Favors the Edwards v. Sims dissent!! → this was a midterm question!
■ Landowners can’t own things they can’t themselves control
■ The owner must (1) control it and (2) be able to benefit from it

CONTINUAL (REPEATED) TRESPASS
●
●

If land is repeatedly invaded by a trespasser, the possessor may sue for either trespass or nuisance
Baker v. Howard County Hunt (1936) → Foxhound case
○ Foxhunter’s rights are subordinate to landowner’s rights; Baker’s reasonable enjoyment was interrupted!
○ Equity remedies (injunctions) will relieve against repeating trespasses
○ BAKER 2-PART TEST → if someone wants equitable relief, NOT monetary damages
■ (1) P comes to court with clean hands (no harming/wrongdoing as to specific dispute)
■ (2) No adequate remedy at law exists (damages won’t fix the problem)
● Ask what caused damage to the property!

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

CONTINUOUS (UNINTERRUPTED) TRESPASS
●

●

●

●

Balancing the equities! Courts often deny enjoinment injunctions if encroachment is done in good faith
○ Injunction granted if relief is required by “traditional equitable principles”; 4-part test (less care about good-faith)
■ 1: P suffered irreparable injury
■ 2: Monetary damages are inadequate
■ 3: Considering the balance of hardships between both parties, a remedy in equity is warranted
■ 4: The public interest would not be disserved by an injunction
Pile v. Pedrick (1895) → building accidentally built over land border by 1” & forced to tear down
○ Question: should innocent building encroachments be enjoined? Cost = main issue!
■ Yep! Encroacher had to tear down wall & rebuilt on own land despite accidental nature
● Many courts reject this absolutist, wasteful approach
■ Don’t really care about good faith; the right to exclude is super strong!
○ Ex-ante considerations (before building’s construction)
■ Pile v. Pedrick’s harsh rule incentivizes people to act carefully before they build ($$$ on the line!)
Golden Press, Inc. v. Rylands (1951) - basically same facts as Pile v. Pedrick, but now we care about good faith
○ 2” (de minimis) encroachment underneath P’s land, encroacher can keep encroachment
○ Ex-ante considerations (before building’s construction)
■ Golden Press’s rule incentivizes people to act in good faith
○ MODERN RULE: enjoinment injunction for UNINTENTIONAL (good faith) damage can be denied if
■ 3 PART BALANCING TEST
● Removal causes grave financial hardship
● P’s use is unaffected (P not harmed)
● Damage is unintentional & slight
■ Court should not become a party to extortion if good faith mistake (concern = unequal bargaining)
● “Bargaining occurs in the shadow of the law”; Courts of equity are courts of conscience!
○ Clean hands and adequate remedy of law still required!
Ex post considerations (after building’s construction) are trickier
○ Bilateral monopoly! Bargaining can break down over a modification of rights!
○ Courts like the softer, efficient, fair analysis of ex post better because it is mostly what they litigate

CRIMINAL & CIVIL ENFORCEMENT
●
●

Criminal law of trespass
○ Small penalties; allows you to call cops instead of resorting to self-help
Civil action
○ Three actions to enforce right to exclude
■ (1) Trespass: protects person in possession who has in exclusion possession of land
● Protects possession; a party must be in possession of land to sue an intruder for trespass
■ (2) Ejectment: protects person who has been dispossessed of property (projects title)
● What you bring to STOP AP if you find it in time
● Example: only the tenant in possession can bring an action in trespass
■ (3) Nuisance: protects use & enjoyment of land

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

SELF-HELP ENFORCEMENT
●
●
●

●

●

Self help allowed with real property (movable goods)...JUST DON’T BREACH THE PEACE!!!
○ Controversial: using self-help to recover possession of property after it’s been transferred to another
Examples: Fences, locks on doors, security guards, dogs, burglar alarms, video cameras, safes, ignition locks, etc.
Hohfeld (legal scholar)
○ Right = a claim one has against others that corresponds to a duty they have towards others
○ Privilege = freedom to act without interference (others have “no-right” to interfere)
■ Permits (not compels!) one to use self-help
SELF HELP ENFORCEMENT FOR REAL PROPERTY
○ Berg v. Wiley (1978) → gives us the Modern Rule for real property in landlord/tenant disputes
■ Old Common Law rule for real property REJECTED in Berg:
● Landlords can use self-help to retake leased premises if:
○ (1): Landlord is legally entitled to possession (clause where tenant forfeits possession
rights)
○ (2): re-entry is peaceful
● WHY IT’S REJECTED
○ The court likes when people do things the judicial way, especially when peace is breached!
○ High risk of violence
■ Modern Rule for real property in landlord/tenant disputes in Berg:
● Self-help never allowed to retake real property
SELF HELP ENFORCEMENT FOR MOVABLE PROPERTY
○ Williams v. Ford Motor Credit Company (1982) → divorce/car case
■ Article 9 of UCC says self-help is ok if done without breaching the peace (no actual violence)
■ Heaney Dissent
● Violence WAS invoked! This wasn’t a silent night raid; invasion was detected, confrontation
ensued
● Requiring ex ante violence is not good public policy

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

LIMITS ON THE RIGHT TO EXCLUDE
NECESSITY, PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION, PUBLIC POLICY, ANTI DISCRIMINATION
●
●
●

●

●

●

One has the right to exclude for any reason at all = Common Law!
GENERAL LIMITATION: Sic Utere Principle → Sic Utere Tuo Ut Alienum Non Laedas)
○ Use what is yours in such a way that you don’t harm somebody else (limits exist; property rights are not absolute)
NECESSITY LIMITATION ON THE RIGHT TO EXCLUDE (just has to be objectively or subjectively reasonable)
○ Outside of human life, deciding what’s necessity and what isn’t is TRICKY!
○ Ploof v. Putnam (1908) - storm, boat tied to dock, dock damage
■ Tying the boat to dock due to storm was justified by necessity!
■ Human life is more sacred than the right to exclude and thus validates necessity
● BUT the party causing damage still must pay damages!
○ Extra lesson: don’t always trust authority! (Eugenics story)
PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS LIMITATION ON THE RIGHT TO EXCLUDE
○ Private accommodations can reasonably exclude
○ Requirements for public accommodations (common carriers) to exclude:
■ (1) First come first serve basis (anyone willing to pay)
■ (2) Reasonable prices
○ The more you accommodate to common use, the more you must accommodate to public use
■ IF YOU LET PEOPLE USE YOUR PROPERTY, NOW YOU HAVE TO RESPECT THEM MORE! Duhhhh
■ Uston v. Resorts International Hotel, Inc. (NJ, 1982) → Card counting case, D barred from P’s casino
● Casino Control Commission does not determine whether card counters should be excluded
○ NJ cannot decide whether P’s exclusion is lawful!
○ D was playing correctly under the Commission’s existing rules
PUBLIC POLICY LIMITATION ON THE RIGHT TO EXCLUDE
○ General exception to the right to exclude = Public policy balancing test!
■ Weighs right to exclude against social interest (State v. Shack)
■ Don’t exclude people for unreasonable reasons!
■ Society can be better off if certain exclusions happen
○ State v. Shack (NJ, 1971) → wellbeing of workers on land > employer’s ownership rights
■ Property rights serve human values! Courts’ job is to figure out what promotes human values
■ Rights are relative; there must be an accommodation when they meet
■ Did not clarify who can be excluded from land and who can’t
■ THIS IS A STANDARD, NOT A RULE!
■ Sic Utere Principle in action!
○ Some courts allow denying people from entertainment venues if not for race, color, creed, national origin, or sex
■ BUT they can deny experts in a game…horse-racing case example!
ANTI DISCRIMINATION LIMITATION ON THE RIGHT TO EXCLUDE
○ Shelley v. Kraemer (1948) → black family bought house, white neighbors sued to enforce restrictive covenant
■ Racially restrictive covenants are not judicially enforceable; you can create them, but courts enforcing
them = state action, which violates EP (this is binding everywhere)
● Differs from self-help repossessions, which are NOT state action
○ Fair Housing Act of 1968 prohibits discrimination for race, religion, sex, familial status, national origin, & disability
■ Goal = uniformity (discrimination laws differed because previously regulated by state & local laws)
■ Applies to discriminatory sale/leasing of (1) dwellings (2) terms of such sales/ rentals (3) advertising of
sales & rentals (4) misrepresentations about sale/rental unavailability or profit-seeking representations
about changing racial makeup of communities in which they are located (5) failures to make reasonable
accommodations in the disability context

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
■ Policy: (1) privacy + safety and (2) statutes will be interpreted to avoid constitutional questions
■ Mrs. Murphy (old racist irish ladies) exception to FHA: § 3603(b)(2) → Mrs. Murphy can be racist
● Professor Lee thinks this is unfairly stereotyping Irish people!
● Does not apply to advertising! Mrs. Murphy cannot be racist in her ads!
● Mrs. Murphy’s dwelling has <4 rental units = exempt from FHA
■ STEP 1 → P shows prima facie case of discrimination via disparate treatment/impact
■ STEP 2 → D can rebut prima facie case by showing a non-discriminatory reason
● Private D → Rational Basis Review
● Public D → Strict Scrutiny
■ STEP 3 → P may rebut the alleged non-discriminatory reason as pretext (landlord did not actually rely on
the claimed legitimate reason)
○ Roommates case; FHA does not extend to shared living; gov.’t can’t invade privacy/autonomy/security!
■ Court says “dwelling” does NOT include shared living
■ Congress intended FHA to apply to landlord and tenant transactions, NOT shared living
■ Rights of intimate association (like the right not to associate) are protected
○ Policy for laws that prohibit discrimination in private housing markets
■ 1) Increase housing opportunities for protected groups
■ 2) Eliminate harm/indignity suffered by members of protected groups when they are rejected by a
landlord or seller based on persons being a member of a protected group
■ 3) Eliminate inferiority/subordination communicated to community when landlords/sellers discriminate

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

CEDING SOVEREIGNTY
LICENSES AND THEIR EQUITABLE ENFORCEMENT, BAILMENTS, ABANDONMENT, DESTRUCTION
TRANSFER OF PROPERTY: STATUTE OF FRAUDS, DELIVERY, LAND TRANSACTIONS, NEMO DAT/GOOD FAITH
PURCHASERS EXCEPTION, PROVING OWNERSHIP
●

●
●

One stick in your bundle = your right to transfer property
○ Why should the law allow transfers?
■ Enhances autonomy; rids of burden of taking care of property no longer wanted; owners can designate!
Licenses and bailments are how property owners can relinquish right to exclude temporarily
LICENSES AND THEIR EQUITABLE ENFORCEMENT
○ License example: when you go to the movies, you are allowed in, but you don’t own any part of the theater
■ Licenses authorize licensees to enter land, but they don’t transfer a property right
○ LICENSES = REVOCABLE, GRANTS = IRREVOCABLE
■ Licenses = revocable at any time & are temporary; black letter law via Baron Alderson!
■ License + grant = irrevocable; the grantor is estopped from defeating their grant!
● Grants (implied license to enter land) transfer property rights (one can remove property from
land)
● Irrevocable property rights to enter land given via deed; if no deed, interest = license (revocable)
○ Wood v. Leadbitter (1845) → buying a horse racing ticket = a revocable license
■ Wood was granted access to property during horse races, but was later removed
■ If licensee exceeds license/remains on land after license expires/is revoked, then TRESPASSER!
● Many think this rule was unjust here since a contract existed & Eglintoun didn’t provide a reason
for removing Wood (but Wood was a shitty guy/fraudulent bookmaker…interesting case!)

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
BAILMENTS
● Temporarily transferring possession (NOT ownership) of property for a specific reason (usually created via contract)
○ Ex: temporarily transferring clothes to a dry cleaning shop for cleaning = bailment
● Bailor: transferor → they create the bailment relationship
● Bailee: receiver
○ Old rule for involuntary bailees
■ Involuntary bailee MUST STILL deliver goods to the proper owner…good faith doesn’t matter!
● Cowen majority
○ Modern rule for involuntary bailees
■ Involuntary bailee has no duty to return goods to property owner, but good faith matters!
● Lehman’s Cowen dissent has modernly been adopted!
○ Voluntary bailee accepts responsibility that comes with possessing property; TO can evaluate good faith!
● BAILMENT ANALYSIS: three questions!
○ 1: Is there a bailment issue/is a bailment relationship formed?
■ Did a transfer of property possession happen?
● Circumstantial! Is there some attendant/security guard that has temporary possession?
■ If not, stop → there is no duty/liability if no formed bailment relationship
○ 2: What is the bailee’s duty of care with respect to the bailment?
■ Modern Doctrine framework: DUTY OF REASONABLE CARE FOR ALL BAILMENTS
● Circumstantial! Was it foreseeable?
● Courts are stricter on misdelivery (property given to wrong person) than for damage/theft
(Cowen)
■ Justice Story’s framework (Old Story Doctrine) → duty of care depends on who benefits from the
bailment (requires understanding what the benefit is!)
● 1: If sole benefit is for the bailor, bailee’s slight diligence is required
○ Liable for gross neglect
○ Ask: how can the bailee satisfy slight diligence?
■ Ex: B possesses (keeps) A’s car while A is vacationing (B owes SD)
● 2: If sole benefit is for the bailee, bailee’s great diligence is required
○ Liable for slight neglect
○ Ask: how can the bailee satisfy great diligence?
■ Ex: B possesses (borrows) A’s lawn mower (B’s owes GD)
● 3: If reciprocal benefit, bailee’s ordinary diligence is required
○ Liable for ordinary neglect
○ Ask: how can the bailee satisfy ordinary diligence?
■ Could be helpful to analyze who is paying who if applicable in fact pattern
■ Ex: A possesses B’s coat at A’s dry cleaning shop (A owes OD)
○ 3: Who is better situated to protect the property?
■ THIS IS A POLICY POINT that derives from Allen (hotel in better position, they can spread out cost)
■ Learned Hand?
● Allen v. Hyatt Regency-Nashville Hotel (TN, 1984) → commercial garage, P parked in D’s garage, car missing
○ BAILMENT FOR HIRE RELATIONSHIP FORMED; a bailment was created in hotel parking garage because the hotel
was in a better position to protect
○ When bailee doesn’t give property back (non-deliver), negligence is presumed (provided by statute)
■ Bailments can be created despite disclaimers (circumstantial)
● Garage was commercial/enclosed/regularly attended by security patrolled
● Disclaimers are NOT ENOUGH to prevent a bailment relationship when circumstances point to the
existence of a bailment relationship! → this is focused on THEFT

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
● Are they on notice? (signed a clear disclaimer vs. signed an easily ignorable disclaimer like in Allen)
○ Court analyzes through torts lens; duty of care should fall on who can cheaply avoid problems
○ Dissent (Drowota): No implied bailment because no traditional elements of delivery/control exist
● Cowen v. Pressprich (1922) → misdelivery of a bond (dissent + majority focused on reasonableness standard)
○ LOTS OF MISTAKES!! Bailee is strictly liable!
■ Courts are typically stricter on bailees receiving misdeliveries than for damage/theft
■ OLD RULE: Involuntary bailee still must deliver goods to the proper owner…good faith doesn’t matter!
● MODERN RULE = Lehman’s dissent: involuntary bailee has no duty to return, good faith matters!
● Finders of goods are typically “involuntary bailees”

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
ABANDONMENT
○ General rule: Personal property CAN be abandoned, but perfect title to real property CANNOT be abandoned!
○ The law doesn’t allow real property to NOT be owned
■ Someone must always have a present possessory interest in real property!
○ Pocono Springs (1995) → D stopped paying real estate taxes, sheriff’s sale, no buyers, another tax sale, no buyers,
D mailed intent to abandon to “all interested parties,” refused to accept mail at that address, D loses because he
did not relinquish rights!
■ Test for abandoning real property
● Voluntary relinquishment of all title & right/claim to possession
● Intention to terminate ownership
● No vesting ownership in anyone else
● Intention to not reclaim possession
■ POLICY REASON WHY WE DON’T ALLOW ABANDONMENT
● People make decisions that are optimal for themselves, but taint the pool
● Negative externalities: we don’t want empty houses everywhere
● Environmental concerns
● Government wants to gain the property taxes on real property
● DESTRUCTION
○ Eyerman v. Mercantile Trust Co. (1975) → house NOT destroyed for public policy reasons
■ P’s will to knock down house void for public policy (dead landowners more restrained than living)
■ Dissent (Clemens): Destruction might have been for good reason, and we should protect a will’s wishes
○ POLICY: Destroying houses just to honor a will is against public policy; No one would benefit from destruction!
■ Cannot impose conditions that oppose public policy!
○ RULE: Taking property by inheritance (will) is not an absolute right; the state may foreclose the right
● TRANSFER OF PROPERTY
○ 2 basic types
■ Exchanges (contracts)
■ Gifts (trusts and estates)
● (1) donor must intend to give the gift
● (2) donor must deliver the gift
● (3) donee must accept the gift (CANNOT REFUSE)
● TRANSFER OF PROPERTY: STATUTE OF FRAUDS (SOF)
○ Land transactions must be transferred in a signed writing under the SOF
■ Exceptions: (1) short term leases, (2) Louisiana doesn’t follow this, lol
■ Types of signed writings: deed, a will, any written instrument
○ Two types of fraud:
■ Fraud in the inducement
● They think they’re signing one thing, but they’re signing something else (they’re just kinda dumb)
■ Fraud in the factum → produces void title, NOT voidable title
● Misrepresentation causes one to enter a transaction without realizing risks, duties, or obligations
● Hauck v. Crawford: Hauck = 8th grade education, his negligence does not justify fraud
○ Foster v. Reiss → delivery requirement for non-gifts:
■ Dying woman wrote letter showing intent to leave to husband, but no property transferred (not delivered)
■ Delivery requirement for a non-gift! The deed must be signed, sealed, and delivered
■ Dissent: this is too ritualistic, we know the woman wanted to transfer to her husband
■ Establishing a gift causa mortis requires:
● Donor (1) anticipates death, (2) dies of anticipated peril, (3) and has clear donative intent
● TRANSFER OF PROPERTY: LAND TRANSACTIONS

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
○ Wood v. Donahue (doctrine of equitable conversion)
■ The purchaser under a land installment contract = equitable owner of the land via contract’s execution
● Purchaser: property’s equitable owner, reaps benefits that accrue to the land and bears risk of
loss
● Seller: entitled to purchase money, retains title as security for payment of purchase money, does
not retain any equitable interest on the property
○ Marketable title: free from defects and incumbencies
○ Perfect title: nothing wrong with it – no dispute!
○ Types of deeds:
■ General warranty deed
● The grantor covenants against title defects created both by himself and by all prior titleholders
● You make promises and you’re willing to go to court to defend them
■ Quit claim deed
● To formally release, renounce, or relinquish a legal claim to property (giving up whatever you
have)
● Basically, a release of whatever interest, if any, the grantor has in the property
● Covenants warranting the grantor’s title is inconsistent with quick claim deeds
● Seller says “not my problem, I gave this to you”
■ Special warranty deed
● Guarantees the title against defects arising only during the period the grantor holds title, and does
not extend to the property's entire ownership history (warranting that this is good title and will
defend against it)
● The grantor covenants only that he himself did not create title defects; he represents nothing
about what prior owners might have done
● Covers ANY problems that the seller caused
○ LAND DEMARCATIONS
■ Defines property boundaries!
● Keeping of land involves identifying what land you are keeping! What are the exact boundaries?
● Two broad categories
○ Rectangular survey: originated w/ Land Ordinance of 1785; defines rectangular land plots
■ Almost all land in fed. public domain follows this/why cities/farms are rectangular
■ More $$$ than metes & bounds, but more certain descriptions/easier to use
■ Some (Libecap & Lueck) argue shapes lead to economic value!
○ Metes and bounds system: rocks, trees, etc. mark boundaries (prevails in Eastern states)
■ Mistakes are common! Nature erodes over time!
■ Cheaper than rectangular survey, but can be tailored to rugged terrain
■ Uniquely suited to American colonial development
● TRANSFER OF PROPERTY: NEMO DAT (nobody can give dat!)
○ Nemo dat quod non habet = one cannot give that which one does not have
○ “Chain of transactions”/“derivation principle”
○ Transferee’s rights derive from those of transferor
○ Prior in time = prior in right
○ Nemo dat = baseline principle regarding transfers of ownership
■ UNLESS good faith purchaser
● UNLESS original sale gave void title due to fraud in the factum
○ UNLESS the seller was negligent
○ Innocent purchaser can still have rights to goods IF
■ (1) Their purchase was in good faith

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
■ (2) they gave value in exchange for the good
● TRANSFER OF PROPERTY: GOOD FAITH PURCHASERS’ EXCEPTION TO NEMO DAT
○ The purchaser didn’t have notice that there was something wrong with the intermediate seller claim
■ Don’t blame innocent purchaser who did not have notice!
○ “ETERNAL TRIANGLE” = original owner, bad actor, innocent purchaser
■ The bad actor is usually gone, so 2 innocent parties have to battle it out
● Ask: who of those 2 parties is in a better position to avoid the loss? It depends!
○ UCC recognizes exception for goods (UCC §2-403), BUT transferor must have “voidable” title; NOT “void” title
○ Voidable title: Power to transfer to a good faith purchaser for value!! → NEMO DAT EXCEPTION APPLIES!
■ SOMEBODY (the bad actor) CAN GIVE DAT!
■ Example of Nemo Dat exception: acquiring goods with a fraudulent check (Kotis v. Nowlin Jewelry)
● Original owner: Nowling Jewelry, sold watch to Sitton
● Bad actor: Sitton, fraudulently purchased watch from Nowling Jewelry
● “Innocent purchaser”: Kotis, purchased watch from Sitton
● Sitton had voidable title; he paid with a forged check, so he could transfer title to Kotis
○ KOTIS ON CONSTRUCTIVE NOTICE THAT WATCH WAS STOLEN via low watch cost
○ Void title: No power to create rights in another (via theft) → NEMO DAT EXCEPTION DOES NOT APPLY
■ SO, STILL, NOBODY CAN GIVE DAT!!
■ EXAMPLE: If Sitton (Kotis v. Nowlin Jewelry) had stolen Nowlin’s watch, title to Kotis = void
○ How to prove ownership (3 ways to effectuate transferring property; 3 types of jurisdictions for recording acts)
■ Filing system (permanent public recording of property interests) = alt. to transfer rules based on
possession
● Purpose = notice to all of the world, but purchasers need the most info!
○ Problem: does a potential trespasser need to look up the state of a title?
■ Recording acts require a grantee to make some sort of recordation that gives “notice to the world” that
property title has already been conveyed, which puts subsequent purchasers on notice
● Inquiry notice: a reasonable person would have done more research to discover something
● Record notice: there’s a record, you should have checked!
■ 1: Race acts (it’s a race to the government office to file your deed first!)
● Just file first and you win the property! → no requirement of good faith
● Creates another exception to Nemo Dat principle and partial exception to good faith purchaser
● Subsequent purchaser could prevail over the holder of a prior unrecorded interest
■ 2: Notice acts:
● Subsequent purchaser for value prevails over a prior grantee only if the subsequent purchaser
lacked notice of the earlier conveyance
● Recording provides constructive notice → good faith matters!
● A → B, B→ C…who wins between B and C?
○ C wins only if C didn’t have notice (which can be record notice) of the other transfer
■ If C was on record notice and acted in bad faith, B wins!
■ 3: Race-Notice acts:
● First purchaser to record (race) AND acquired in good faith prevails (like if you lacked notice of the
earlier interest)
■ *some states apply mixed regimes (example: a race act to mortgages, but others to general conveyances)

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

SERVITUDES
EASEMENTS (CREATION, TERMINATION, MISUSE)
COVENANTS (EQUITABLE SERVITUDES, REAL COVENANTS, RUNNING WITH THE LAND, NOTICE, TERMINATION)
●

●

●

SERVITUDE = a contract that binds successors in ownership; they run with the land (1: easements and 2: covenants)
○ Easements CANNOT be struck down for changed circumstances
○ Covenants CAN be abandoned AND struck down for changed circumstances
■ Peckham v. Milroy → To determine if a covenant has been abandoned, the court will consider:
● 1) Habitual & substantial violations (frequency & size of violation ); and
● 2) If enforcement of the covenant would be inequitable
○ Nonpossessory interest in land!
○ 5 types of servitudes
■ 1: Easements → grant of property use right that tends to stick around!
■ 2: Licenses → a privilege to enter the land of another for a limited purpose! (flimsiest of all servitudes)
■ 3: Profit a prendre → similar to an easement, but entitles holder to extract natural resources from land
■ 4: Real covenant → starts as a contract, rooted in law
■ 5: Equitable servitude → similar to a real covenant, rooted in equity
THE LAW OF SERVITUDES: Allows for lawful transfers of permanent property rights! (Permanently serving property rights)
○ One way to rearrange one’s bundle of rights (aka sticks); transfer ownership of individual bundle elements!
How are leases different from licenses and easements?
○ Leases include the right to exclude, Licenses & Easements do NOT include the right to exclude
○ Leases transfer possession, Licenses & Easements only transfer use rights (not possession)
○ Lease = contract + conveyance of land, Licenses & Easements are not that
Present Estates

Easements

Licenses

Possessory or Non-possessory RIGHT?

Possessory

Subject to SOF?

Triggers SOF

Only triggers SOF if trying
to transfer the easement

No SOF (typically oral)

Yes

Can it be granted orally?

No (SOF!!)

Yes

Yes (and it’s typical)

No

Right to exclude?
What if Licensee detrimentally relies
on Licensor’s permission?

N/A

Non-possessory (use)

Lease
Possessory

No

Yes

License → Easement by Estoppel (an irrevocable
grant)

N/A

EASEMENTS → functionally like a contract, make a deal!
● Easements give you the right to enter/use someone else's land
○ Usually waives the right to exclude
○ Runs with the land (good or bad…you bought the land, so you bought the easement’s burden/benefit!)
○ Gives right to a particular use
○ Cannot be revoked easement’s duration (differs from licenses, which are revocable)
○ The right to use is non-possessory
● Ex: right of way across land, right to water cattle on someone’s land, utilities’ right to lay power lines
● Easements are either (1) appurtenant to land or (2) held in gross
○ Easement Appurtenant = Benefit is attached to the parcel of land and always runs with it
■ Waiver of one’s right to exclude BELONGS with the land!

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
■ “It Takes Two” → two parcels must be involved!
● Land being crossed/burdened by easement = servient parcel
● Land being reached/benefited/enhanced by easement = dominant parcel
● Example: A grants B a right of way across A’s land so that B can more easily reach B’s land
○ A’s land is serving B’s easement
○ B has an easement appurtenant to B’s dominant tenement because it allows B to derive a
benefit in B’s use and enjoyment of B’s own land
○ Easement in Gross = Benefit is attached to a person
■ Baseball Publishing Co: This is more than a lease or a license; it’s an easement in gross!
■ “It Takes One” → servient land; no dominant parcel
■ Servient land is burdened, but there is no dominant parcel
● No land is benefited; only a person benefits
● Examples: the right to place a billboard on another’s lot or swim in another’s pond
■ Typically for recreational easements:
● Easement to fish, hunt, camp, boating etc on someone else’s land
■ They are NOT transferable, unless for commercial purposes
● Example: you cannot transfer the right you were given to swim in another’s pond!
● Example: you can transfer the right to fish for bait in another’s lake
● Easements are either (1) affirmative (most common!) or (2) negative
○ AFFIRMATIVE EASEMENT: Permits easement holder to perform some affirmative act on servient parcel
■ Example: allowing a power company to put electrical wires on your property
■ Can be created in any of four ways (PING): Prescription, Implication, Necessity, or Grant (estoppel)
○ Negative Easement: Rare, but permits easement holder to demand servient stop certain actions
■ More narrow in scope than affirmative easements!
■ No automatic right to a negative easement! They can only be granted via expressed grant (a signed
writing)
■ Does not give dominant holder the right to do anything; they can only STOP the servient’s actions
■ 5 traditional negative easements (today these are usually done by creating a covenant):
● SASS → sunlight, air, support, stream water
○ 1: Stop interfering with sunlight falling on windows
○ 2: Stop the flow of air in a defined channel
○ 3: Stop removing lateral support of buildings
○ 4: Stop the flow of stream water from an artificial source (common in dry, arid climates)
○ 5: (depends on jurisdiction) stop interfering with someone’s scenic view
● Public vs. private easement
○ PRIVATE EASEMENT: authorizes specific named parties to use the land for designated purposes
○ PUBLIC EASEMENT: authorizes the general public to use land for designated purposes
● Easement by Grant → MUST BE IN WRITING
○ Baseball Publishing Co. v. Burton
■ P received personal benefit, but no benefit to land, so P has an easement in gross created by grant
■ If lease, then transfer of possessory interest in land does exist; so NOT a lease here!
■ How do you tell which easement is which?
● If they intended it to be either, that’s what it will be
● If unclear, court will look at circumstances
● If it adds to use and enjoyment of neighboring partner, will probably be appurtenant
● SOF does not apply to the following: PINE (easements by Prescription, Implication, Necessity, or Estoppel)
○ EASEMENT BY PRESCRIPTION → the permanent legal right to use someone else’s property
■ Similar to AP, but AP grants title while prescriptive easements only grant an easement

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
● Prescriptive easements don’t have to be exclusive, are usually revocable, give use rights, & have a
shorter SOL
■ When the claimant’s use of property is COAH + DLOT + For the Given Statutory Period, they have an
easement by prescription
● C → Continuous (not constant)/uninterrupted for the statutory period
● O → Open and notorious (visible use to owner, like walking across someone’s land)
● A → Actual entry that need not be exclusive
● H → Hostile use (without the servient owner’s consent; if you get permission, that’s a license)
● DLOT → Definite Line Of Travel
○ The court in Warsaw also added this requirement (like following a driveway)!
■ Structure interfering with Warsaw’s property use right must be removed
■ Sometimes, easement holders must compensate for (1) the fair market value of the easement OR (2) the
cost of removing an interfering encroachment
○ EASEMENT BY IMPLICATION → An easement is implied from prior use
■ A separation of title, but use allowed from before the separation (1) continued and (2) was so obvious so
as to show that it was meant to be permanent
■ Without this easement, the property owner cannot enjoy usual use of property
■ Policy for existing: prevent subdivision property purchasers from being surprised that no easement exists
■ Example: A owns two lots; Lot 1 is hooked up to a sewer drain located on Lot 2, A sells Lot 1 to B without
mention of B’s right to continue use of the drain → the court will imply an easement for B!
○ EASEMENT BY NECESSITY → When an owner conveys partland with no way out (landlocked)
■ If the owner severs a landlocked portion of property & conveys it to another, the future buyer of
landlocked property has an easement that was passed onto them
■ Owners who do the land-severing cannot claim an easement by necessity or implication
■ It doesn’t matter how inconvenient it is to get to your land (geographical barriers like water/forest); if you
can get to your land legally, NO easement by necessity!
● Courts are less strict on this today
● Schwab v. Timmons
○ P failed to show they needed an easement by implication; the private road they sought to
extend did not & had never extended to their properties
○ REQUIREMENTS
■ (1) severance of property held in common ownership
■ (2) the owner is who severed part of the property
■ (3) the severed portion is landlocked
○ EASEMENT BY ESTOPPEL → Easement holder pays to use land
■ The owner of land grants a license to another to use and make improvements upon the land, and the
licensee, relying on this permission, does so at considerable cost, leaving license irrevocable
● Licenses are freely revocable, UNLESS estoppel applies through a licensee investing substantial
money or labor in reasonable reliance that license would continue!
○ Example: show tickets are revocable: no significant money/labor spent!
● License = privilege that are NOT subject to SOF
■ Holbrook v. Taylor → easement by estoppel
● Once a landowner gives the licensee permission to use/improve land in an expensive way, the
landowner does not have the right to revoke the license
● How to succeed on easement by estoppel
○ 1: Owner grants permission to use/improve land
○ 2: A reasonable person would not think this permission would be revoked!
■ Granted license = IRREVOCABLE!

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
Revocation of the license can cause unjust enrichment!
● We want to prevent this
○ 3: The recipient detrimentally relied on permission being continued!
■ Reliance can estopp someone from claiming “no easement”
■ Fontainebleau Hotel Corp v. 4525 inc. → no easement by estoppel
● As long as no legal right is infringed, a landowner may reasonably & lawfully use property
● No legal right to the free flow of light and air across adjoining land
● The right to have one’s view cannot be created by implication; otherwise, property development
would be hindered
○ EASEMENT BY RESERVATION → The landower reserves himself an easement in the land he sells to the buyer
■ Example: A buys land from B that is between B and the road. B can reserve himself an easement to cross
A’s parcel in order to get to the road
EASEMENT TERMINATION
○ 5 ways to terminate easements
■ Most commonly by deed (parties agree to end easement)
■ Merger as a Matter of Law (dominant & servient tract are commonly owned which merges the easement)
■ AP/prescription (easement ends UNLESS dominant owner objects before SOL expires)
■ Prolonged nonuse creates an inference that easement = abandoned…then easement ends (ex: railroads)
■ Necessity for easement ends
● Schwab v. Timmons → landlocked
○ 1 way to temporary stop easement
■ Misuse of easement (reasonableness standard)
● Remedy = temporary injunction to stop misuse, not easement termination unless you don’t stop
● Penn Bowling (bowling alley uses land for restaurant unloading, land owner puts up wall to stop)
○ Use with one parcel is fine, but NOT with additional parcel
Profit a prendre: the nonpossessory right to enter another’s land to extract something (similar to an easement)
○ One’s right to exclude is WAIVED; a right to cross/use someone else's land, typically for a specified purpose
○ Examples: timber, fruit from trees, fish/game from a lake/forest
■

●

●

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
COVENANTS VS. EQUITABLE SERVITUDES
● Covenant → contract where parties agree to do/not do something with land
○ SOF applies; all covenants must be in writing!
○ Ex: you cannot paint your house yellow or blue, you won’t dry clothes on clothes lines
○ 2 covenant variations (both are promises to respect use of land; the difference lies in the remedy for the breach!)
■ Equitable servitude remedy = injunction (equity)
■ Real covenant remedy = damages (common law)
● SOMETIMES these agreements bind successors when they didn’t agree to anything
○ If they are bound, the benefit/burden of the covenant is said to “run with the land” (Tulk v. Moxhay)
■ Missing privity requirement is okay in Tulk
● Covenants can’t be by PINE (prescription, implication, necessity, estoppel) bc they need to be in writing (differs from
easements)
● Restrictive covenant = we discussed racially restrictive covenants (most covenants are restrictive!)
● Affirmative covenant = contract requiring a party to do something (like promising to maintain a fence)
● How to analyze Covenant vs Equitable Servitude questions
○ Step 1: Who is the burdening/benefiting party
■ Who is being forced (burdener), and who is doing the forcing (benefiter)? Are both?
○ Step 2: Are we dealing with a real covenant, or an equitable servitude?
■ What remedy is being sought; injunction (ES) or damages (RC)?
○ Step 3: Does the burden/benefit run?
■ Harder for burden to run than for the benefit to run
● How to terminate a Covenant
○ Bolotin v. Rindge (change of circumstances)
■ A court will declare a deed restriction unenforceable by reason of changed circumstances if:
● 1) If enforcement of the covenant would be inequitable;
● 2) enforcement would harass the other (the burdened) party; and
● 3) and it would serve no benefit to the adjoining land owners
○ Covenant abandonment requires proof that prior violations eroded general plan, & enforcement is inequitable
○ Peckham v. Milroy
■ To determine if a covenant has been abandoned, the court considers:
● 1) Habitual & substantial violations (Frequency and size of violation); and
● 2) If enforcement of the covenant would be inequitable
● Equitable servitude theory (injunction remedy)
○ When a lessor/lessee transfers their interest in property subject to a lease
○ If you purchase property with notice of restrictive covenant burdening the land, you must honor it
○ Tulk v. Moxhay → why courts should enforce ES
■ It’s inequitable to knowingly sell property that's burdened to another & receive $ for it
Requirements for burden of an ES to run (TWIN):

Requirements for benefit of an ES to run (WIT):

No horizontal/vertical privity requirement AT ALL
Touch and Concern

Writing

Writing

Intent

Intent

Touch and Concern

Notice
●

Real covenant theory (damages remedy)

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
○ Normally found in deeds: written promise to do or not do something on land
○ Benefits and burdens are analyzed separately to determine if they run with the land
○ Eagle Enterprises Inc. v. Gross
■ A covenant runs with the land only if (all three conditions must be met → tripartite rule):
● (1) Intent between original grantor and original grantee;
● (2) Privity of estate between current parties contesting the covenant; and
● (3) the covenant touches and concerns the land with which it runs
○ Must reasonably relate to use of land and affect parties’ legal relations as landowners
■ A covenant must change the value of the land
■ Somewhat uncertain, it varies & is a murky area of the law
○ Neponsit Prop Owners Assc. V. Emigrant Industrial Savings Bank
■ Expanded definition of touch & concern
● Covenant need not physically TOUCH land (it included an easement
allowing use of roads/beaches)
Requirements for burden of a RC to run (WITHN)

Requirements for benefit of a RC to run (WITV)
Writing
Intent

Touch and Concern
Horizontal + Vertical Privity (need both…THIS DIFFERS IN ES)
Vertical Privity ONLY
Horizontal concerns relationship between OG parties
● Complete succession not required, only need
● Difficult to establish (common obstacle for burden to run)
some non hostile nexus (not AP)
○ Neighbors don't count; they are often not each
other's grantor/grantee, landlord/tenant,
debtor/creditor, etc. (grantor/grantee would be
most common)
● OG relationship must have been one of SUCCESSION
○ Landlord/tenant, debtor/creditor, grant/grantee like
a developer who sells off lots to people
Vertical concerns relationship between CURRENT parties
● Easier to establish
● Some non-hostile nexus (no AP) must be found between A &
A1 via deed, familial relationship, deed, a devise in a will, etc.
● COMPLETE succession of the estate must exist
○ Lease is not complete succession, purchase is
○ Kind of gets at fee simple absolute
Notice
● A1 must have had notice (constructive/inquiry, record, or actual) of A and B’s original promise
○ Sanborn v. McLean: McLean’s on inquiry notice of covenant’s existence bc obvious, general neighborhood plan;
they should have tried to discover the covenant’s existence!
● Traditionally not required, but now it is (varies by jx)
● (1) Actual/told up front OR (2) Constructive (on record with county which establishes inquiry notice)

NUISANCE

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

BASICS, DISTINGUISHING FROM TRESPASS, SCOPE OF RIGHT OF NON-INTERFERENCE
●

●
●

●

●

●
●

Nuisance picks up where trespass leaves off; it is a non-trespassory invasion of land that causes substantial injury and an
unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of property
○ Nuisance is an ex post way of dealing with property-use conflict
Prosser calls it an “impenetrable jungle”; many complications arise with nuisance law, no concrete theory to deal with it
Remember Sic Utere Principle; it limits the private use right of one’s property, but to an extent
○ Fontainebleau Hotel Corp
■ A landowner does not have a legal right to the light/air/sunlight across the adjoining land of his neighbor
● Light/air/sunlight are NOT sticks in your bundle!
● If no legal right is infringed, a landowner can use property in any reasonable & lawful manner
● The right to have one’s view remain unobstructed cannot be created by implication; otherwise,
property development would be hindered!
■ Court doesn’t care if done out of spite (hotel owners = friends breakup) (some jx allow spite exceptions)
● Spite Fence Doctrine (unless spiteful structure is useful)
○ Malicious things to injure neighbors are not allowed!
Campbell v. Seaman → toxic fumes enough for nuisance; damage to P (mansion/flowers) large & substantial, P wins!
○ If damage to P is small or trifling, and the damage to D is large if restrained, courts sometimes deny an injunction
○ How to establish a prima facie case of nuisance:
■ (1) What defenses are available
■ (2) What remedies are available?
○ Locality rule/principle
■ What is ordinary use in the neighborhood?
■ Some can tolerate certain noise/smells in industrial areas, some can’t (determines if wrongful land
interference)
NUISANCE DEFENSES
○ “Coming to the nuisance” defense → P literally came to the nuisance so they can’t complain!
■ Bars a nuisance claim if P knew of the nuisance before they acquired the property
■ Courts usually don’t apply this!
● Instead, courts look at many factors: timing, good faith, spite, public interest, etc.
○ Estoppel or acquiescence defense
■ Estoppel: one party led the other to think one thing, but then did the other (be reasonable!)
NUISANCE REMEDIES
○ Injunction granted IF no adequate remedy at law (damages unhelpful…if no injunction, litigation = infinity!)
DISTINGUISHING NUISANCE FROM TRESPASS
○ Nuisance social value balancing test:
■ P must show:
● (1) Actual, substantial/significant harm that results from
● (2) An unreasonable interference(s) with
● (3) The use or enjoyment of property
○ Modern trespass view:
■ Invasion of physical object OR intangible object can qualify as trespassing
■ Actual & substantial damages NOT required
■ NO NEED to balance P’s damage with the social utility of it’s cause
○ Trespass historically required and concerned POSSESSION (less P friendly) think Jaques
■ (1) An invasion by a physical tangible object (tangible = visible to naked eye)
■ (2) The invasion is direct (no intervening force)
○ Adams v. Cleveland-Cliffs Iron Company → THIS IS A NUISANCE CASE, TRESPASSING CLAIM LOSES
■ P sues mining company for trespassing via dust, vibrations, and noise (but court says this is nuisance)

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
■ The court did NOT follow the modern view of trespassing that allows intangible objects to be trespassing
■ The mining company failed the trespass requirements:
● Did the mining company know or should they have known what they were doing?
○ Directness requirement satisfied (the court said they probably should have known!)
○ BUT tangible physical object requirement not satisfied (dust/noise/vibrations not tangible)
■ 4 tests to distinguish nuisance from trespassing:
● 1: Was D’s action giving rise to the intrusion committed on P’s land or outside P’s land?
○ On Land → T
○ Outside → N
● 2: Was the harm to P’s land direct or indirect?
○ Direct → T
○ Indirect → N
● 3: Was the invasion committed by a tangible matter or some intangible substance?
○ Tangible → T
○ Intangible → N (but now, a T claim can succeed)
● 4: Did the intrusion deprive P of land possession or use and enjoyment of their land?
○ Possession → T
○ Use & Enjoyment → N

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

ZONING
●

●

●

●

●

Zoning ordinances
○ Zoning is meant to regulate land (organizes different locations for different uses)
○ They are law; the government steps in to enact regulations to say you can/can’t do something
■ Zoning is not unconstitutional on its face, but their constitutionality has been challenged before!
○ Modern zoning ordinances prescribe 3 zones: (1) residence (2) business (3) unrestricted
Cumulative/use-based zoning
○ Zoning levels go from restrictive to permissive, allowing all previous uses while accumulating additional uses
■ Euclid: U1-6 have diff. rules about what types of buildings/structures can go in certain areas of the village
● If something is allowed in U1, it is also allowed in U2, U3, U4, U5, and U6
○ Things that are less pleasant can go in any zone that is designated for it, or a less-nice zone
● If something is allowed in U6, it is ONLY allowed in U6
● Scheme example from Euclid
○ U-1 – Single family homes, parks
Residenti
○ U-2 – Duplexes
al
○ U-3 – Apartments and schools
Residential,
○ U-4 – Offices and retail
Commercial
○ U-5 – Warehouses and auto repair
Residential, Commercial,
○ U-6 – Industrial
Agricultural
○ Duplexes can go in U-2 through U-6
Residential, Commercial,
Agricultural, Industrial
○ Warehouses can only go in U-5 or U-6
● Holding: use-based zoning regulations are constitutional UNLESS they are clearly arbitrary and
unreasonable, have no substantial relation to public health, safety, morals, or general welfare
○ ISSUE: zoning was trying to keep out poor people here
Ind
Noncumulative zoning
ustr
○ Each zoning district is exclusive & each zone only allows one type of development
Agr
○ Determined by municipalities
ial
icul
Co
How to not be bound/burdened by zoning ordinance:
tura
mm
Re
○ 1: Non-conforming use
lsid
erci
■ If the structure was built BEFORE the zoning ordinance took effect, it will be allowed to stay standing
al
enti
● Grandfathering in, if not you can go to the board and ask
al
■ Amortization: you can stay here for X amount of years
○ 2: Special exceptions (they are built into the zoning ordinance itself)
■ Exception specially designed for certain parcels/particular building that are baked into the zoning law
○ 3: Get a variance
■ It is NOT baked into the zoning law
■ Case-by-case exception for hardship; developers can apply for them AFTER zoning ordinances go into
effect, and if they receive a variance, they will be excused for following the ordinance
○ Difference between a special exception & a variance:
■ A right to a special exception is given if one satisfied criteria is set forth in the zoning ordinance
■ Variance is given for a special hardship or undue burden as determined within a broad grant
Pro-Zoning (late 19th & early 20th centuries)
○ Pro-regulation in general; they promote certainty
○ Buying a home is investing A LOT into a single property; people get nervous about home value decreasing
○ Can’t rely on nuisance law because fines could happen instead of injunctions, which are needed
○ Can’t rely on covenants because there are huge transaction costs + it’s difficult for everyone to agree
○ Zoning leads to better cities (urban planning argument)

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
○ People place higher value in their homes (endowment effect) than what the true market value is, so market value
compensation is undercompensating them
● Anti-Zoning:
○ Entities with more political power will be more effective at shaping zoning laws to their liking
■ Rent Seeking: spending $ to lobby the government to get economic advantage
■ Real estate developers have a lot of money & power
■ Some regulatory entities can be captured by other entities
○ Discriminatory purposes/effects
■ Earlier zoning targeted users (not uses), which led to racist zoning ordinances that USSC struck down
■ Zoning can further class & race segregation (it is a tool to implement exclusion)
● Think of the Lochner era (1987-1937), where there was race discrimination
● Think of Euclid; it was trying to keep out people that couldn’t afford single family homes
○ Zoning an entire community for only mansions is unfair against lower classes
○ Too rigid & sticks around too long
○ Nuisance & covenants are better to let people determine what uses should be allowed
■ Changed circumstances doctrine can be used to get out of them if needed
○ Let people build what they want!

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

DIVIDING OWNERSHIP
PRESENT + FUTURE INTERESTS AND WASTE, CO-TENANCIES (SEVERANCE & PARTITION), LEASES
(INDEPENDENT/DEPENDENT COVENANTS, IMPLIED WARRANTY, SURRENDER, DUTY TO MITIGATE
●
●

Possessory rights can be flexible over time (they can be divided!)
When dividing property rights to land over time, the pieces created must conform to a menu of possibilities called Estates
in Land (the degree, quantity, nature, & extent of interest a person has in real & personal property)
STEP 1: Identify which present POSSESSORY interest is being discussed!
● How is the title being held? What form of estate is it? FSA? LE? FSD? FSSTACS? FSSTEL?
● There are 5 Present Possessory Interests (an interest in property that gives you the right to possess now):
○ 1) Fee Simple Absolute
■ Title is given by saying “To Mr. Smith”; Mr. Smith has a Fee Simple Absolute
○ 2) Life Estate
■ Title is given by saying “To Mr. Smith, for life.”; Mr. Smith has a Life Estate
■ Title of Life Estate Pur Autre Vie is given by saying “To Mr. Smith, for the life of Mr. Johnson.”
● Mr. Smith has a Life Estate Pur Autre Vie
■ Life tenants are entitled to reasonable uses & profits from land, but they cannot commit waste because it
can injure future interest holders!
● The law is trying to prevent conflict between people who have rights at different times
● Three types of waste (waste is a COA)
○ Affirmative waste: acting, not harmful, but excessive damage (wilful destruction)
■ More than ordinary wear and tear
■ Example: chopping down rare trees
○ Permissive waste: neglectfulness, not acting when you should, excessive damage
■ More than ordinary wear and tear
■ Example: failure to patch up a leaky ceiling hole
○ Ameliorative waste: significant change in property that enhances the property’s market
value (waste that makes things better!)
■ Ex: no enhancement allowed UNLESS all future interest holders know & consent
● Brokaw v. Fairchild → ameliorative waste case; P’s could NOT demolish
■ Traditionally prohibited, but not anymore (it’s a benefit, you can’t really be upset)
○ 3) Fee simple determinable (Defeasible Fees)
■ Title is given by saying “To Mr. Smith, as long as he is a lawyer”
● Triggering event = Mr. Smith NOT being a lawyer anymore
● Mr. Smith has a Fee Simple Determinable with the Possibility of Reverter!
○ 4) Fee simple subject to a condition subsequent (Defeasible Fees)
■ Title is given by saying “To Mr. Smith, but if coffee is ever consumed on the premises, grantor reserves the
right to re-enter and re-take”
● Mr. Smith has a Fee Simple Subject to a Conditional Statement!
○ The grantor has the Right to Entry in the future if Mr. Smith breaks the conditional
statement!
○ 5) Fee simple subject to executory limitation (Defeasible Fees)
■ Title is given by saying “To Mr. Smith, but if he ever leaves the legal profession, then to Mr. Johnson.”

STEP 2: Once identified, look ACROSS THE CHART and figure out which (and if a) future interest corresponds!

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
Future Interests That Accompanies the Present Possessory Interest

Present Interest

Reversionary Interest (Original Grantor)

Interest In Other People

1: Fee Simple Absolute (Fees Simple Absolute)
Largest package of ownership rights; it’s the complete
bundle if you are transferring the fee simple!
Unlimited, no contingencies!
While alive, you have “heirs apparent”
Once dead, you have “heirs” (a living person has NO heirs!)

No future interest at all! (the OG owner has an
unlimited, present interest!)
Heirs don’t exist yet!

No future interest at all! (original
owner has an unlimited, present
interest!)
Heirs don’t exist yet!

2: Life Estate
A carve out of ownership rights!
Life estate pur autre vie (life estate through another life;
termination is measured by someone else’s death)

Reversion (if life estate is held by the original
owner; someone must always be able to take!)

Remainder (if life estate is held by a
third party)
Brokaw v. Fairchild
BUT a life tenant CANNOT cause
permanent injury affecting inheritor
(ameliorative waste)

Defeasible fees
Who gets the possessory interest if a triggering event occurs → the original grantor, or a 3rd party?
Basically, they are all fees simple, but with a catch!
1: Fee Simple Determinable
If triggering event occurs, present interest
AUTOMATICALLY ends.
Clear, durational language indicates a FSD:
● So/as long as, During, Until, While

The Possibility of Reverter (similar to reversion,
but different!)
● ONLY goes with fee simple
determinable
● “Fee simple determinable with
possibility of reverter”

N/A (goes back to original grantor)

2: Fee simple subject to a condition subsequent
If triggering event occurs, the OG grantor can CHOOSE
whether to end the possessory interest
Words that indicate a FSSTACS:
● But if, on condition that, if, provided that

Right of Entry AKA Power of Termination (but
laches can bar on the grounds of unreasonable
delay in bringing it…even a 10 min gap!)

N/A (goes back to original grantor)

3: Fee simple subject to executory limitation
If the triggering event occurs, the possessory interest does
NOT return to the OG grantor…it AUTOMATICALLY
transfers to a 3RD PARTY, who has the executory interest!
Clauses that make conditional OR durational statements:
● Property to A, until X happens, then to B

N/A (it goes to someone else, not the original
owner)

Executory Interest (goes to 3rd party;
NOT original grantor)

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
CO-TENANCIES (CONCURRENT OWNERSHIP/ESTATES)
● Types of division: horizontal (division over time) & vertical (division at any moment in time)
● Severance only changes the nature of the relationship
● Tenancy in common (presumed unless clear manifestation of intent to create JT/TBTE) → DEFAULT CONCURRENT
ESTATE
○ Unequal shares allowed
○ NO right of survivorship between tenants: when 1 tenant dies, their interest passes onto their own heirs
■ The interest goes where each tenant wants it to go!
○ 1 unity required at the creation of TIC
■ Possession→ Each must have equal right to possess the whole
○ Unity can be severed unilaterally (like if one person dies or by transferring the unity of “title”)
● Joint tenancy (presumed if no TBTE & there is an ambiguous transfer to a married couple)
○ Each has the right to possession of the whole
○ Separate, UNDIVIDED interest
○ Right of survivorship between tenants: when 1 tenant dies, the other tenant takes all (deceased will is immaterial)
■ This will be expressly stated
■ The interest goes to the other tenant
○ 4 unities required at the creation of JT: time, title, interest, possession
■ Possession → Each has equal right to possess the whole
■ Interest → Each has equal AND same legal interest (FS/FSD/lease, etc.)
■ Time → Each acquired interest at the same time
■ Title → Each acquired title by same instrument (like a deed) or by joint AP
■ Destroying a unity (which can be done unilaterally) = severing JT and thus creating a TIC, which removes
right of survivorship even if co-tenant is unaware
● Example: M → 50% to A and 50% to B
○ If A sells his 50% to C, C and B are now TIC because the unities of time & title were broken;
so, neither C or B have a right of survivorship anymore
● DIFFERENT FOR 3+ PARTIES: M → 33% to A, 33% to B, 33% to C
○ If A sells his 30% to D, D has a TIC (if he dies, his 33% passes to his heirs); HOWEVER…B
and C are still joint tenants; if one of them dies, there is still a right of survivorship
between them
○ Does transferring a mortgage sever a JT? States are split!
■ Majority of states: Lien theory jx
● Transferring a mortgage interest is a lien (does NOT destroy JT; title unity title wasn’t broken!)
● Harms v. Sprague → JT not severed by mortgage since unity of title was preserved; interest
vanished & other tenant had whole interest without mortgage
■ Minority of states: Title theory jx
● Transferring a mortgage interest is transferring title (destroys JT; title unity was broken, now TIC)
■ *States are also split on whether leasing out property severs a JT*
○ Policy: an unrecorded mortgage is similar to a judgment lien or another type of lien, which merely establishes an
interest but not a transfer of the title
● Tenancy by the entirety (similar to JT, but more durable because neither spouse can unilaterally destroy their TBTE)
○ Separate, UNDIVIDED interest, each has the right to possession of the whole
○ Right of survivorship DEPENDS
■ If one spouse dies, the survivor takes all…but some states require spousal consent
■ If spouses divorce, the relationship is now one of TIC with no right of survivorship
○ Some southern/western states recognize Community Property for married couples
○ 5 unities required at the creation of TBTE: time, title, interest, possession, marriage

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
■ Possession → Each must have equal right to possess the whole
■ Interest → Same legal interest in property (FS/LE/lease, etc; equal fractional shares unneeded)
■ Time → Each interest must be acquired at the same time
■ Title → Each acquired title by the same instrument or by joint AP
■ Marriage → At the time of conveyance
○ Unities can ONLY be severed via divorce, death, or agreement (no partition allowed)
Tenancy In Common

Joint Tenancy

Tenancy By The Entirety

Unilateral severance?

Yes

Yes

No → only divorce, death, or agreement severs

Is partition available?

No

Yes

Not unless divorced OR agree to convert into TIC/JT

Right of Survivorship?

No (passes to heirs)

Yes (doesn’t pass to heirs)

Depends; no if divorce (bc now its aTIC) but if death,
survivor takes all

Separate but undivided interest?

Yes

Yes

No

Unities required at creation?

P

PITT

PITTM

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
PARTITION
● Any tenant can use the partition tool to sever their JT or TIC relationship at any time for any reason, or no reason at all
○ Courts determine which type (by kind or by sale) by parties’ best interests
○ TBTE tenants CANNOT use partition!
● Partition by Kind
○ The court basically auctions off the property and physically divides it proportionally via ownership %
○ The law generally favors partitioning in kind, but certain conditions warrant the court to order partition by sale
■ Delfino v. Vealencis (TIC, one owner = garbage business, guy wanted to build subdivision, 69% vs 31%)
● Policy favors partition in kind if TIC holder lives on & runs a business on their property portion
● Policy still cares if impractical/inequitable OR if partition by sale would serve interests better
● Partition by Sale
○ Sell the property and divide proceeds proportionally to % of ownership
LEASES → another way to divide the bundle of rights! BIG STICK in bundle!!
● How are leases different from licenses and easements?
○ Leases include the right to exclude, Licenses & Easements do NOT include the right to exclude
○ Leases transfer possession, Licenses & Easements only transfer use rights (not possession)
○ Lease = contract + conveyance of land, Licenses & Easements are not that
● Lease types
○ Term of Years
■ Specified, fixed endpoint; neither party needs to give notice because lease is up when its up
■ If longer than a year, SOF applies (writing required)
■ NYC lease history: fixed endpoint = May 1st, people switched houses a lot…chaos!
○ Periodic Tenancy (month-to-month leases)
■ Lease automatically rolls over (renews) for a specified time period UNLESS either party terminates
● BUT advance notice of termination is required in most jx (usually correlates to payment period)
● A lease > 1 year requires 6 month termination notice
■ Usually a month or a year → fixed period/end date (example: month-to-month leases)
○ Tenancy at will
■ No fixed end date
■ No automatic renewal (like renting with an ordinary lease)
■ Either party can terminate, but advance notice is required (usually correlates to payment period)
○ *Tenancy at sufferance → not really a lease!
■ Tenant has lease, it ends, but they don’t leave!
■ Differs from a trespasser in that the tenant at sufferance was ORIGINALLY there lawfully!
■ Landlord can evict, but CANNOT use self help (Berg v. Wiley)
■ This is NOT AP; tenant had permission at first
● How do we allocate risk when multiple leases exist?
○ Asymmetries of information: various people, they all have different type/amount of information
○ Asymmetries in the ability to control: various people, some can control what happens next, some can’t
■ Asymmetric/unequal bargaining power between landlords & tenants; leases are standardized (boilerplate)
○ The law is trying to come to a sensible allocation of risk to address asymmetry!
■ If we divide up rights, who is on the hook when bad stuff happens?
■ Caveat lessee: (tenant, beware!) → this WAS the default (Javins got rid of that)
● Who bears the risk? The tenant; the landlord doesn’t know everything about the tenant
○ The tenant needs to ask questions! They are the beneficiary of information asymmetry!
○ This can seem harsh, so courts have tried to mitigate
○ The courts try to decide if covenants are INDEPENDENT or DEPENDENT in addressing risk
■ Independent covenants

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
● 2 covenants exist, P1 violates one, P2 is NOT excused from violating other covenant
● Example: if P1 breaks lease & sells to other drug sellers, P2 still must pay rent
■ Dependent covenants = covenants affecting ENTIRE contract
● 2 covenants are linked (like through a rider), breaking one = breaking both
○ Medico-Dental Building Company of Los Angeles v. Horton and Converse
■ Covenants to pay rent & not to lease to another drug seller = DEPENDENT (breaking one = breaking both)
● Implied Warranty of Habitability → determined by the housing code
○ Is it good or bad for poor people? Practically, it doesn’t do as much as we hope
■ The poor is who this especially matters, but it’s hard for them to access legal representation to sue
○ Dependent covenant that CAN’T be waived even if tenant wants to so as to save $ by making their own repairs!
■ Landlords should fix things, not tenants because:
● Tenants are not good at repairing things
● Modern housing = difficult to repair
● People frequently move
● Tenants make fixes that last longer than their stay, so landlord reaps the benefits (asymmetry)
● Unequal bargaining power
○ Javins v. First National Realty Corp.: Implied warranties of habitability are read into residential leases
● Doctrine of constructive eviction → pro-lessee!
○ Not a regular eviction, but the law treats it as such…you move out & don’t have to pay the remainder rent!
○ Blackett v. Olanoff (Ds successfully raised constructive eviction as defense for club next door, no need to pay
rent!)
■ Factors for Constructive Eviction:
● (1) Someone’s conduct substantially interferes w/ tenant’s use and enjoyment of property
● (2) Landlord can be held responsible for that conduct
■ Nonfeasance; the landlord didn’t do anything to stop the noise! They should have…they had control!
● Doctrine of Surrender → pro-lessee! PAY ATTENTION TO TIMING; the question is when did the landlord accept surrender?
○ Based on the idea of a contractual release of liability (how to get out of a lease)
○ Gotlieb v. Taco Bell Corporation → Taco Bell wins even though community didn’t want it there
■ Gotlieb & Taco Bell had 20-year lease where Taco Bell could cancel if it couldn’t obtain permits
■ Gotlieb accepted TB’s surrender when they tried to lease to Rite-Aid at higher rate than proposed to TB
○ The landlord has three options when a tenant abandons:
■ (1) reject surrender by doing nothing & sue for accrued rent; if no duty to mitigate, tenant is on the hook
■ (2) reject surrender & relet for tenant’s benefit as their “agent”, tenant is on the hook (default rule)
● No duty to mitigate, but landlords are incentivized to mitigate
● Tenant only has to pay difference between new market rate (if lower) & original lease payment
■ (3) accept surrender & relet for landlord’s benefit, tenant NOT on the hook
● Surrender accepted if landlord rejects tenant’s surrender but then changes locks
● Surrender accepted if landlord terminated relationship in express agreement
● Surrender can be accepted if by operation of law/ implication
○ What did the parties do?
○ Did the market price go up/down? Down = tenant’s benefit, Up = landlord’s benefit
○ Duty to Mitigate (pure contract doctrine)
■ NO duty to mitigate for commercial property!
■ Landlord must try to find tenant within reasonable amount of time
● Sommer v. Kridel → landlord duty to mitigate when ex-army/school/no engagement guy backs
out
■ Exception: lost volume seller (example: seller could’ve sold more if you didn’t back out)
● No exception in residential leases (each apartment is real property, which is unique)

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
TAKINGS: EMINENT DOMAIN → the government takes property (even if owner doesn’t want to sell) & pays just compensation
● Eminent domain > ordinary property rights, Americans are suspicious!
● Limitations:
○ State statutes
■ Almost every state has own version of the takings clause (usually similar to Constitution)
○ US Constitution (not explicitly there, but government’s power is recognized)
■ The 5th Amendment Takings Clause directly constraints the use of eminent domain
● “Nor shall private property be taken for public use without just compensation”
● This originally applied only to federal government, but USSC found that these principles apply to
states under the DP of the 14th A (takings clause is understood as incorporated)
■ 14th Amendment
● Justifications for Eminent Domain:
○ Inherent attribute of sovereignty; considered necessary for government operation
○ Property markets are often thin economic markets
● Basic Taking Structure requirements: (1) Taking must be for a Public Use (2) Just Compensation
○ *the 5th and 14th amendments also require notice & OTBH, but not all states recognize this
● Public Use → USSC thinks this means public advantage/benefit
○ Kelo v. City of New London, CT → received a TON of backlash!
■ States can seize private property & sell to private developers to create new jobs/increase tax revenues
WITHOUT violating 5th A → state legislatures have great deference (not the judiciary)
■ Public Purpose Test (it was PASSED here, the property owners lose):
● (1) The plan has a public purpose (solely for economic benefits is OK)
○ Public benefit does not even need to be “reasonably certain to occur”
● (2) The plan is carefully considered
● (3) The taking furthers the public purpose
○ The taking must be reasonably necessary to achieve the public use for reasonably
foreseeable needs
■ Dissent (Thomas): this is unfair for poor and black communities!
■ Dissent (O’Connor): slippery slope; any property is vulnerable if “some socially valuable other use”
○ 3 classes of takings have historically satisfied public-use requirement:
■ (1) taking property for public ownership (public roads)
■ (2) taking property for use by common carriers (railroads) who put the property to public uses
■ (3) taking property for private ownership for a public program
● Just Compensation (difficult to have a fixed amount per U.S. v. Miller)
○ U.S. v. Miller
■ Strong argument that you should be offered more than market value bc you’re being forced
■ Basic takings principles
● 1: Compensation is for the loss of the owner, not the gain of the taker
● 2: Compensation is for fair market value of property (Constitutionally required minimum)
○ What a willing buyer would pay a willing seller in cash
○ Fair market value date = date of taking
● 3: Property value excludes value from a particular fitness (personal value attached to property)

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024
TAKING: REGULATORY TAKINGS → common issue presented by the Takings Clause generally goes by “regulatory takings”
● Regulatory takings = not physically taking property, but they regulated it so much so that in essence, they did take it and
they should compensate you for it
● Government takes action without exercising eminent domain, but they should have, so they should compensate (remedy)
● The most powerful substantive Constitutional constraint on governmental interference with property rights
● Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon (1922) → the modern regulatory takings doctrine began to take shape
○ Mahon is not good law concerning whether anti-subsidence laws give rise to a takings claim
○ General rule (N): property can be regulated BUT if it goes too far, it’s a taking ($ should be paid)
■ How far is too far is a “question of degree”; We must limit police power!
○ 4 primary factors in distinguishing between proper police power & proper eminent domain power:
■ (1) Diminution in value (consider economic effects of the regulation)
■ (2) Whether the measure is designed to regulate a nuisance (did it abate a public nuisance)
■ (3) Reciprocity of advantage
■ (4) The regulation interferes with long-established property or contract rights
● Dissent: The restriction here is merely the prohibition of a noxious use; this is not a taking, so no compensation required
○ Where the police power is exercised to protect the public from detriment and danger and not to confer benefits
upon property owners, there is no room for considering reciprocity of advantage
● Per Se Takings: rare, categorical → certain situations/categories are takings
○ They are ALWAYS regulatory takings; doesn’t matter what the circumstances are
○ It must (1) not just do what nuisance law is doing, and (2) qualify as at least one (no balancing) of the following:
■ Physical invasion/occupation of something on the property (Loretto)
■ Government eliminated 100% of property’s economic value (Lucas)
■ Government appropriated the right to exclude, even if temporarily (Cedar Point Nursery)
● Ad Hoc Takings: more common→ case by case on whether a regulation went too far so as to categorize it as a taking
○ Example: Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon
■ Holmes found that there was a taking here because the 4 primary factors (from above) applied (although
they are not ALL required)
■ Majority Factors:
● (1) Diminution in value caused by regulation
● (2) Public nuisance? (if yes, no $ owed because it’s an exercise of police power)
● (3) Is there average reciprocity of advantage? Benefits of regulation compensate for the burdens
● (4) Does the regulation interfere with long-established property or contract rights
○ The dissent doesn’t like factor #4 and applies it differently:
■ (1) restriction imposed to protect the public health is not a taking
■ (2) look at TMV of rights to whole property; support right is not significant
■ (3) average reciprocity only relevant if it benefits people; difference between
benefit & preventing harm, here it’s just preventing
○ Policy considerations
■ It’s murky to let governments decide on vibes!! Who has influence on takings?
● Unclear rules cause people to lobby so as to tilt the playing field to their favor!!
● Penn Central Transportation Company v. City of New York (1978) → GCT designated as historical landmark by NYC law
○ PCTC = railroad, which weren’t doing well in the 70s, PTCTC owned GCT and realized they could make $
○ TDRs (transfer of development rights) allow building higher than zoning allows, PCTC got TDRs for airspace above
○
● Policy concerns for requiring no change to building’s exterior design without providing $ for lost development rights
○ (1) owners of potential targets for historic preservation may rush to demolish them before they can’t anymore
○ (2) owners contemplating constructing new buildings may decline dramatic/innovative designs for fear they will be
“rewarded” with a historic preservation designation

Professor Lee, Property Spring 2024

