ee

wl
THE SEARCH FOR GOVERNING PRINCIPLES CH

112
CHAPTER 2

8. Do any of the articles you have read in this chant arene ie snould
i i tis the subject of a chapter in this
le category of behavior tha ; ‘ :
be removed from criminal law? Which categories and why’?

FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX
MARRIAGE: SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND
SEXUAL ORIENTATION

A. THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE |

GRISWOLD V. CONNECTICUT |

Supreme Court of the United States, 1965.
381 U.S. 479. |

MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS delivered the opinion of the Court.

Appellant Griswold is Executive Director of the Planned Parenthood
League of Connecticut. Appellant Buxton is a licensed physician and a
professor at the Yale Medical School who served as Medical Director for
the League at its Center in New Haven—a center open and operating |
from November 1 to November 10, 1961, when appellants were arrested. |

They gave information, instruction, and medical advice to married
persons as to the means of preventing conception. They examined the wife
and prescribed the best contraceptive device or material for her use. Fees
were usually charged, although some couples were serviced free.

The statutes whose constitutionality is involved in this appeal are

§§ 53-32 and 54-196 of the General Statutes of Connecticut (1958 rev.).
The former provides:

“Any person who uses any drug, medicinal article or instrument for
the purpose of preventing conception shall be fined not less than fifty
dollars or imprisoned not less than sixty days nor more than one year
or be both fined and imprisoned.”

Section 54—196 provides:

“Any person who assists, abets, counsels, causes, hires or commands
another to commit any offense may be prosecuted and punished as if
he were the principal offender.” .

The appellants were found guilty as accessories and fined $100 each,
against the claim that the accessory statute as so applied violated the
Fourteenth Amendment. The Appellate Division of the Circuit Court
affirmed. The Supreme Court of Errors affirmed that judgment. * * *

113



eee

FROM ANTI-Sopomy LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:

SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

114

Coming to the merits, we are met with a wide range of questions that
implicate the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

Overtones of some arguments suggest that Lochner v. New York should
n * * * We do not sit as a super-

be our guide. But we decline that invitatio

legislature to determine the wisdom, need, and propriety of laws that
touch economic problems, business affairs, or social conditions. This law,
however, operates directly on an intimate relation of husband and wife
and their physician’s role in one aspect of that relation.

The association of people is not mentioned in the Constitution nor in
the Bill of Rights. The right to educate a child in a school of the parents’
choice—whether public or private or parochial—is also not mentioned.
Nor is the right to study any particular subject or any foreign language.
Yet the First Amendment has been construed to include certain of those

rights.

By Pierce v. Society of Sisters, the right to educate one’s children as

one chooses is made applicable to the States by the force of the First and

Fourteenth Amendments. By Meyer v. Nebraska, the same dignity is
given the right to study the German language jn a private school. In other
words, the State may not, consistently with the spirit of the First
Amendment, contract the spectrum of available knowledge. The right of

freedom of speech and press includes not only the right to utter or to

print, but the right to distribute, the right to receive, the right to read

(Martin v. Struthers, 319 U.S. 141, 143) and freedom of inquiry, freedom
of thought, and freedom to teach (see Wieman v. Updegraff, 344 U.S. 183,
195)—indeed the freedom of the entire university community. Sweezy v.
New Hampshire, 354 U.S. 234, 249-250, 261-263; Barenblatt v. United
States, 360 U.S. 109, 112, Baggett v. Bullitt, 377 U.S. 360, 369. Without
those peripheral rights the specific rights would be less secure. And so we
reaffirm the principle of the Pierce and the Meyer cases.

In NAACP v. Alabama, 357 US. 449, 462, we protected the “freedom
to associate and privacy in one’s associations,” noting that freedom of

association was a peripheral First Amendment right. Disclosure of
we held, was

membership lists of a constitutionally valid association,
invalid “as entailing the likelihood of a substantial restraint upon the
exercise by petitioner’s members of their right to freedom of association.”
Tbid. In other words, the First Amendment has a penumbra where
privacy is protected from governmental intrusion. In like context, we have
protected forms of “association” that are not political in the customary
sense but pertain to the social, legal, and economic benefit of the
members. NAACP v. Button, 371 U.S. 415, 430-431. In Schware v. Board.
of Bar Examiners, 353 U.S. 232, we held it not permissible to bar a
lawyer from practice, because he had once been a member of the
Communist Party. The man’s “association with that Party” was not
shown to be “anything more than a political faith in a political party” Gd.,

SEc.
CA THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 115

at 244) and was not acti i i
oun one action of a kind proving bad moral character. Id., at

Those cases involved
more than the “right of ass ”. i
> ; 1 embly”—:

oars ns The pective of their race or ideology. De Wao ee an

8. . The right of “association,” lik ig Board of
Snes n,” like the right of belief
Ta rae ernstte, 319 U.S. 624), is more than the vieht to send of
meeting Kine! es the right to express one’s attitudes or philosophies by
embership . a group or by affiliation with it or by other lawful means.
é at context is a form of ex i ini ;
‘ ; ] pression of opinion; ile i
1s mot expressly included in the First Amendment its orteree .

ry in making the express guarantees fully meaningful memes

The i
Rights hae one cases suggest that specific guarantees in the Bill of
that help give the Nhe ormed by emanations from those guarantees
516-622 (Cineanti m e and substance. See Poe v. Ullman, 367 U.S. 497
The right of g opinion). Various guarantees create zones of privac :
Amendment is Sree ee ned in me penumbra of the First

nam _one, en. The Third A in i
pron iien against the quartering of soldiers “in any ae on time tt
The Pocrth ot ae consent of the owner is another facet of that privac:
secure in then Noe explicitly affirms the “right of the people to be
searches ont 8; ee papers, and effects, against unreasonable
Clause enables ae °s. e Fifth Amendment in its Self-Incrimination
may not fores mn citizen to create a zone of privacy which government
provides: “The enumeration . the Constitntnn Chee amendment

ns in yi

not be construed to deny or disparage others retained by the poeta Shall

Th i
State. e er Soe ta eamendments were described in Boyd v. United
‘ s, 11 Ss. : , as protection agai
i ; gainst all
8 cccntly refer saneny of a mens home and the privacios of life I We
app v. Ohio, 367 U.S ;
Amendment as creatin, “ri no less drnpottont hee
; g a “right to privac impe ‘
me : y, no less i
“ er ight carefully ene particularly reserved to the poeple.” Bee sat ney,
utional Right to Privacy, 1962 Sup. C , iswold,
The Right to be Let Alone, 55 Nw. U. L. Rev. 216 (een se 2 Gaiswoldy

The present case, then, concer i ip lyi
of pri : : ns a relationship lying withi
* privacy created by several fundamental constitutional puatentece ‘And
than regulating ae ich, in forbidding the use of contraceptives rather
ran regula ir manufacture or sale, seeks to achieve its goals b
§ a maximum destructive impact upon that relationship.

© Such al in li
aw cannot stand in light of the familiar principle, so often applied

by this Court, that a “
tau . a “governmental
acti a ¢ purpose to control
by wee coe utionally subject to state regulation may not be achicved
of protested fe sweep unnecessarily broadly and thereby invade the are
reedoms.” NAACP v. Alabama, 377 U.S. 288, 307 Would we
19. £00, . we



From ANTL-SODOMY Laws TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
116 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

allow the police to search the sacred precincts of marital bedrooms for
telltale signs of the use of contraceptives? The very idea is repulsive to
the notions of privacy surrounding the marriage relationship.

We deal with a right of privacy older than the Bill of Rights—older
than our political parties, older than our school system. Marriage is a
coming together for better or for worse, hopefully enduring, and intimate
to the degree of being sacred. It is an association that promotes a way of
life, not causes; a harmony in living, not political faiths; a bilateral
Joyalty, not commercial or social projects. Yet it is an association for as

noble a purpose as any involved in our prior decisions.
Reversed.

Mr. JUSTICE GOLDBERG, whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and MR. JUSTICE
BRENNAN join, concurring.

I agree with the Court that Connecticut's birth-control law
unconstitutionally intrudes upon the right of marital privacy, and I join
in its opinion and judgment. Although I have not accepted the view that
“due process” as used in the Fourteenth Amendment incorporates all of
the first eight Amendments, 1 do agree that the concept of liberty protects
those personal rights that are fundamental, and is not confined to the
specific terms of the Bill of Rights. My conclusion that the concept of
liberty is not so restricted and that it embraces the right of marital
privacy though that right is not mentioned explicitly in the Constitution
is supported both by numerous decisions of this Court, referred to in the
Court's opinion, and by the language and _ history of the Ninth
Amendment. In reaching the conclusion that the right of marital privacy
is protected, as being within the protected penumbra of specific
guarantees of the Bill of Rights, the Court refers to the Ninth
Amendment, ante, at 484. I add these words to emphasize the relevance
of that Amendment to the Court’s holding.

The Court stated many years ago that the Due Process Clause
protects those liberties that are “so rooted in the traditions and conscience’
of our people as to be ranked as fundamental.” Snyder v. Massachusetts,
291 U.S. 97, 105. * **

This Court, in a series of decisions, has held that the Fourteenth
Amendment absorbs and applies to the States those specifics of the first
eight amendments which express fundamental personal rights. The
language and history of the Ninth Amendment reveal that the Framers of
the Constitution believed that there are additional fundamental rights,
protected from governmental infringement, which exist alongside those
fundamental rights specifically mentioned in the first eight constitutional
amendments.

The Ninth Amendment reads, “The enumeration in the Constitution,
of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or disparage others

Sec. A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 117

retained by the people.” *** It was proffered to quiet expressed fears
that a bill of specifically enumerated rights could not be sufficiently broad
to cover all essential rights and that the specific mention of certain rights
would be interpreted as a denial that others were protected.

In presenting the proposed Amendment, Madison said:

“It has been objected also against a bill of rights, that, by
enumerating particular exceptions to the grant of power, it would
disparage those rights which were not placed in that enumeration; and it
might follow by implication, that those rights which were not singled out,
were intended to be assigned into the hands of the General Government,
and were consequently insecure. This is one of the most plausible
arguments I have ever heard urged against the admission of a bill of
rights into this system; but, I conceive, that it may be guarded. against. IT
have attempted it, as gentlemen may see by turning to the last clause of
the fourth resolution [the Ninth Amendment].” I Annals of Congress 439
(Gales and Seaton ed. 1834).

; These statements of Madison and Story make clear that the Framers
did not intend that the first eight amendments be construed to exhaust
the basic and fundamental rights which the Constitution guaranteed to
the people.

; I agree fully with the Court that, applying these tests, the right of
privacy is a fundamental personal right, emanating “from the totality of
the constitutional scheme under which we live.” Td., at 521. Mr. Justice
Brandeis, dissenting in Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438, 478,
comprehensively summarized the principles underlying the Constitution’s
guarantees of privacy:

“The protection guaranteed by the [Fourth and Fifth] Amendments is
much broader in scope. The makers of our Constitution,undertook to
secure conditions favorable to the pursuit of happiness. They
recognized the significance of man’s spiritual nature, of his feelings
and of his intellect. They knew that only a part of the pain, pleasure
and satisfactions of life are to be found in material things. They
sought to protect Americans in their beliefs, their thoughts, their
emotions and their sensations. They conferred, as against the
Government, the right to be let alone—the most comprehensive of
rights and the right most valued by civilized men.”

. The Connecticut statutes here involved deal with a particularly
important and sensitive area of privacy—that of the marital relation and
the marital home. * * * In sum, I believe that the right of privacy in the
marital relation is fundamental and basic—a personal right “retained by
the people” within the meaning of the Ninth Amendment. Connecticut
cannot constitutionally abridge this fundamental right, which is protected



——__ <<

From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
118 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

by the Fourteenth Amendment from infringement by the States. I agree
with the Court that petitioners’ convictions must therefore be reversed.

Mr. JUSTICE HARLAN, concurring in the judgment.

J fully agree with the judgment of reversal, but find myself unable to
join the Court’s opinion. The reason is that it seems to me to evince an
approach to this case very much like that taken by my Brothers Black
and Stewart in dissent, namely: the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment does not touch this Connecticut statute unless the enactment
is found to violate some right assured by the letter or penumbra of the
Bill of Rights.

In other words, what I find implicit in the Court’s opinion is that the
“incorporation” doctrine may be used to restrict the reach of Fourteenth
Amendment Due Process. For me this is just as unacceptable
constitutional doctrine as is the use of the “incorporation” approach to
impose upon the States all the requirements of the Bill of Rights as found
in the provisions of the first eight amendments and in the decisions of
this Court interpreting them.

In my view, the proper constitutional inquiry in this case is whether
this Connecticut statute infringes the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment because the enactment violates basic values
“implicit in the concept of ordered liberty,” Palko v. Connecticut, 302 U.S.
319, 325. For reasons stated at length in my dissenting opinion in Poe v.
Ullman, supra, I believe that it does. While the relevant inquiry may be
aided by resort to one or more of the provisions of the Bill of Rights, it is
not dependent on them or any of their radiations. The Due Process Clause
of the Fourteenth Amendment stands, in my opinion, on its own bottom.

Mr. JUSTICE BLACK, with whom Mr. JUSTICE STEWART joins,
dissenting.

I agree with my Brother Stewart’s dissenting opinion. And like him I
do not to any extent whatever base my view that this Connecticut law is
constitutional on a belief that the law is wise or that its policy is a good
one. In order that there may be no room at all to doubt why I vote as I do,
I feel constrained to add that the law is every bit as offensive to me as it
is to my Brethren of the majority and my Brothers Harlan, White and
Goldberg who, reciting reasons why it is offensive to them, hold it
unconstitutional. There is no single one of the graphic and eloquent

strictures and criticisms fired at the policy of this Connecticut law either
by the Court’s opinion or by those of my concurring Brethren to which I
cannot subscribe—except their conclusion that the evil qualities they see
in the law make it unconstitutional.

Had the doctor defendant here, or even the nondoctor defendant,
been convicted for doing nothing more than expressing opinions to
persons coming to the clinic that certain contraceptive devices, medicines

SEC. A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 119

or practices would do them good and would be desirable, or for telli
people how devices could be used, I can think of no reasons at this ti me
ad their expressions of views would not be protected by the First and
Fourteenth Amendments, which guarantee freedom of speech. But speech
a ng: conduct and physical activities are quite another. The two
ndants here were active participants in an organization which gave
physical examinations to women, advised them what ‘kind of
contraceptive devices or medicines would most likely be satisfactory for
em, and then supplied the devices themselves, all for a graduated scale
of fees, based on the family income. Thus these defendants admittedly
engaged with others in a planned course of conduct to help people violate
re | onnecticut law. Merely because some speech was used in carrying on
peat cone eet as in ordinary life some speech accompanies most
sands ° ; we —we are not in my view justified in holding that the First
men: orbids the State to punish their conduct. Strongly as I desire
to protect all First Amendment freedoms, I am unable to stretch the
Amendment so as to afford protection to the conduct of these defendants
in violating the Connecticut law. What would be the constitutional fate of

the law if hereafter applied to punish nothing but speech i Thi

said, quite another matter. » mes us

h The Court talks about a constitutional “right of privacy” as though
ere is some constitutional provision or provisions forbidding any law
ever to be passed which might abridge the “privacy” of individuals. But
there is not. There are, of course, guarantees in certain s ecifi

constitutional provisions which are designed in part to protect privacy at
certain times and places with respect to certain activities. Such, for
example, is the Fourth Amendment’s guarantee against “unreasonable
searches and seizures.” But I think it belittles that Amendment to talk
about it as though it protects nothing but “privacy.” To treat it that way is
to give ita niggardly interpretation, not the kind of liberal reading I ‘hh k
ely a of Rights provision should be given. The average man would very

: not have his feelings soothed any more i i

seized openly than by having it seized privately an by iocith Ho ahaniy
wants his property left alone. And a person can be just as much if not
more, irritated, annoyed and injured by an unceremonious public arrest

by a poli i i i i
by a policeman as he is by a seizure in the privacy of his office or home.

; I realize that many good and able men have elo
written, sometimes in rhapsodical strains, about the ee ee Count to
keep the Constitution in tune with the times. The idea is that th
Constitution must be changed from time to time and that this Court is
charged with a duty to make those changes. For myself, I must with all
; i erence reject that philosophy. The Constitution makers knew the need
: change and provided for it. Amendments suggested by the people’s
elected representatives can be submitted to the people or their selected



ee ieds._ese... eee

7 TAGE:
FRoM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME SEX MARR’
120 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

agents for ratification. That method of change was good for our Fathers:
and being somewhat old-fashioned I must add it is good enone or me
And so, I cannot rely on the Due Process Clause or the Ninth Amen: men
or any mysterious and uncertain natural law concept os a reat
striking down this state law. The Due Process Clause wit beg i rary
and capricious” or “shocking to the conscience formula was ‘ ne y -
by this Court to strike down economic legislation in the early eva eso
this century, threatening, many people thought, the wana Ae an
stability of the Nation. See, e. g., Lochner v. New York, 198 5. - pet
formula, based on subjective considerations of ‘natural justice, isn Tess
dangerous when used to enforce this Court’s views about person L ents
than those about economic rights. I had thought that we ad ai hae
formula, as a means for striking down state legislation, to rest once

for all. * * *

So far as I am concerned, Connecticut’s law as applied here is not
forbidden by any provision of the Federal Constitution as that
Constitution was written, and I would therefore affirm.

Mr, JUSTICE STEWART, whom MR. JUSTICE BLACK joins, dissenting.

Since 1879 Connecticut has had on its books a law which forbids the
use of contraceptives by anyone. I think this is an uncommonly a y an
As a practical matter, the law is obviously unenforceable, exeen : ne
oblique context of the present case. As a philosophical matter, ‘ en ve
the use of contraceptives in the relationship of marriage Shou ; e ee
personal and private choice, based upon each individual's mora e rical:
and religious beliefs. As a matter of social policy, I thin Protec
counsel about methods of birth control should be available to all, f° pat
each individual’s choice can be meaningfully made. But we are not asl
in this case to say whether we think this law is unwise, or even asinine:
We are asked to hold that it violates the United States Constitution.
that I cannot do.

In the course of its opinion the Court refers to no less then ox
Amendments to the Constitution: the First, the Third, the Four , : <
Fifth, the Ninth, and the Fourteenth. But the Court does not say wt c fo)
these Amendments, if any, it thinks is infringed by this Connecticut law.

We are told that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteentit
Amendment is not, as such, the “guide” in this case. With that mu :
agree. [A]s the Court says, the day has long passed since the Due rogers
Clause was regarded as a proper instrument for determining ‘
wisdom, need, and propriety” of state laws. My Brothers Har an and
White to the contrary, “we have returned to the original constitution’
proposition that courts do not substitute their social and economic i‘ “ 8
for the judgment of legislative bodies, who are elected to pass laws.
Ferguson v. Skrupa, supra, at 730.

SEc.A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 121

As to the First, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Amendments, I can find
nothing in any of them to invalidate this Connecticut law, even assuming
that all those Amendments are fully applicable against the States. It has
not even been argued that this is a law “respecting an establishment of
religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.” And surely, unless the
solemn process of constitutional adjudication is to descend to the level of a
play on words, there is not involved here any abridgment of “the freedom
of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble,
and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.” No soldier
has been quartered in any house. There has been no search, and no
seizure. Nobody has been compelled to be a witness against himself.

The Court also quotes the Ninth Amendment, and my Brother
Goldberg’s concurring opinion relies heavily upon it. But to say that the
Ninth Amendment has anything to do with this case is to turn
somersaults with history. The Ninth Amendment, like its companion the
Tenth, which this Court held “states but a truism that all is retained
which has not been surrendered,” United States v. Darby, 312 U.S. 100,
124, was framed by James Madison and adopted by the States simply to
make clear that the adoption of the Bill of Rights did not alter the plan
that the Federal Government was to be a government of express and
limited powers, and that all rights and powers not delegated to it were
retained by the people and the individual States. Until today no member
of this Court has ever suggested that the Ninth Amendment meant
anything else, and the idea that a federal court could ever use the Ninth
Amendment to annul a law passed by the elected representatives of the

people of the State of Connecticut would have caused James Madison no
little wonder.

What provision of the Constitution, then, does make this state;law
invalid? The Court says it is the right of privacy “created by several
fundamental constitutional guarantees.” With all deference, I can find no
such general right of privacy in the Bill of Rights, in any other part of the
Constitution, or in any case ever before decided by this Court.7

At the oral argument in this case we were told that the Connecticut
law does not “conform to current community standards.” But it is not the
function of this Court to decide cases on the basis of community
standards. We are here to decide cases “agreeably to the Constitution and
laws of the United States.” It is the essence of judicial duty to subordinate
our own personal views, our own ideas of what legislation is wise and
what is not. If, as I should surely hope, the law before us does not reflect
the standards of the people of Connecticut, the people of Connecticut can
freely exercise their true Ninth and Tenth Amendment rights to persuade

7 The Court does not say how far the new constitutional right of privacy announced today
extends. I suppose, however, that even after today a State can constitutionally still punish at
least some offenses which are not committed in public.



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE: cu.2
122 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION He

their elected representatives to repeal it. That is the constitutional way to
take this law off the books.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. What is the difference between the right to privacy and notions of
freedom or autonomy?

2. The Griswold opinion was novel in two respects—the fore that
received constitutional protection and the methodology used aes ores
Douglas in finding constitutional protection. The metho _ “4 res vod most
initial scholarly scrutiny, not all of it critical. See Charles Black,
and Relationship in Constitutional Law (1965).

3. What areas of behavior are covered by the liberty interests
recognized in Griswold? Only whether to conceive a cn If so, pen married
i by abstaining from sexual interce .
couples could always avoid pregnancy : ual tercourse-
iki f contraception must be
So striking down state prohibition o ; ase
i i i have sexual relations withow g
substantive right to decide to . ; ; ishing
is ri ded as a right to privacy in m
vegnancy. Is this right best regar ; ) :
concerning sexual relations and reproduction or a right to autonomy in
making such decisions?
4. What aspects of sex and reproduction argue for allocation of power
to individuals or married couples rather than BO en inns sbout
i i ? How important are
overnment’s interest in such matters? I ‘
soxual behavior and reproduction to individuals and married couples?

i ied couples or must they be

5. Can rights be conferred to marrie :
conferred individuals in a marriage? Are Griswole rights to decide about Ae

i in individuals who are not m ?

d reproduction also found in indivi ri
Risenstadt vy. Baird, 405 U.S. 438 (1971). If governments can prohibit sexual
i ied indivi ’t they also deny them
intercourse to unmarried individuals, can't the Geny overs te

i i d in criminal activity? But what is
contraceptives which could only be use n . ents
i i i | behavior of unmarried adults?
state interest in regulating the sexua ried eis

in address that question? Even if it is

jd Professor Hart and Lord Devlin a that i
proper to forbid sex to the unmarried, would that justify state efforts to forbid
contraception?

6. If sexual autonomy is recognized in individuals, whether single or
martied, what limits can the state place on sexual behavior’ an
heterosexual sodomy be prohibited (genital contacts with anal and ora
cavities)? Homosexual sodomy? Sex with minors?

7, T€ the state cannot prohibit the use of contraceptive devices, what
about ‘efforts to terminate pregnancies once conception has occurred? ve toe
v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973). What would Professor Hart and Lord Devlin
say about this?

SEC. A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 123

BOWERS V. HARDWICK

Supreme Court of the United States, 1986.
478 U.S. 186.

JUSTICE WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.

In August 1982, respondent Hardwick (hereafter respondent) was
charged with violating the Georgia statute criminalizing sodomy! by
committing that act with another adult male in the bedroom of
respondent’s home. After a preliminary hearing, the District Attorney

decided not to present the matter to the grand jury unless further
evidence developed.

Respondent then brought suit in the Federal District Court,
challenging the constitutionality of the statute insofar as it criminalized
consensual sodomy.? He asserted that he was a practicing homosexual,
that the Georgia sodomy statute, as administered by the defendants,
placed him in imminent danger of arrest, and that the statute for several
reasons violates the Federal Constitution. The District Court granted the
defendants’ motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim.

A divided panel of the Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
reversed. [The court held] that the Georgia statute violated respondent’s
fundamental rights because his homosexual activity is a private and
intimate association that is beyond the reach of state regulation by reason
of the Ninth Amendment and the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. The case was remanded for trial, at which, to prevail, the
State would have to prove that the statute is supported by a compelling
interest and is the most narrowly drawn means of achieving that end.

Because other Courts of Appeals have arrived at judgments contrary
to that of the Eleventh Circuit in this case, we granted the Attorney
General’s petition for certiorari questioning the holding that the sodomy
statute violates the fundamental rights of homosexuals. We agree with

1 Georgia Code Ann. § 16-6-2 (1984) provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
“(a) A person commits the offense of sodomy when he performs or submits to any sexual
act involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus of another. .. .
“(b) A person convicted of the offense of sodomy shall be:punished by imprisonment for
not less than one nor more than 20 years....”

2 John and Mary Doe were also plaintiffs in the action. They alleged that they wished to
engage in sexual activity proscribed by § 166-2 in the privacy of their home, App. 8, and that
they had been “chilled and deterred” from engaging in such activity by both the existence of the
statute and Hardwick’s arrest. Id., at 5. The District Court held, however, that because they had
neither sustained, nor were in immediate danger of sustaining, any direct injury from the
enforcement of the statute, they did not have proper standing to maintain the action. Id., at 18.
The Court of Appeals affirmed the District Court’s judgment dismissing the Does’ claim for lack
of standing, 760 F.2d 1202, 1206-1207 (CA11 1985), and the Does do not challenge that holding
in this Court.

The only claim properly before the Court, therefore, is Hardwick’s challenge to the Georgia
Statute as applied to consensual homosexual sodomy.’ We express no opinion on the
constitutionality of the Georgia statute as applied to other acts of sodomy.



FRoM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
124 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

petitioner that the Court of Appeals erred, and hence reverse its
yadgment.

This case does not require a judgment on whether laws against
sodomy between consenting adults in general, or between homosexuals in
particular, are wise or desirable. It raises no question about the right or
propriety of state legislative decisions to repeal | their | laws that
criminalize homosexual sodomy, or of state-court decisions invalidating
those laws on state constitutional grounds. The issue presented is
whether the Federal Constitution confers a fundamental right upon
homosexuals to engage in sodomy and hence invalidates the laws of the
many States that still make such conduct illegal and have done 80 for a
very long time. The case also calls for some judgment about the limits of
the Court’s role in carrying out its constitutional mandate.

We first register our disagreement with the Court of Appeals and
with respondent that the Court’s prior cases have construed the
Constitution to confer a right of privacy that extends to homosexual
sodomy and for all intents and purposes have decided this case. The reach
of this line of cases was sketched in Carey v. Population Services
International, 431 U.S. 678, 685 (1977). Pierce v. Society of Sisters, 268
U.S. 510 (1925), and Meyer v. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390 (1928), were
described as dealing with child rearing and education; Prince v.
Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158 (1944), with family relationships; Skinner v.
Oklahoma ex rel. Williamson, 316 U.S. 535 (1942), with procreation;
Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1 (1967), with marriage; Griswold v.
Connecticut, supra, and Hisenstadt v. Baird, supra, with contraception;
and Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973), with abortion. The latter three
cases were interpreted as construing the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment to confer a fundamental individual right to
decide whether or not to beget or bear a child. Carey v. Population
Services International, supra, at 688-689.

Accepting the decisions in these cases and the above description of
them, we think it evident that none of the rights announced in those
cases bears any resemblance to the claimed constitutional right of
homosexuals to engage in acts of sodomy that is asserted in this case. No
connection between family, marriage, or procreation on the one hand and
homosexual activity on the other has been demonstrated, either by the
Court of Appeals or by respondent. Moreover, any claim that these cases
nevertheless stand for the proposition that any kind of private sexual
conduct between consenting adults is constitutionally insulated from
state proscription is unsupportable. Indeed, the Court’s opinion in Carey
twice asserted that the privacy right, which the Griswold line of cases
found to be one of the protections provided by the Due Process Clause, did
not reach so far. 431 U.S., at 688, n. 5, 694, n. 17.

SEC.A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 125

Precedent aside, however, respondent would have us announce, as
the Court of Appeals did, a fundamental right to engage in homosexual
sodomy. This we are quite unwilling to do. It is true that despite the
language of the Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments, which appears to focus only on the processes by which life,
liberty, or property is taken, the cases are legion in which those Clauses
have been interpreted to have substantive content, subsuming rights that
to a great extent are immune from federal or state regulation or
proscription. Among such cases are those recognizing rights that have
little or no textual support in the constitutional language. Meyer, Prince,

and Pierce fall in this category, as do the privacy cases from Griswold to
Carey.

Striving to assure itself and the public that announcing rights not
readily identifiable in the Constitution’s text involves much more than
the imposition of the Justices’ own choice of values on the States and the
Federal Government, the Court has sought to identify the nature of the
rights qualifying for heightened judicial protection. In Palko v.
Connecticut, 302 U.S. 319, 325, 326 (1987), it was said that this category
includes those fundamental liberties that are “implicit in the concept of
ordered liberty,” such that “neither liberty nor justice would exist if [they]
were sacrificed.” A different description of fundamental liberties appeared
in Moore v. East Cleveland, 431 U.S. 494, 503 (1977) (opinion of POWELL,
J.), where they are characterized as those liberties that are “deeply rooted
in this Nation’s history and tradition.” Id., at 503 (POWELL, J.). See also
Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S., at 506.

It is obvious to us that neither of these formulations would extend a
fundamental right to homosexuals to engage in acts of consensual
sodomy. Proscriptions against that conduct have ancient roots. Sodomy
was a criminal offense at common law and was forbidden by the laws of
the original 13 States when they ratified the Bill of Rights. In 1868, when
the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified, all but 5 of the 37 States in the
Union had criminal sodomy laws. In fact, until 1961, all 50 States
outlawed sodomy, and today, 24 States and the District of Columbia
continue to provide criminal penalties for sodomy performed in private
and between consenting adults. Against this background, to claim that a
right to engage in such conduct is “deeply rooted.in this Nation’s history
and tradition” or “implicit in the concept of ordered liberty” is, at best,
facetious.

Nor are we inclined to take a more expansive view of our authority to
discover new fundamental rights imbedded in the Due Process Clause.
The Court is most vulnerable and comes nearest to illegitimacy when it
deals with judge-made constitutional law having little or no cognizable
roots in the language or design of the Constitution. That this is so was
painfully demonstrated by the face-off between the Executive and the



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
126 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

Court in the 1930’s, which resulted in the repudiation of much of the
substantive gloss that the Court had placed on the Due Process Clauses of
the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. There should be, therefore, great
resistance to expand the substantive reach of those Clauses, particularly
if it requires redefining the category of rights deemed to be fundamental.
Otherwise, the Judiciary necessarily takes to itself further authority to
govern the country without express constitutional authority. The claimed
right pressed on us today falls far short of overcoming this resistance.

Respondent, however, asserts that the result should be different
where the homosexual conduct occurs in the privacy of the home. He
relies on Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557 (1969), where the Court held
that the First Amendment prevents conviction for possessing and reading
obscene material in the privacy of one’s home: “If the First Amendment
means anything, it means that a State has no business telling a man,
sitting alone in his house, what books he may read or what films he may
watch.” Id., at 565.

Stanley did protect conduct that would not have been protected
outside the home, and it partially prevented the enforcement of state
obscenity laws; but the decision was firmly grounded in the First
Amendment. The right pressed upon us here has no similar support in
the text of the Constitution, and it does not qualify for recognition under
the prevailing principles for construing the Fourteenth Amendment. Its
limits are also difficult to discern. Plainly enough, otherwise illegal
conduct is not always immunized whenever it occurs in the home.
Victimless crimes, such as the possession and use of illegal drugs, do not
escape the law where they are committed at home. Stanley itself
recognized that its holding offered no protection for the possession in the
home of drugs, firearms, or stolen goods. Id. at 568, n. 11. And if
respondent’s submission is limited to the voluntary sexual conduct
between consenting adults, it would be difficult, except by fiat, to limit
the claimed right to homosexual conduct while leaving exposed to
prosecution adultery, incest, and other sexual crimes even though they
are committed in the home. We are unwilling to start down that road.

Even if the conduct at issue here is not a fundamental right,
respondent asserts that there must be a rational basis for the law and
that there is none in this case other than the presumed belief of a
majority of the electorate in Georgia that homosexual sodomy is immoral
and unacceptable. This is said to be an inadequate rationale to support
the law. The law, however, is constantly based on notions of morality, and
if all laws representing essentially moral choices are to be invalidated
under the Due Process Clause, the courts will be very busy indeed. Even
respondent makes no such claim, but insists that majority sentiments
about the morality of homosexuality should be declared inadequate. We

SEC. A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 127

do not agree, and are uni
: persuaded that the sodomy laws of 2
States should be invalidated on this basis. " some 2

Accordingly, the judgment of the Court of Appeals is
Reversed.

CHIEF JUSTICE BURGER, concurring.

; I join the Court’s opinion, but I write separately to underscore my
view that in constitutional terms there is no such thing as a fundamental
right to commit homosexual sodomy.

As the Court notes, ante, at 192, the proscriptions against sodomy
have very “ancient roots.” Decisions of individuals relating to homosexual
conduct have been subject to state intervention throughout the history of
Western civilization. Condemnation of those practices is firmly rooted in
Judeao-Christian moral and ethical standards. Homosexual sodomy was a
capital crime under Roman law. See Code Theod. 9.7.6; Code Just. 9.9.31
See also D. Bailey, Homosexuality and the Western Christian Tradition
70-81 (1976). During the English Reformation when powers of the
ecclesiastical courts were transferred to the King’s Courts, the first
English statute criminalizing sodomy was passed. 25 Hen. VIL ch. 6
Blackstone described “the infamous crime against nature” as an offense of
deeper malignity” than rape, a heinous act “the very mention of which is
a disgrace to human nature,” and “a crime not fit to be named.” 4 W.
Blackstone, Commentaries *215. The common law of England. including
its prohibition of sodomy, became the received law of Georgia and the
other Colonies. In 1816 the Georgia Legislature passed the statute at
issue here, and that statute has been continuously in force in one form or
another since that time. To hold that the act of homosexual sodomy is
somehow protected as a fundamental right would be to cast aside
millennia of moral teaching.

This is essentially not a question of personal “preferences” but rather
of the legislative authority of the State. I find nothing in the Constitution
depriving a State of the power to enact the statute challenged here.

JUSTICE POWELL, concurring.

I join the opinion of the Court. I agree with the-Court that there is no
fundamental right—i. e., no substantive right under the Due Process
Clause—such as that claimed by respondent Hardwick, and found to exist
by the Court of Appeals. This is not to suggest, however, that respondent
may not be protected by the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution. The
Georgia statute at issue in this case, Ga. Code Ann. § 16-6-2 (1984)
authorizes a court to imprison a person for up to 20 years for a single
private, consensual act of sodomy. In my view, a prison sentence for such
conduct—certainly a sentence of long duration—would create a serious
Eighth Amendment issue. Under the Georgia statute a single act of



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
128 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

sodomy, even in the private setting of a home, is a felony comparable in
terms of the possible sentence imposed to serious felonies such as
aggravated battery, § 16-524, first-degree arson, § 16-760, and
robbery, § 16-8-40.1

In this case, however, respondent has not been tried, much less
convicted and sentenced.2 Moreover, respondent has not raised the
Eighth Amendment issue below. For these reasons this constitutional
argument is not before us.

JUSTICE BLACKMUN, with whom Justice BRENNAN, JUSTICE
MARSHALL, and JUSTICE STEVENS join, dissenting.

This case is no more about “a fundamental right to engage in
homosexual sodomy,” as the Court purports to declare, ante, at 191, than
Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557 (1969), was about a fundamental right to
watch obscene movies, or Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967), was
about a fundamental right to place interstate bets from a telephone booth.
Rather, this case is about “the most comprehensive of rights and the right
most valued by civilized men,” namely, “the right to be let alone.”
Olmstead v. United States, 277 US. 438, 478 (1928) (Brandeis, J.
dissenting).

The statute at issue, Ga. Code Ann. § 16-6-2 (1984), denies
individuals the right to decide for themselves whether to engage in
particular forms of private, consensual sexual activity. The Court
concludes that § 16-6-2 is valid essentially because “the laws of... many
States... still make such conduct illegal and have done so for a very long

1 Among those States that continue to make sodomy a crime, Georgia authorizes one of the
longest possible sentences. See Ala. Code § 13A-6-65(a)(3) (1982) (1-year maximum); Ariz. Rev.
Stat, Ann. §§ 138-1411, 13-1412 (West Supp. 1985) (30 days); Ark. Stat. Ann. § 41-1813 (1977)
(l-year maximum); D. C. Code § 22-8502 (1981) (L0-year maximum); Fla. Stat. § 800.02 (1985)
(60-day maximum); Ga. Code Ann. § 16-6-2 (1984) (1 to 20 years); Idaho Code § 18-6605 (1979)
(5-year minimum); Kan, Stat. Ann. § 21-3505 (Supp. 1985) (6-month maximum); Ky. Rev. Stat.
§ 610.100 (1985) (90 days to 12 months); La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 14:89 (West 1986) (5-year
maximum); Md. Ann. Code, Art. 27, §§ 553-554 (1982) (10-year maximum); Mich. Comp. Laws
§ 750.158 (1968) (15-year maximum); Minn. Stat. § 609.293 (1984) (1-year maximum); Miss.
Code Ann, § 97-29-59 (1973) (10-year maximum); Mo. Rev. Stat. § 566.090 (Supp. 1984) (1-year
maximum); Mont. Code Ann. § 45-5-505 (1985) (10-year maximum); Nev. Rev. Stat. § 201.190
(1985) (6-year maximum); N. C. Gen. Stat. § 14-177 (1981) (10-year maximum); Okla. Stat., Tit.
21, § 886 (1981) (10-year maximum); R. I. Gen. Laws § 1110-1 (1981) (7 to 20 years); S. C. Code
§ 16-15-120 (1985) (6-year maximum); Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-2 -612 (1982) (5 to 15 years); Tex.
Penal Code Ann. § 21.06 (1974) ($200 maximum fine); Utah Code Ann. § 76-5403 (1978) (6—
month maximum); Va. Code § 18.2-361 (1982) (6-year maximum).

2 Tt was conceded at oral argument that, prior to the complaint against respondent
Hardwick, there had been no reported decision involving prosecution for private homosexual
sodomy under this statute for several decades. See Thompson v. Aldredge, 187 Ga. 467, 200 S. E.
799 (1989). Moreover, the State has declined to present the criminal charge against Hardwick to
a grand jury, and this is a suit for declaratory judgment brought by respondents challenging the
validity of the statute. The history of nonenforcement suggests the moribund character today of
jaws criminalizing this type of private, consensual conduct. Some 26 States have repealed
similar statutes. But the constitutional validity of the Georgia statute was put im issue by
respondents, and for the reasons stated by the Court, I cannot say that conduct condemned for
hundreds of years has now become a fundamental right.

SEC. A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 129

time.” Ante, at 190. But the fact that the moral judgments expressed by
statutes like § 16—-6-2 may be “ ‘natural and familiar ... ought not to
conclude our judgment upon the question whether statutes embodying
them conflict with the Constitution of the United States.’” Roe v. Wade,
410 U.S. 118, 117 (1973), quoting Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45, 76
(1905) (Holmes, J., dissenting). Like Justice Holmes, I believe that “[it] is
revolting to have no better reason for a rule of law than that so it was laid
down in the time of Henry IV. It is still more revolting if the grounds
upon which it was laid down have vanished long since, and the rule
simply persists from blind imitation of the past.” Holmes, The Path of the
Law, 10 Harv. L. Rev. 457, 469 (1897). I believe we must analyze
respondent Hardwick’s claim in the light of the values that underlie the
constitutional right to privacy. If that right means anything, it means
that, before Georgia can prosecute its citizens for making choices about
the most intimate aspects of their lives, it must do more than assert that
the choice they have made is an “ ‘abominable crime not fit to be named
‘ion Christians.’ ” Herring v. State, 119 Ga. 709, 721, 46 S. E. 876, 882
1904).

I

In its haste to reverse the Court of Appeals and hold that the
Constitution does not “[confer] a fundamental right upon homosexuals to
engage in sodomy,” ante, at 190, the Court relegates the actual statute
being challenged to a footnote and ignores the procedural posture of the
case before it. A fair reading of the statute and of the complaint clearly
reveals that the majority has distorted the question this case presents.

First, the Court’s almost obsessive focus on homosexual activity is
particularly hard to justify in ight of the broad language Georgia has
used. Unlike the Court, the Georgia Legislature has not proceeded on the
assumption that homosexuals are so different from other citizens that
their lives may be controlled in a way that would not be tolerated if it
limited the choices of those other citizens. Rather, Georgia has provided
that “[a] person commits the offense of sodomy when he performs or
submits to any sexual act involving the sex organs of one person and the
mouth or anus of another.” Ga. Code Ann. § 16-6—2(a) (1984). The sex or
status of the persons who engage in the act is irrelevant as a matter of
state law. In fact, to the extent I can discern a legislative purpose for
Georgia’s 1968 enactment of § 16-6-2, that purpose seems to have been to
broaden the coverage of the law to reach heterosexual as well as
homosexual activity.1 I therefore see no basis for the Court’s decision to

1 Until 1968, Georgia defined sodomy as “the carnal knowledge and connection against the
order of nature, by man with man, or in the same unnatural manner with woman.” Ga. Crim.
Code § 26-5901 (1933). In Thompson v. Aldredge, 187 Ga. 467, 200 S. E. 799 (1939), the Georgia
Supreme Court held that § 26-5901 did not prohibit lesbian activity. And in Riley v. Garrett, 219
Ga. 345, 133 S. E. 2d 367 (1963), the Georgia Supreme Court held that § 26-5901 did not
prohibit heterosexual cunnilingus. Georgia passed the act-specific statute currently in force



FRomM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
130 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

treat this case as an “as applied” challenge to § 16-6—2, or for Georgia’s
attempt, both in its brief and at oral argument, to defend § 16-6-2 solely
on the grounds that it prohibits homosexual activity. Michael Hardwick’s
standing may rest in significant part on Georgia’s apparent willingness to
enforce against homosexuals a law it seems not to have any desire to
enforce against heterosexuals. But his claim that § 16-6-2 involves an
unconstitutional intrusion into his privacy and his right of intimate
association does not depend in any way on his sexual orientation.

Second, I disagree with the Court’s refusal to consider whether § 16-
6-2 runs afoul of the Eighth or Ninth Amendments or the Equal
Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Respondent's complaint
expressly invoked the Ninth Amendment, see App. 6, and he relied
heavily before this Court on Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479, 484
(1965), which identifies that Amendment as one of the specific
constitutional provisions giving “life and substance” to our understanding
of privacy. More importantly, the procedural posture of the case requires
that we affirm the Court of Appeals’ judgment if there is any ground on
which respondent may be entitled to relief. * * * Thus, even if respondent
did not advance claims based on the Eighth or Ninth Amendments, or on
the Equal Protection Clause, his complaint should not be dismissed if any
of those provisions could entitle him to relief. I need not reach either the
Eighth Amendment or the Equal Protection Clause issues because I
believe that Hardwick has stated a cognizable claim that § 16—-6-2
interferes with constitutionally protected interests in privacy and freedom
of intimate association. But neither the Eighth Amendment nor the Equal
Protection Clause is so clearly irrelevant that a claim resting on either
provision should be peremptorily dismissed. The Court’s cramped reading
of the issue before it makes for a short opinion, but it does little to make
for a persuasive one.

II

“Qur cases long have recognized that the Constitution embodies a
promise that a certain private sphere of individual liberty will be kept
largely beyond the reach of government.” Thornburgh v. American
College of Obstetricians & Gynecologists, 476 US. 747, 772 (1986). In
construing the right to privacy, the Court has proceeded along two
somewhat distinct, albeit complementary, lines. First, it has recognized a
privacy interest with reference to certain decisions that are properly for
the individual to make. Second, it has recognized a privacy interest with
reference to certain places without regard for the particular activities in
which the individuals who occupy them are engaged. The case before us
implicates both the decisional and the spatial aspects of the right to
privacy. * * *

“perhaps in response to the restrictive court decisions such as Riley,” Note, The Crimes Against
Nature, 16 J. Pub. L. 159, 167, n. 47 (1967).

SEcC.A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 131

Til

The Court’s failure to comprehend the magnitude of the liberty
interests at stake in this case leads it to slight the question whether
petitioner, on behalf of the State, has justified Georgia’s infringement on
these interests. I believe that neither of the two general justifications for
§ 16-6-2 that petitioner has advanced warrants dismissing respondent’s
challenge for failure to state a claim.

First, petitioner asserts that the acts made criminal by the statute
may have serious adverse consequences for “the general public health and
welfare,” such as spreading communicable diseases or fostering other
criminal activity. Brief for Petitioner 37. Inasmuch as this case was
dismissed by the District Court on the pleadings, it is not surprising that
the record before us is barren of any evidence to support petitioner’s
claim. In light of the state of the record, I see no justification for the
Court’s attempt to equate the private, consensual sexual activity at issue
here with the “possession in the home of drugs, firearms, or stolen goods,”
ante, at 195, to which Stanley refused to extend its protection. 394 U.S.,
at 568, n. 11. None of the behavior so mentioned in Stanley can properly
be viewed as “[victimless],” ante, at 195: drugs and weapons are
inherently dangerous, and for property to be “stolen,” someone must have
been wrongfully deprived of it. Nothing in the record before the Court
provides any justification for finding the activity forbidden by § 16-6-2 to
be physically dangerous, either to the persons engaged in it or to others.‘

The core of petitioner's defense of § 16-6-2, however, is that
respondent and others who engage in the conduct prohibited by § 16-6~2
interfere with Georgia’s exercise of the “‘right of the Nation and of the
States to maintain a decent society,’” Paris Adult Theatre I v. Slaton, 413
US., at 59-60, quoting Jacobellis v. Ohio, 878 U.S. 184, 199 (1964)
(Warren, C. J., dissenting). Essentially, petitioner argues, and the Court
agrees, that the fact that the acts described in § 16-6~-2 “for hundreds of
years, if not thousands, have been uniformly condemned as immoral” is a
sufficient reason to permit a State to ban them today. Brief for Petitioner
19; see ante, at 190, 192-194, 196.

4 Although I do not think it necessary to decide today issues that are not even remotely
before us, it does seem to me that a court could find simple, analytically sound distinctions
between certain private, consensual sexual conduct, on the one hand, and adultery and incest
(the only two vaguely specific “sexual crimes” to which the majority points, ante, at 196), on the
other. For example, marriage, in addition to its spiritual aspects, is a civil contract that entitles
the contracting parties to a variety of governmentally provided benefits. A State might define the
contractual commitment necessary to become eligible for these benefits to include a commitment
of fidelity and then punish individuals for breaching that contract. Moreover, a State might
conclude that adultery is likely to injure third persons, in particular, spouses and children of
persons who engage in extramarital affairs. With respect to incest, a court might well agree with
respondent that the nature of familial relationships renders true consent to incestuous activity
sufficiently problematical that a blanket prohibition of such activity is warranted. See Tr. of Oral
Arg. 21-22. Notably, the Court makes no effort to explain why it has chosen to group private,
consensual homosexual activity with adultery and incest rather than with private, consensual
heterosexual activity by unmarried persons or, indeed, with oral or anal sex within marriage.



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
132 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

T cannot agree that either the length of time a majority has held its
convictions or the passions with which it defends them can withdraw
legislation from this Court’s scrutiny. As Justice Jackson wrote so
eloquently for the Court in West Virginia Board of Education v. Barnette,
319 U.S. 624, 641-642 (1943), “we apply the limitations of the
Constitution with no fear that freedom to be intellectually and spiritually
diverse or even contrary will disintegrate the social organization. ...
[Freedom] to differ is not limited to things that do not matter much. That
would be a mere shadow of freedom. The test of its substance is the right
to differ as to things that touch the heart of the existing order.” It is
precisely because the issue raised by this case touches the heart of what
makes individuals what they are that we should be especially sensitive to
the rights of those whose choices upset the majority.

The assertion that “traditional Judeo-Christian values proscribe” the
conduct involved, Brief for Petitioner 20, cannot provide an adequate
justification for § 16-6-2. That certain, but by no means all, religious
groups condemn the behavior at issue gives the State no license to impose
their judgments on the entire citizenry. The legitimacy of secular
legislation depends instead on whether the State can advance some
justification for its law beyond its conformity to religious doctrine. Thus,
far from buttressing his case, petitioner’s invocation of Leviticus, Romans,
St. Thomas Aquinas, and sodomy’s heretical status during the Middle
Ages undermines his suggestion that § 16-6-2 represents a legitimate
use of secular coercive power. A State can no more punish private
behavior because of religious intolerance than it can punish such behavior
because of racial animus. “The Constitution cannot control such
prejudices, but neither can it tolerate them. Private biases may be outside
the reach of the law, but the law cannot, directly or indirectly, give them
effect.” Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U.S. 429, 433 (1984). No matter how
uncomfortable a certain group may make the majority of this Court, we
have held that “[mere] public intolerance or animosity cannot
constitutionally justify the deprivation of a person’s physical liberty.”
O'Connor v. Donaldson, 422 U.S. 568, 575 (1975).

Nor can § 16-6—2 be justified as a “morally neutral” exercise of
Georgia’s power to “protect the public environment,” Paris Adult Theatre
I, 413 U.S., at 68-69. Certainly, some private behavior can affect the
fabric of society as a whole. Reasonable people may differ about whether
particular sexual acts are moral or immoral, but “we have ample evidence
for believing that people will not abandon morality, will not think any
better of murder, cruelty and dishonesty, merely because some private
sexual practice which they abominate is not punished by the Jaw.” H. L.
A. Hart, Immorality and Treason, reprinted in The Law as Literature
220, 225 (L. Blom-Cooper ed. 1961). Petitioner and the Court fail to see
the difference between laws that protect public sensibilities and those
that enforce private morality. Statutes banning public sexual activity are

SEc.A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 133

entirely consistent with protecting the individual’s liberty interest in
decisions concerning sexual relations: the same recognition that those
decisions are intensely private which justifies protecting them from
governmental interference can justify protecting individuals from
unwilling exposure to the sexual activities of others. But the mere fact
that intimate behavior may be punished when it takes place in public
cannot dictate how States can regulate intimate behavior that occurs in
intimate places.

IV

; It took but three years for the Court to see the error in its analysis in
Minersville School District v. Gobitis, 310 U.S. 586 (1940), and to
recognize that the threat to national cohesion posed by a refusal to salute
the flag was vastly outweighed by the threat to those same values posed
by compelling such a salute. See West Virginia Board of Education v.
Barnette, 319 U.S. 624 (1943). I can only hope that here, too, the Court
soon will reconsider its analysis and conclude that depriving individuals
of the right to choose for themselves how to conduct their intimate
relationships poses a far greater threat to the values most deeply rooted
in our Nation’s history than tolerance of nonconformity could ever do.
Because I think the Court today betrays those values, I dissent.

JUSTICE STEVENS, with whom JUSTICE BRENNAN and JUSTICE
MARSHALL join, dissenting.

Like the statute that is challenged in this case, the rationale of the
Court’s opinion applies equally to the prohibited conduct regardless of
whether the parties who engage in it are married or unmarried, or are of
the same or different sexes. Sodomy was condemned as an odious and
sinful type of behavior during the formative period of the common law.
That condemnation was equally damning for heterosexual and
homosexual sodomy. Moreover, it provided no special exemption for
married couples. The license to cohabit and to produce legitimate
offspring simply did not include any permission to engage in sexual
conduct that was considered a “crime against nature.”

The history of the Georgia statute before us clearly reveals this
traditional prohibition of heterosexual, as well as homosexual, sodomy.
Indeed, at one point in the 20th century, Georgia’s law was construed to
permit certain sexual conduct between homosexual women even though
such conduct was prohibited between heterosexuals. The history of the
statutes cited by the majority as proof for the proposition that sodomy is
not constitutionally protected, similarly reveals a prohibition on
heterosexual, as well as homosexual, sodomy.

Because the Georgia statute expresses the traditional view that
sodomy is an immoral kind of conduct regardless of the identity of the
persons who engage in it, I believe that a proper analysis of its



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
134 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

constitutionality requires consideration of two questions: First, may a
State totally prohibit the described conduct by means of a neutral law
applying without exception to all persons subject to its jurisdiction? If not,
may the State save the statute by announcing that it will only enforce the
law against homosexuals? The two questions merit separate discussion.

I

Our prior cases make two propositions abundantly clear. First, the
fact that the governing majority in a State has traditionally viewed a
particular practice as immoral is not a sufficient reason for upholding a
law prohibiting the practice; neither history nor tradition could save a
law prohibiting miscegenation from constitutional attack. Second,
individual decisions by married persons, concerning the intimacies of
their physical relationship, even when not intended to produce offspring,
are a form of “liberty” protected by the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1968).
Moreover, this protection extends to intimate choices by unmarried as
well as married persons. Carey v. Population Services International, 431
U.S. 678 (1977); Bisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U.S. 488 (1972).

In consideration of claims of this kind, the Court has emphasized the
individual interest in privacy, but its decisions have actually been
animated by an even more fundamental concern. As I wrote some years
ago:

“These cases do not deal with the individual’s interest in protection

from unwarranted public attention, comment, or exploitation. They

deal, rather, with the individual’s right to make certain unusually
important decisions that will affect his own, or his family’s, destiny.

The Court has referred to such decisions as implicating ‘basic values,’

as being ‘fundamental, and as being dignified by history and

tradition. The character of the Court’s language in these cases brings
to mind the origins of the American heritage of freedom—the abiding
interest in individual liberty that makes certain state intrusions on
the citizen’s right to decide how he will live his own life intolerable.

Guided by history, our tradition of respect for the dignity of

individual choice in matters of conscience and the restraints implicit

in the federal system, federal judges have accepted the responsibility
for recognition and protection of these rights in appropriate cases.”

Fitzgerald v. Porter Memorial Hospital, 523 F.2d 716, 719-720 (CAT

1975) (footnotes omitted), cert. denied, 425 U.S. 916 (1976).

Society has every right to encourage its individual members to follow
particular traditions in expressing affection for one another and in
gratifying their personal desires. It, of course, may prohibit an individual
from imposing his will on another to satisfy his own selfish interests. It
also may prevent an individual from interfering with, or violating, a
legally sanctioned and protected relationship, such as marriage. And it

Sec. A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 135

may explain the relative advantages and disadvantages of different forms
of intimate expression. But when individual married couples are isolated
from observation by others, the way in which they voluntarily choose to
conduct their intimate relations is a matter for them-—not the State—to
decide. The essential “liberty” that animated the development of the law
in cases like Griswold, Eisenstadt, and Carey surely embraces the right to
engage in nonreproductive, sexual conduct that others may consider
offensive or immoral.

Paradoxical as it may seem, our prior cases thus establish that a
State may not prohibit sodomy within “the sacred precincts of marital
bedrooms,” Griswold, 381 U.S., at 485, or, indeed, between unmarried
heterosexual adults. Eisenstadt, 405 U.S., at 453. In all events, it is
perfectly clear that the State of Georgia may not totally prohibit the
conduct proscribed by § 16—6—2 of the Georgia Criminal Code.

II

If the Georgia statute cannot be enforced as it is written—if the
conduct it seeks to prohibit is a protected form of liberty for the vast
majority of Georgia’s citizens—the State must assume the burden of
justifying a selective application of its law. Hither the persons to whom
Georgia seeks to apply its statute do not have the same interest in
“tiberty” that others have, or there must be a reason why the State may
be permitted to apply a generally applicable law to certain persons that it
does not apply to others.

The first possibility is plainly unacceptable. Although the meaning of
the principle that “all men are created equal” is not always clear, it surely
must mean that every free citizen has the same interest in “liberty” that
the members of the majority share. From the standpoint of the individual,
the homosexual and the heterosexual have the same interest in deciding
how he will live his own life, and, more narrowly, how he will conduct
himself in his personal and voluntary associations with his companions.
State intrusion into the private conduct of either is equally burdensome.

The second possibility is similarly unacceptable. A policy of selective
application must be supported by a neutral and legitimate interest—
something more substantial than a habitual dislike for, or ignorance
about, the disfavored group. Neither the State nor the Court has
identified any such interest in this case. The Court has posited as a
justification for the Georgia statute “the presumed belief of a majority of
the electorate in Georgia that homosexual sodomy is immoral and
unacceptable.” Ante, at 196. But the Georgia electorate has expressed no
such belief—instead, its representatives enacted a law that presumably
reflects the belief that all sodomy is immoral and unacceptable. Unless
the Court is prepared to conclude that such a law is constitutional, it may
not rely on the work product of the Georgia Legislature to support its



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
136 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

holding. For the Georgia statute does not single out homosexuals as a
separate class meriting special disfavored treatment.

Nor, indeed, does the Georgia prosecutor even believe that all
homosexuals who violate this statute should be punished. This conclusion
is evident from the fact that the respondent in this very case has formally
acknowledged in his complaint and in court that he has engaged, and
intends to continue to engage, in the prohibited conduct, yet the State has
elected not to process criminal charges against him. As JUSTICE POWELL
points out, moreover, Georgia’s prohibition on private, consensual sodomy
has not been enforced for decades. The record of nonenforcement, in this
case and in the last several decades, belies the Attorney General’s
representations about the importance of the State’s selective application
of its generally applicable law.

Both the Georgia statute and the Georgia prosecutor thus completely
fail to provide the Court with any support for the conclusion that
homosexual sodomy, simpliciter, is considered unacceptable conduct in
that State, and that the burden of justifying a selective application of the
generally applicable law has been met.

Hl

The Court orders the dismissal of respondent’s complaint even
though the State’s statute prohibits all sodomy; even though that
prohibition is concededly unconstitutional with respect to heterosexuals;
and even though the State’s post hoc explanations for selective
application are belied by the State’s own actions. At the very least, J think
it clear at this early stage of the litigation that respondent has alleged a
constitutional claim sufficient to withstand a motion to dismiss.

I respectfully dissent.

NOTES

To understand more fully the real story behind the 5 to 4 opinions in
Bowers, it is important to peek into the Justices’ chambers and explore the
relationship between the judges and their clerks. This is especially true in the
case of Justice Powell, who changed his mind several times during the
opinion-writing process and may have been influenced heavily by a clerk. The
following chapter chronicles the history of the Bowers decision.

COURTING JUSTICE: GAY MEN AND LESBIANS V. THE
SUPREME COURT
Joyce Murdoch and Deb Price (New York: Basic Books 2001).
ALONG, SECRET STRUGGLE OVER A “FRIVOLOUS” CASE

The decent, fundamentally good-hearted man who cast the decisive
vote in Hardwick agonized over that ruling long after it was handed

SEC.A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 137

down. Publicly, Justice Powell played down the case’s importance.
Privately, he sought to make peace with his anti-gay vote by concocting
new justifications for it. His post-ruling mental tug-of-war with himself
began in August 1986 as he told the American Bar Association, “The case
may not be as significant as press reports suggest.” Sodomy laws are
“moribund and rarely enforced,” he claimed.

Three years after his 1987 retirement, Powell publicly confessed that
he’d “probably made a mistake” in Hardwick. After Powell branded his
vote a mistake, he told a Washington Post reporter, “So far as I’m
concerned it’s just part of my past and not very important. I don’t
supposed I’ve devoted half an hour” to thinking about it since the ruling.

An inch-thick legal-sized file that stayed in the retired justice’s
Supreme Court office after most of his court papers had been shipped to
the Washington and Lee University law library puts the lie to Powell’s
claims. Powell’s extensive, handwritten notes and post-retirement memos
reveal that he kept rearguing the case with himself, kept fighting with
Blackmun’s dissent and counted the ruling among the court’s most
important privacy decisions.

Hardwick was among the cases the retired Powell reviewed most
thoroughly in 1988 and 1989 before lecturing at the University of Virginia
and Washington and Lee. Girding himself for a March 1988 seminar on
due process, Powell wrote two memos, totaling 11 pages, analyzing the
case. “I will be grilled as to how Hardwick can be reconciled with Roe v.
Wade, and to a lesser extent with the City of East Cleveland [Powell's
extended-family zoning decision],” Powell’s first memo said. Powell
reminded himself to ask law students: “What does ‘sodomy’ contribute to
family life?”

Powell also had clerk Bob Werner produce a due process memo
focused on Hardwick. Werner found some merit in White’s majority
decision but ultimately sided with the dissent—spurring Powell to
respond “No.” To Werner’s repeated assertion that homosexual sodomy
was victimless, Powell three times wrote “AIDS” in the margin—though
the disease had not been among his reasons for siding with White. Powell
wrote that the “sanctity of the home,” family and history didn’t support a
sodomy-rights decision. When Werner declared “sexual intimacy ... is
important to the development of the human personality,” Powell, aghast,
wrote “sodomy!?!!”

Powell’s second memo concluded by citing the language in Harlan’s
classic Poe v. Ullman dissent that listed “homosexuality” among activities
“the state forbids altogether.”

Powell counted the times that Blackmun’s dissent had irked him by
mentioning “family” and “home.” Beside its mention of “family life,”
Powell hostilely asked, “what family?” Powell-saw “no limiting principle”



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
138 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

in Blackmun’s “right to be let alone.” Next to Blackmun’s eloquent
statement about the threat posed by intolerance, Powell wrote “error” and
“history is contrary.”

In a handwritten outline of key points for his seminar, Powell showed
a male and biblical bias by characterizing the court’s contraceptive
decisions as establishing a “right to beget.” In reference to sodomy he
wrote, “AIDS (blood transfusions). There are victims—innocent ones.”

Yet in reviewing Chief Justice Burger’s contention that knocking
down sodomy laws would “cast aside millennia of moral teaching,” Powell
circled “moral” and put a question mark beside it. Powell wrote, “Not a
question of morality w/ [with] me.”

Nowhere in his class preparation notes does Powell conclude his
Hardwick vote was an error. The closest he came was in a margin note on
a copy of White’s ruling. Powell said, “DC [district court] found no
standing. I should have done this.” That district court assessment, of
course, had applied only to the married couple who had tried to join the
case.

When Powell discussed Hardwick during his 1988~89 seminars, he
didn’t call his vote a mistake. However, on October 18, 1990—four years
after Hardwick branded gay Americans second class—he told students at
New York University’s law school, “I think I probably made a mistake in
that one.” That almost unprecedented admission of error by a former
justice was triggered, he said, by a question about “any decision I made I
had doubts about in retrospect.” The 83-year-old Powell was in
Manhattan to deliver the school’s annual James Madison lecture. Among
the guests—invited because of her Powell connection—was a lesbian
former clerk. With a pained laugh, she recalls feeling, “Too pad you didn’t
think of this years ago.”

A few days after calling his vote a mistake, Powell inadvertently
rubbed salt in gay Americans’ wounds by saying, “That case was not a
major case, and one of the reasons I voted the way I did was the case was
a frivolous case” filed “just to see what the court would do.”

Powell somewhat disingenuously explained his change of heart to
The National Law Journal by saying, “When I had the opportunity to
reread the opinions a few months later, I thought the dissent had the
better of the arguments.” Powell’s explanation was misleading because
his high-profile switch has effectively cast his vote in concrete months
before Blackmun’s dissent was even drafted. Blackmun never had a real

chance to win Powell’s support by making “the better of the arguments.” *
eK

Especially after Powell declared that he’d made a mistake in
Hardwick, his long line of gay clerks was plagued by questions about
whether one or more of them should have come out to him before his 1986

Sec. A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 139

vote. Could they have made him better prepared to wrestle with
Hardwick? Could they have helped him see that the human toll of sodomy
laws?

Not surprisingly, Cabell Chinnis is the ex-clerk most bedeviled by
unanswerable questions. “I wish I knew why he changed his vote because
then maybe I would be able to say to myself, ‘Cabell, anything else you
could have done wouldn’t have made a difference.’ . . . It’s the not knowing
that really kills you,” Chinnis said before war-gaming a series of “what if”
scenarios over lunch in 1998.

What if he or Coughlin had handled the case? What if he had invited
Powell to lunch and come out to him? What if he had hosted a dinner in
which, one by one, gay Powell clerks had risen and said, “Justice Powell, I
am a homosexual. This is my partner. We’ve been together four years.”
Or, “Justice Powell, I’m a lesbian. I want to be judged on my work and my
character not my sexual orientation. I don’t want to have to live in fear.”

What if Chinnis had done something overt and it had backfired? “I
never thought of that,” he gasped in horror. “I really think I would have
wanted to slit my wrists.”

Other ex-clerks also wonder what would have happened if they'd told
the grandfatherly Powell they were gay. A clerk from the mid-1980s said,
“It’s hard to imagine having a conversation like that with your
grandfather.... He’s a great grandfather, but he was still a
grandparent.” A gay Powell clerk from the 1982-83 term said, “T
wondered what I would have done if I had been clerking at the time [of
Hardwick]. And in my best moments, I’d like to think I would have gone
into the justice and said, ‘Hey, justice—’. [Y]ou don’t lobby judges. You
know, you don’t say, ‘Hey, my mother owns a lot of Shell Oil Company.’
... On the other hand, if in fact having some experience with being gay
... would help the judge, maybe you would tell him.”

A lesbian whose Powell clerkship preceded Hardwick remembers
thinking at the time the case came up “that Ann Coughlin and Bill Stuntz
were such good people and such decent people that the appeal on behalf of
humanity was going to get made.” She thought it wouldn’t be necessary
for gay clerks to out themselves. Powell’s anti-gay vote shifted her
perspective. She says, “Maybe it would have made a difference if all the
gay clerks came out to him because I think some of us were his favorites.
But on the other hand, that would have been such an inappropriate thing
to do. You just can’t do that—try to direct somebody's decision in a
pending case with information that is totally outside of the record and
really should be irrelevant.”

None of Powell’s gay clerks ever came out to him, according to his
administrative assistant Sally Smith, who kept tabs on virtually every
interaction Powell had from 1962 until his death in 1999. A couple of



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
140 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

years after Hardwick, Smith tried to talk to Powell about the fact that
Cabell Chinnis was gay. “I saw it was not going anywhere. He was polite.
He didn’t tell me to shut up. It was just something he wouldn’t deal with,”
she recalls.

Well into his retirement years, Powell told his lone clerk for that year
that he didn’t know that he’d ever had a gay clerk. The clerk, who
happened to be gay, responded, “Considering the numbers, surely you
have.” Powell just chuckled. John Jeffries’s 1994 Powell biography
mentions that the justice had a gay clerk during Hardwick’s term. Powell
claimed never to have read the book, though his wife read portions aloud
to him and Smith caught him peeking at it.

In 1995, Ronald Carr, a gay man who'd clerked for Powell in 1974—
75, died of AIDS at 49. He was the first Powell clerk to die. Powell knew
the cause of death but ignored it. “He just didn’t want to face certain
issues, and he didn’t,” Smith observes. Powell’s court papers are archived
at the Washington and Lee University law library in Lexington, Virginia.
The library bulletin board includes announcements from the law school’s
gay student group. No one could attend law school at Powell’s alma mater
today and remain oblivious to gay people.

Though Powell labeled Hardwick “frivolous” because he’d been told
sodomy laws weren’t enforced, prosecutions continued. For example, a
Georgia man was sentenced in 1988 to five years in prison for sodomy.
James Moseley had successfully defended himself against a charge of
raping his estranged wife by persuading the jury they had had consensual
oral sex. He later said he hadn’t realized he was admitting to criminal
behavior. He had thought sodomy laws applied only to homosexuals. He
served 18 months, and the conviction was used to deny him visitation
rights to see his children.

Many gay-rights attorneys did their best to avoid the hostile
Supreme Court after Hardwick. Focusing on state courts, state
constitutions and state legislatures, they slowly chipped away at sodomy
Jaws. In overturning Kentucky's same-sex sodomy law, that state’s top
court declared, “We need not sympathize, agree with or even understand
the sexual preference of homosexuals in order to recognize their right to
equal treatment before the bar of justice.”

When Hardwick was handed down, 24 states, the District of
Columbia and the military had sodomy laws. In 2000, they still existed in
18 states and the military. Gay-rights attorneys’ most gratifying
breakthrough came in 1998, when the Georgia Supreme Court struck
down that state’s notorious law. “We cannot think of any other activity
that reasonable persons would rank as more private and more deserving
of protection from governmental interference than consensual, private,
adult sexual activity.... [S}uch activity is at the heart of the Georgia
Constitution’s protection of the right to privacy,” Chief Justice Robert

Sec. A THE ROAD TO LAWRENCE 141

Benham declared, overturning the conviction of a man serving a five-year
sentence for heterosexual sodomy in his own home.

Michael Hardwick didn’t live to see his challenge to the Georgia law
vindicated. He died of AIDS at his sister’s home in Gainesville, Florida,
on June 13, 1991. He was 37.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Moral disgust: Lord Devlin discusses the role of disgust in the
debate over homosexuality, suggesting that “No society can do without
intolerance, indignation, and disgust.” (p. 17). Read the passage from his
lecture on “Morals and the Criminal Law” attached, and react.

2. What if a minority feels disgust but not the majority? What do we
do then? What if it is a larger minority than the homosexual population?
Does that become a moral foundation for using the criminal law?

PATRICK DEVLIN—-MORALS AND THE CRIMINAL LAW
from The Enforcement of Morals (Oxford University Press, 1965).

I do not think that one can talk sensibly of a public and private
morality any more than one can of a public or private highway. Morality
is a sphere in which there is a public interest and a private interest, often
in conflict, and the problem is to reconcile the two. This does not mean
that it is impossible to put forward any general statements about how in
our society the balance ought to be struck. Such statements cannot of
their nature be rigid or precise; they would not be designed to
circumscribe the operation of the lawmaking power but to guide those
who have to apply it. While every decision which a court of law makes
when it balances the public against the private interest is an ad hoc
decision, the cases contain statements of principle to which the court
should have regard when it reaches its decision. In the same way it is
possible to make general statements of principle which it may be thought
the legislature should bear in mind when it is considering the enactment
of laws enforcing morals.

I believe that most people would agree upon the chief of these elastic
principles. There must be toleration of the maximum jndividual freedom
that is consistent with the integrity of society. It cannot be said that this
is a principle that runs all through the criminal law. Much of the criminal
law that is regulatory in character—the part of it that deals with malum

> prohibitum rather than malum in se—is based upon the opposite

*

principle, that is, that the choice of the individual must give way to the
convenience of the many. But in all matters of conscience the principle I
have stated is generally held to prevail. It is not confined to thought and
speech; it extends to action, as is shown by the recognition of the right to
conscientious objection in war-time; this example shows also that



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
142 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

conscience will be respected even in times of national danger. The
principle appears to me to be peculiarly appropriate to all questions of
morals. Nothing should be punished by the law that does not lie beyond
the limits of tolerance. It is not nearly enough to say that a majority
dislike a practice; there must be a real feeling of reprobation. Those who
are dissatisfied with the present law on homosexuality often say that the
opponents of reform are swayed simply by disgust. If that were so it
would be wrong, but I do not think one can ignore disgust if it is deeply
felt and not manufactured. Its presence is a good indication that the
bounds of toleration are being reached. Not everything is to be tolerated.
No society can do without intolerance, indignation, and disgust; they are
the forces behind the moral law, and indeed it can be argued that if they
or something like them are not present, the feelings of society cannot be
weighty enough to deprive the individual of freedom of choice.

B. A NEW RIGHT

LAWRENCE V. TEXAS

Supreme Court of the United States, 2003.
539 U.S. 558.

JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.

Liberty protects the person from unwarranted government intrusions
into a dwelling or other private places. In our tradition the State is not
omnipresent in the home. And there are other spheres of our lives and
existence, outside the home, where the State should not be a dominant
presence. Freedom extends beyond spatial bounds. Liberty presumes an
autonomy of self that includes freedom of thought, belief, expression, and
certain intimate conduct. The instant case involves liberty of the person
both in its spatial and more transcendent dimensions.

I

The question before the Court is the validity of a Texas statute
making it a crime for two persons of the same sex to engage in certain
intimate sexual conduct.

In Houston, Texas, officers of the Harris County Police Department
were dispatched to a private residence in response to a reported weapons
disturbance. They entered an apartment where one of the petitioners,
John Geddes Lawrence, resided. The right of the police to enter does not
seem to have been questioned. The officers observed Lawrence and
another man, Tyron Garner, engaging in a sexual act. The two petitioners
were arrested, held in custody over night, and charged and convicted
before a Justice of the Peace.

The complaints described their crime as “deviate sexual intercourse,
namely anal sex, with a member of the same sex (man).” The applicable

SEc.B A NEW RIGHT 143

state law is Tex. Penal Code Ann. § 21.06(a) (2008). It provides: “A person
commits an offense if he engages in deviate sexual intercourse with
another individual of the same sex.” The statute defines “[d]eviate sexual
intercourse” as follows:

(A) any contact between any part of the genitals of one person and
the mouth or anus of another person; or

“(B) the penetration of the genitals or the anus of another person
with an object.” § 21.01(1).

The petitioners exercised their right to a trial de novo in Harris
County Criminal Court. They challenged the statute as a violation of the
Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and of a like
provision of the Texas Constitution. Tex. Const., Art. 1, § 8a. Those
contentions were rejected. The petitioners, having entered a plea of nolo
contendere, were each fined $200 and assessed court costs of $141.25.

The Court of Appeals for the Texas Fourteenth District considered
the petitioners’ federal constitutional arguments under both the Equal
Protection and Due Process Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment. After
hearing the case en banc the court, in a divided opinion, rejected the
constitutional arguments and affirmed the convictions. The majority
opinion indicates that the Court of Appeals considered our decision in
Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186, 92 L. Ed. 2d 140, 106 S. Ct. 2841
(1986), to be controlling on the federal due process aspect of the case.
Bowers then being authoritative, this was proper.

We granted certiorari to consider three questions:

“1. Whether Petitioners’ criminal convictions under the Texas
Homosexual Conduct” law—which criminalizes sexual intimacy by
same-sex couples, but not identical behavior by different-sex
couples—violate the Fourteenth Amendment guarantee of equal
protection of laws?

“2. Whether Petitioners’ criminal convictions for adult consensual
sexual intimacy in the home violate their vital interests in liberty
and privacy protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment?

“3. Whether Bowers v. Hardwick should be overruled?”

The petitioners were adults at the time of the alleged offense. Their
conduct was in private and consensual.

Il
We conclude the case should be resolved by determining whether the

petitioners were free as adults to engage in the private conduct in the
exercise of their liberty under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
144 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

Amendment to the Constitution. For this inquiry we deem it necessary to
reconsider the Court’s holding in Bowers.
wkE*K

In Griswold the Court invalidated a state law prohibiting the use of
drugs or devices of contraception and counseling or aiding and abetting
the use of contraceptives. The Court described the protected interest as a
right to privacy and placed emphasis on the marriage relation and the
protected space of the marital bedroom.

After Griswold it was established that the right to make certain
decisions regarding sexual conduct extends beyond the marital
relationship. In Eisenstadt v. Baird, the Court invalidated a law
prohibiting the distribution of contraceptives to unmarried persons. The
case was decided under the Equal Protection Clause, id., at 454; but with
respect to unmarried persons, the Court went on to state the fundamental
proposition that the law impaired the exercise of their personal rights.

kK

The opinions in Griswold and Eisenstadt were part of the background
for the decision in Roe v. Wade. As is well known, the case involved a
challenge to the Texas law prohibiting abortions, but the laws of other
States were affected as well. Although the Court held the woman’s rights
were not absolute, her right to elect an abortion did have real and
substantial protection as an exercise of her liberty under the Due Process
Clause. The Court cited cases that protect spatial freedom and cases that
go well beyond it. Roe recognized the right of a woman to make certain
fundamental decisions affecting her destiny and confirmed once more that
the protection of liberty under the Due Process Clause has a substantive
dimension of fundamental significance in defining the rights of the
person.

In Carey v. Population Services Intl, the Court confronted a New
York law forbidding sale or distribution of contraceptive devices to
persons under 16 years of age. Although there was no single opinion for
the Court, the law was invalidated. Both Hisenstadt and Carey, as well as
the holding and rationale in Roe, confirmed that the reasoning of
Griswold could not be confined to the protection of rights of married
adults. This was the state of the law with respect to some of the most
relevant cases when the Court considered Bowers v. Hardwick.

The facts in Bowers had some similarities to the instant case. A
police officer, whose right to enter seems not to have been in question,
observed Hardwick, in his own bedroom, engaging in intimate sexual
conduct with another adult male. The conduct was in violation of a
Georgia statute making it a criminal offense to engage in sodomy. One
difference between the two cases is that the Georgia statute prohibited
the conduct whether or not the participants were of the same sex, while

SEc.B A NEW RIGHT 145

the Texas statute, as we have seen, applies only to participants of the
same sex. Hardwick was not prosecuted, but he brought an action in
federal court to declare the state statute invalid. He alleged he was a
practicing homosexual and that the criminal prohibition violated rights
guaranteed to him by the Constitution. The Court *** sustained the
Georgia law. * * *

The Court began its substantive discussion in Bowers as follows: “The
issue presented is whether the Federal Constitution confers a
fundamental right upon homosexuals to engage in sodomy and hence
invalidates the laws of the many States that still make such conduct
illegal and have done so for a very long time.” Jd., at 190, 92 L.Ed.2d 140,
106 S.Ct. 2841. That statement, we now conclude, discloses the Court’s
own failure to appreciate the extent of the liberty at stake. To say that
the issue in Bowers was simply the right to engage in certain sexual
conduct demeans the claim the individual put forward, just as it would
demean a married couple were it to be said marriage is simply about the
right to have sexual intercourse. The laws involved in Bowers and here
are, to be sure, statutes that purport to do no more than prohibit a
particular sexual act. Their penalties and purposes, though, have more
far-reaching consequences, touching upon the most private human
conduct, sexual behavior, and in the most private of places, the home. The
statutes do seek to control a personal relationship that, whether or not
entitled to formal recognition in the law, is within the liberty of persons to
choose without being punished as criminals.

This, as a general rule, should counsel against attempts by the State,
or a court, to define the meaning of the relationship or to set its
boundaries absent injury to a person or abuse of an institution the law
protects. It suffices for us to acknowledge that adults may choose to enter
upon this relationship in the confines of their homes and their own
private lives and still retain their dignity as free persons. When sexuality
finds overt expression in intimate conduct with another person, the
conduct can be but one element in a personal bond that is more enduring.
The liberty protected by the Constitution allows homosexual persons the
right to make this choice.

Having misapprehended the claim of liberty there presented to it,
and thus stating the claim to be whether there is a fundamental right to
engage in consensual sodomy, the Bowers Court said: “Proscriptions
against that conduct have ancient roots.” Id., at 192. * * *

® At the outset it should be noted that there is no longstanding history
*in this country of laws directed at homosexual conduct as a distinct
matter. Beginning in colonial times there were prohibitions of sodomy
derived from the English criminal laws passed in the first instance by the
Reformation Parliament of 1533. The English prohibition was understood
to include relations between men and women as well as relations between



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
146 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

men and men. Nineteenth-century commentators similarly read
American sodomy, buggery, and crime-against-nature statutes as
criminalizing certain relations between men and women and between
men and men. The absence of legal prohibitions focusing on homosexual
conduct may be explained in part by noting that according to some
scholars the concept of the homosexual as a distinct category of person did
not emerge until the late 19th century. Thus early American sodomy laws
were not directed at homosexuals as such but instead sought to prohibit
nonprocreative sexual activity more generally. This does not suggest
approval of homosexual conduct. It does tend to show that this particular
form of conduct was not thought of as a separate category from like
conduct between heterosexual persons.

Laws prohibiting sodomy do not seem to have been enforced against
consenting adults acting in private. *** Instead ***, 19th-century
sodomy prosecutions typically involved relations between men and minor
girls or minor boys, relations between adults involving force, relations
between adults implicating disparity in status, or relations between men
and animals.

To the extent that there were any prosecutions for the acts in
question, 19th-century evidence rules imposed a burden that would make
a conviction more difficult to obtain even taking into account the
problems always inherent in prosecuting consensual acts committed in
private. Under then-prevailing standards, a man could not be convicted of
sodomy based upon testimony of a consenting partner, because the
partner was considered an accomplice. A partner’s testimony, however,
was admissible if he or she had not consented to the act or was a minor,
and therefore incapable of consent. See, e.g., F. Wharton, Criminal Law
443 (2d ed. 1852); 1 F. Wharton, Criminal Law 512 (8th ed. 1880). The
rule may explain in part the infrequency of these prosecutions. In all
events that infrequency makes it difficult to say that society approved of a
rigorous and systematic punishment of the consensual acts committed in
private and by adults. The longstanding criminal prohibition of
homosexual sodomy upon which the Bowers decision placed such reliance
is as consistent with a general condemnation of nonprocreative sex as it is
with an established tradition of prosecuting acts because of their
homosexual character.

*** [Flar from possessing “ancient roots,” Bowers, 478 U.S., at 192,
American laws targeting same-sex couples did not develop until the last
third of the 20th century. The reported decisions concerning the
prosecution of consensual, homosexual sodomy between adults for the
years 1880-1995 are not always clear in the details, but a significant
number involved conduct in a public place.

It was not until the 1970’s that any State singled out same-sex
relations for criminal prosecution, and only nine States have done so.

SEc. B A NEw RIGHT 147

*** Over the course of the last decades, States with same-sex
prohibitions have moved toward abolishing them.

In summary, the historical grounds relied upon in Bowers are more
complex than the majority opinion and the concurring opinion by Chief
Justice Burger indicate. Their historical premises are not without doubt
and, at the very least, are overstated.

It must be acknowledged, of course, that the Court in Bowers was
making the broader point that for centuries there have been powerful
voices to condemn homosexual conduct as immoral. The condemnation
has been shaped by religious beliefs, conceptions of right and acceptable
behavior, and respect for the traditional family. For many persons these
are not trivial concerns but profound and deep convictions accepted as
ethical and moral principles to which they aspire and which thus
determine the course of their lives. These considerations do not answer
the question before us, however. The issue is whether the majority may
use the power of the State to enforce these views on the whole society
through operation of the criminal law. * * *

[W]e think that our laws and traditions in the past half century are
of most relevance here. These references show an emerging awareness
that liberty gives substantial protection to adult persons in deciding how
to conduct their private lives in matters pertaining to sex. “[H]istory and
tradition are the starting point but not in all cases the ending point of the
substantive due process inquiry.”

This emerging recognition should have been apparent when Bowers
was decided. In 1955 the American Law Institute promulgated the Model
Penal Code and made clear that it did not recommend or provide for
“criminal penalties for consensual sexual relations conducted in private.”
In Bowers the Court referred to the fact that before 1961 all 50 States had
outlawed sodomy, and that at the time of the Court’s decision 24 States
and the District of Columbia had sodomy laws. Justice Powell pointed out
that these prohibitions often were being ignored, however.

The sweeping references by Chief Justice Burger to the history of
Western civilization and to Judeo-Christian moral and ethical standards
did not take account of other authorities pointing in an opposite direction.
A committee advising the British Parliament recommended in 1957
repeal of laws punishing homosexual conduct. The Wolfenden Report:
Report of the Committee on Homosexual Offenses and Prostitution
(1963). Parliament enacted the substance of those recommendations 10
years later. Sexual Offences Act 1967, § 1.

Of even more importance, almost five years before Bowers was
decided the European Court of Human Rights considered a case with
parallels to Bowers and to today’s case. An adult male resident in
Northern Ireland alleged he was a practicing homosexual who desired to



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
148 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

engage in consensual homosexual conduct. The laws of Northern Treland
forbade him that right. He alleged that he had been questioned, his home
had been searched, and he feared criminal prosecution. The court held
that the laws proscribing the conduct were invalid under the European
Convention on Human Rights. Dudgeon v. United Kingdom, 45 Eur. Ct.
H. R. (1981) & § 52. Authoritative in all countries that are members of
the Council of Europe (21 nations then, 45 nations now), the decision is at
odds with the premise in Bowers that the claim put forward was
insubstantial in our Western civilization.

In our own constitutional system the deficiencies in Bowers became
even more apparent in the years following its announcement. The 25
States with laws prohibiting the relevant conduct referenced in the
Bowers decision are reduced now to 13, of which 4 enforce their laws only
against homosexual conduct. In those States where sodomy is still
proscribed, whether for same-sex or heterosexual conduct, there is a
pattern of nonenforcement with respect to consenting adults acting in
private. The State of Texas admitted in 1994 that as of that date it had
not prosecuted anyone under those circumstances.

Two principal cases decided after Bowers cast its holding into even
more doubt. In Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 505
U.S. 833, the Court reaffirmed the substantive force of the liberty
protected by the Due Process Clause. The Casey decision again confirmed
that our laws and tradition afford constitutional protection to personal
decisions relating to marriage, procreation, contraception, family
relationships, child rearing, and education. Id., at 851. In explaining the
respect the Constitution demands for the autonomy of the person in
making these choices, we stated as follows:

“These matters, involving the most intimate and personal choices a
person may make in a lifetime, choices central to personal dignity
and autonomy, are central to the liberty protected by the Fourteenth
Amendment. At the heart of liberty is the right to define one’s own
concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery
of human life. Beliefs about these matters could not define the
attributes of personhood were they formed under compulsion of the
State.” Ibid.

Persons in a homosexual relationship may seek autonomy for these
purposes, just as heterosexual persons do. The decision in Bowers would
deny them this right.

The ‘second post-Bowers case of principal relevance is Romer v.
Evans, 517 U.S. 620. There the Court struck down class-based legislation
directed at homosexuals as a violation of the Equal Protection Clause.
Romer invalidated an amendment to Colorado's constitution which named
as a solitary class persons who were homosexuals, lesbians, or bisexual
either by “orientation, conduct, practices or relationships,” and deprived

SEc. B A NEW RIGHT 149

them of protection under state antidiscrimination laws. We concluded
that the provision was “born of animosity toward the class of persons
affected” and further that it had no rational relation to a legitimate
governmental purpose. Id., at 634.

As an alternative argument in this case, counsel for the petitioners
and some amici contend that Romer provides the basis for declaring the
Texas statute invalid under the Equal Protection Clause. That is a
tenable argument, but we conclude the instant case requires us to
address whether Bowers itself has continuing validity. Were we to hold
the statute invalid under the Equal Protection Clause some might
question whether a prohibition would be valid if drawn differently, say, to
prohibit the conduct both between same-sex and different-sex
participants.

*** When homosexual conduct is made criminal by the law of the
State, that declaration in and of itself is an invitation to subject
homosexual persons to discrimination both in the public and in the
private spheres. The central holding of Bowers has been brought in
question by this case, and it should be addressed. Its continuance as
precedent demeans the lives of homosexual persons.

The stigma this criminal statute imposes, moreover, is not trivial.
The offense, to be sure, is but a class C misdemeanor, a minor offense in
the Texas legal system. Still, it remains a criminal offense with all that
imports for the dignity of the persons charged. The petitioners will bear
on their record the history of their criminal convictions. Just this Term
we rejected various challenges to state laws requiring the registration of
sex offenders. We are advised that if Texas convicted an adult for private,
consensual homosexual conduct under the statute here in question the
convicted person would come within the registration laws of a least four
States were he or she to be subject to their jurisdiction. This underscores
the consequential nature of the punishment and the state-sponsored
condemnation attendant to the criminal prohibition. Furthermore, the
Texas criminal conviction carries with it the other collateral consequences
always following a conviction, such as notations on job application forms,
to mention but one example.

KEK

To the extent Bowers relied on values we share with a wider
civilization, it should be noted that the reasoning and holding in Bowers
have been rejected elsewhere. The European Court of Human Rights has
followed not Bowers but its own decision in Dudgeon v. United Kingdom.
Other nations, too, have taken action consistent with an affirmation of
the protected right of homosexual adults to engage in intimate,
consensual conduct. See Brief for Mary Robinson et al. as Amici Curiae
11-12. The right the petitioners seek in this case has been accepted as an
integral part of human freedom in many other countries. There has been



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
150 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

no showing that in this country the governmental interest in
circumscribing personal choice is somehow more legitimate or urgent.

The doctrine of stare decisis is essential to the respect accorded to the
judgments of the Court and to the stability of the law. It is not, however,
‘an inexorable command. In Casey we noted that when a Court is asked to
overrule a precedent recognizing a constitutional liberty interest,
individual or societal reliance on the existence of that liberty cautions
with particular strength against reversing course. The holding in Bowers,
however, has not induced detrimental reliance comparable to some
instances where recognized individual rights are involved. Indeed, there
has been no individual or societal reliance on Bowers of the sort that
could counsel against overturning its holding once there are compelling
reasons to do so. Bowers itself causes uncertainty, for the precedents
before and after its issuance contradict its central holding.

The rationale of Bowers does not withstand careful analysis. In his
dissenting opinion in Bowers Justice Stevens came to these conclusions:

“Our prior cases make two propositions abundantly clear. First, the
fact that the governing majority in a State has traditionally viewed a
particular practice as immoral is not a sufficient reason for upholding
a law prohibiting the practice; neither history nor tradition could
save a law prohibiting miscegenation from constitutional attack.
Second, individual decisions by married persons, concerning the
intimacies of their physical relationship, even when not intended to
produce offspring, are a form of “liberty” protected by the Due
Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Moreover, this
protection extends to intimate choices by unmarried as well as
married persons.” 478 U.S., at 216.

Justice Stevens’ analysis, in our view, should have been controlling in
Bowers and should control here.

Bowers was not correct when it was decided, and it is not correct
today. It ought not to remain binding precedent. Bowers v. Hardwick
should be and now is overruled.

The present case does not involve minors. It does not involve persons
who might be injured or coerced or who are situated in relationships
where consent might not easily be refused. It does not involve public
conduct or prostitution. It does not involve whether the government must
give formal recognition to any relationship that homosexual persons seek
to enter. The case does involve two adults who, with full and mutual
consent from each other, engaged in sexual practices common to a
homosexual lifestyle. The petitioners are entitled to respect for their
private lives. The State cannot demean their existence or control their
destiny by making their private sexual conduct a crime. Their right to
liberty under the Due Process Clause gives them the full right to engage

SEc.B A NEw RIGHT 151

in their conduct without intervention of the government. “It is a promise
of the Constitution that there is a realm of personal liberty which the
government may not enter.” Casey, supra, at 847. The Texas statute
furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into
the personal and private life of the individual.

Had those who drew and ratified the Due Process Clauses of the
Fifth Amendment or the Fourteenth Amendment known the components
of liberty in its manifold possibilities, they might have been more specific.
They did not presume to have this insight. They knew times can blind us
to certain truths and later generations can see that laws once thought
necessary and proper in fact serve only to oppress. As the Constitution
endures, persons in every generation can invoke its principles in their
own search for greater freedom.

; The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Texas Fourteenth
District is reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings not
inconsistent with this opinion.

It is so ordered.
JUSTICE O’CONNOR, concurring in the judgment.

The Court today overrules Bowers v. Hardwick. I joined Bowers, and
do not join the Court in overruling it. Nevertheless, I agree with the
Court that Texas’ statute banning same-sex sodomy is unconstitutional.
Rather than relying on the substantive component of the Fourteenth
Amendment’s Due Process Clause, as the Court does, I base my
conclusion on the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause.

The Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment “is
essentially a direction that all persons similarly situated should be
treated alike.” Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Center, Inc., 473 U.S. 482,
439. Under our rational basis standard of review, “legislation is presumed
to be valid and will be sustained if the classification drawn by the statute
is rationally related to a legitimate state interest.” Cleburne v. Cleburne
Living Center, supra, at 440.

Laws such as economic or tax legislation that are scrutinized under
rational basis review normally pass constitutional muster, since “the
Constitution presumes that even improvident decisions will eventually be
rectified by the democratic processes.” Cleburne v. Cleburne Living
Center, supra, at 440. We have consistently held, however, that some
objectives, such as “a bare ... desire to harm a politically unpopular
group,” are not legitimate state intérests. Department of Agriculture v.
Moreno, supra, at 534, 37 L.Ed.2d 782, 93 S.Ct. 2821. When a law
exhibits such a desire to harm a politically unpopular group, we have
applied a more searching form of rational basis review to strike down
such laws under the Equal Protection Clause.



From ANTLSODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
152 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

We have been most likely to apply rational basis review to hold a law
unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause where, as here, the
challenged legislation inhibits personal relationships. In Department of
Agriculture v. Moreno, for example, we held that a law preventing those
households containing an individual unrelated to any other member of
the household from receiving food stamps violated equal protection
because the purpose of the law was to « ‘discriminate against hippies.” In
Eisenstadt v. Baird, we refused to sanction a law that discriminated
between married and unmarried persons by prohibiting the distribution
of contraceptives to single persons. Likewise, in Cleburne v. Cleburne
Living Center, supra, we held that it was irrational for a State to require
a home for the mentally disabled to obtain a special use permit when
other residences—like fraternity houses and apartment buildings—did
not have to obtain such a permit. And in Romer v. Evans, we disallowed a
state statute that “impos[ed] a broad and undifferentiated disability on a
single named group”’—specifically, homosexuals. The dissent apparently
agrees that if these cases have stare decisis effect, Texas’ sodomy law
would not pass scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause, regardless of
the type of rational basis review that we apply.

The statute at issue here makes sodomy a crime only if a person
“engages in deviate sexual intercourse with another individual of the
same sex.” Tex. Penal Code Ann. § 21.06(a) (2008). Sodomy between
opposite-sex partners, however, is not a crime in Texas. That is, Texas
treats the same conduct differently based solely on the participants.
Those harmed by this law are people who have a same-sex sexual
orientation and thus are more likely to engage in behavior prohibited by
§ 21.06.

The Texas statute makes homosexuals unequal in the eyes of the law
by making particular conduct—and only that conduct—subject to
criminal sanction. It appears that prosecutions under Texas’ sodomy law
are rare. This case shows, however, that prosecutions under § 21.06 do
occur, And while the penalty imposed on petitioners in this case was
relatively minor, the consequences of conviction are not. As the Court
notes, see ante, at 15, petitioners’ convictions, if upheld, would disqualify
them from or restrict their ability to engage jn a variety of professions,
including medicine, athletic training, and interior design. Indeed, were
petitioners to move to one of four States, their convictions would require
them to register as sex offenders to local law enforcement.

And the effect of Texas’ sodomy law is not just limited to the threat of
prosecution or consequence of conviction. Texas’ sodomy law brands all
homosexuals as criminals, thereby making it more difficult for
homosexuals to be treated in the same manner as everyone else.

Texas attempts to justify its law, and the effects of the law, by
arguing that the statute satisfies rational basis review because it furthers

SEc.B A NEw RIGHT 153

the legitimate governmental interest of the promotion of morality. In
Bowers, we held that a state law criminalizing sodomy as applied to
homosexual couples did not violate substantive due process. We rejected
the argument that no rational basis existed to justify the law, pointing to
the government’s interest in promoting morality. The only question in
front of the Court in Bowers was whether the substantive component of
the Due Process Clause protected a right to engage in homosexual
sodomy. Bowers did not hold that moral disapproval of a group is a
rational basis under the Equal Protection Clause to criminalize
homosexual sodomy when heterosexual sodomy is not punished.

This case raises a different issue than Bowers: whether, under the
Equal Protection Clause, moral disapproval is a legitimate state interest
to justify by itself a statute that bans homosexual sodomy, but not
heterosexual sodomy. It is not. Moral disapproval of this group like a
bare desire to harm the group, is an interest that is insufficient to satisfy
rational basis review under the Equal Protection Clause. Indeed, we have
never held that moral disapproval, without any other asserted state
interest, is a sufficient rationale under the Equal Protection Clause to
justify a law that discriminates among groups of persons.* * *

; Moral disapproval of a group cannot be a legitimat

interest under the Equal Protection Clause ecause Tegal ae tions
must not be “drawn for the purpose of disadvantaging the group burdened
by the law.” Romer, at 633. Texas’ invocation of moral disapproval as a
legitimate state interest proves nothing more than Texas’ desire to
criminalize homosexual sodomy. But the Equal Protection Clause
prevents a State from creating “a classification of persons undertaken for
its own sake.” Id., at 6385. And because Texas so rarely enforces its
sodomy law as applied to private, consensual acts, the law serves more as
a statement of dislike and disapproval against homosexuals than as a tool
to stop criminal behavior. The Texas sodomy law “raise[s] the inevitable
inference that the disadvantage imposed is born of animosity toward the
class of persons affected.” Id., at 634.

Texas argues, however, that the sodomy law does not discriminate
against homosexual persons. Instead, the State maintains that the law
discriminates only against homosexual conduct. While it is true that the
law applies only to conduct, the conduct targeted by this law is conduct
that is closely correlated with being homosexual. Under such
circumstances, Texas’ sodomy law is targeted at more than conduct. It is
instead directed toward gay persons as a class.* * * ,

. A State can of course assign certain consequences to a violation of its
criminal law. But the State cannot single out one identifiable class of
gauzens for punishment that does not apply to everyone else, with moral

‘sapproval as the only asserted state interest for the law. The Texas
sodomy statute subjects homosexuals to “a lifelong penalty and stigma. A



eee

From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
154 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

legislative classification that threatens the creation of an underclass .. -
cannot be reconciled with” the Equal Protection Clause. Plyler v. Doe, 457
U.S. at 239 (Powell, J., concurring).

wee

That this law as applied to private, consensual conduct is
unconstitutional under the Equal Protection Clause does not mean that
other laws distinguishing between heterosexuals and homosexuals would
similarly fail under rational basis review. Texas cannot assert any
legitimate state interest here, such as national security or preserving the
traditional institution of marriage. Unlike the moral disapproval of same-
sex relations—the asserted state interest jn this case—other reasons exist
to promote the institution of marriage beyond mere moral disapproval of
an excluded group.

A law branding one class of persons as criminal solely based on the
State’s moral disapproval of that class and the conduct associated with
that class runs contrary to the values of the Constitution and the Equal
Protection Clause, under any standard of review. I therefore concur in the
Court’s judgment that Texas’ sodomy law banning “deviate sexual
intercourse” between consenting adults of the same sex, but not between
consenting adults of different sexes, is unconstitutional.

JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and JUSTICE
THOMAS join, dissenting.

*** Most of *** today’s opinion has no relevance to its actual
holding—that the Texas statute “furthers no legitimate state interest
which can justify’ its application to petitioners under rational-basis
review. Ante, at 18 (overruling Bowers to the extent it sustained Georgia’s
anti-sodomy statute under the rational-basis test). Though there is
discussion of “fundamental proposition[s],” and “fundamental decisions,”
nowhere does the Court’s opinion declare that homosexual sodomy is a
“fundamental right” under the Due Process Clause; nor does it subject the
Texas law to the standard of review that would be appropriate (strict
scrutiny) if homosexual sodomy were a “fundamental right.” Thus, while
overruling the outcome of Bowers, the Court leaves strangely untouched
its central legal conclusion: “[Rjespondent would have us announce... a
fundamental right to engage in homosexual sodomy. This we are quite
unwilling to do.” Instead the Court simply describes petitioners’ conduct
as “an exercise of their liberty’—which it undoubtedly is—and proceeds to
apply an unheard-of form of rational-basis review that will have far-
reaching implications beyond this case.

I
I begin with the Court’s surprising readiness to reconsider a decision

rendered a mere 17 years ago in Bowers v. Hardwick. I do not myself
believe in rigid adherence to stare decisis in constitutional cases; but Ido

SrEc.B A NEW RIGHT 155

believe that we should be consistent rather than manipulative in invoking
the doctrine. Today’s opinions in support of reversal do not bother to
distinguish—or indeed, even bother to mention—the paean to stare
decisis coauthored by three Members of today’s majority in Planned
Parenthood v. Casey. There, when stare decisis meant preservation of
judicially invented abortion rights, the widespread criticism of Roe was
strong reason to reaffirm it. * * *

roday, however, the widespread opposition to Bowers, a decision
resolving an issue as ‘intensely divisive” as the issue in Roe, is offered as
a reason in favor of overruling it. * * *

Today's approach to stare decisis invites us to overrule an
erroneously decided precedent (including an “intensely divisive” decision)
if: (1) its foundations have been “eroded” by subsequent decisions, (2) it
has been subject to “substantial and continuing” criticism, and (3) it has
not induced “individual or societal reliance” that counsels against
overturning. The problem is that Roe itself—which today’s majority
surely has no disposition to overrule—satisfies these conditions to at least
the same degree as Bowers.

(1) * * * I do not quarrel with the Court’s claim that Romer v. Evans
517 U.S. 620 “eroded” the “foundations” of Bowers’ rational-basis holding.
See Romer, supra, at 640-643 (Scalia, J., dissenting). But Roe and Casey
have been equally “eroded” by Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702
721 (1997), which held that only fundamental rights which are “ ‘deeply
rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition’” qualify for anything other
than rational basis scrutiny under the doctrine of “substantive due
process. Roe and Casey, of course, subjected the restriction of abortion to
heightened scrutiny without even attempting to establish that the
freedom to abort was rooted in this Nation’s tradition.

@) Bowers, the Court says, has been subject to “substantial and
continuing [criticism], disapproving of its reasoning in all respects, not
just as to its historical assumptions.” * ** Of course, Roe too (and by

extension Casey) had been (and still is) subject to unrelenting criticism.

; (3) That leaves, to distinguish the rock-solid, unamendable
disposition of Roe from the readily overrulable Bowers, only the third
factor. “(T]here has been,” the Court says, “no individual or societal
reliance on Bowers of the sort that could counsel against overturning its
holding. . . .” It seems to me that the “societal reliance” on the principles

» confirmed in Bowers and discarded today has been overwhelming.

Countless judicial decisions and legislative enactments have relied on the
ancient proposition that a governing majority's belief that certain sexual
behavior is “immoral and unacceptable” constitutes a rational basis for
regulation. *** State laws against bigamy, same-sex marriage, adult
incest, prostitution, masturbation, adultery, fornication, bestiality, and



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
156 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

obscenity are * * * sustainable only in light of Bowers’ validation of laws
based on moral choices. Every single one of these laws is called into
question by today’s decision; the Court makes no effort to cabin the scope
of its decision to exclude them from its holding. The impossibility of
distinguishing homosexuality from other traditional “morals” offenses is
precisely why Bowers rejected the rational-basis challenge. “The law,” it
said, “is constantly based on notions of morality, and if all laws
representing essentially moral choices are to be invalidated under the
Due Process Clause, the courts will be very busy indeed.”

What a massive disruption of the current social order, therefore, the
overruling of Bowers entails. Not so the overruling of Roe, which would
simply have restored the regime that existed for centuries before 1973, in
which the permissibility of and restrictions upon abortion were
determined legislatively State-by-State. Casey, however, chose to base its
stare decisis determination on a different “sort” of reliance. “[P]eople,” it
said, “have organized intimate relationships and made choices that define
their views of themselves and their places in society, in reliance on the
availability of abortion in the event that contraception should fail.” 505
U.S., at 856. This falsely assumes that the consequence of overruling Roe
would have been to make abortion unlawful. It would not; it would merely
have permitted the States to do so. Many States would unquestionably
have declined to prohibit abortion, and others would not have prohibited
it within six months (after which the most significant reliance interests
would have expired). Even for persons in States other than these, the
choice would not have been between abortion and childbirth, but between
abortion nearby and abortion in a neighboring State.

To tell the truth, it does not surprise me, and should surprise no one,
that the Court has chosen today to revise the standards of stare decisis
set forth in Casey. It has thereby exposed Casey’s extraordinary deference
to precedent for the result-oriented expedient that it is.

II

Having decided that it need not adhere to stare decisis, the Court still
must establish that Bowers was wrongly decided and that the Texas
statute, as applied to petitioners, is unconstitutional.

Texas Penal Code Ann. § 21.06(a) (2003) undoubtedly imposes
constraints on liberty. So do laws prohibiting prostitution, recreational
use of heroin, and, for that matter, working more than 60 hours per week
in a bakery. But there is no right to “liberty” under the Due Process
Clause, though today’s opinion repeatedly makes that claim. The
Fourteenth Amendment expressly allows States to deprive their citizens
of “liberty,” so long as “due process of law” is provided.* * *

Our opinions applying the doctrine known as “substantive due
process” hold that the Due Process Clause prohibits States from

Sec. B A NEW RIGHT 157

infringing fundamental liberty interests, unless the infringement is
narrowly tailored to serve a compelling state interest. Washington v.
Glucksberg, 521 U.S. At 721. We have held repeatedly, in cases the Court
today does not overrule, that only fundamental rights qualify for this so-
called “heightened scrutiny” protection—that is, rights which are “ ‘deeply
rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition,” ibid. All other liberty
interests may be abridged or abrogated pursuant to a validly enacted
state law if that law is rationally related to a legitimate state interest.

Bowers held, first, that criminal prohibitions of homosexual sodomy
are not subject to heightened scrutiny because they do not implicate a
“fundamental right” under the Due Process Clause, 478 U.S., at 191-194.
** * Bowers concluded that a right to engage in homosexual sodomy was
not “ ‘deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition,’” id., at 192.

The Court today does not overrule this holding. Not once does it
describe homosexual sodomy as a “fundamental right” or a “fundamental
liberty interest,” nor does it subject the Texas statute to strict scrutiny.
Instead, having failed to establish that the right to homosexual sodomy is
“deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition,” the Court
concludes that the application of Texas’s statute to petitioners’ conduct
fails the rational-basis test, and overrules Bowers’ holding to the
contrary. * * *

I shall address that rational-basis holding presently. First, however,
I address some aspersions that the Court casts upon Bowers’ conclusion
that homosexual sodomy is not a “fundamental right”—even though, as I
have said, the Court does not have the boldness to reverse that
conclusion.

TI

The Court’s description of “the state of the law” at the time of Bowers
only confirms that Bowers was right. The Court points to Griswold v.
Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479. But that case expressly disclaimed any reliance
on the doctrine of “substantive due process,” and grounded the so-called
“right to privacy” in penumbras of constitutional provisions other than the
Due Process Clause. Eisenstadt v. Baird, 405 U.S. 438, likewise had
nothing to do with “substantive due process”; it invalidated a
Massachusetts law prohibiting the distribution of contraceptives to
unmarried persons solely on the basis of the Equal Protection Clause. Of
course Eisenstadt contains well known dictum relating to the “right to
privacy,” but this referred to the right recognized in Griswold—a right
penumbral to the specific guarantees in the Bill of Rights, and not a
“substantive due process” right.

; Roe v. Wade recognized that the right to abort an unborn child was a
‘fundamental right” protected by the Due Process Clause. 410 US, at 155.
The Roe Court, however, made no attempt to establish that this right was



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
158 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

“ ‘deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition’ ”; instead, it based
jts conclusion that “the Fourteenth Amendment’s concept of personal
liberty ... is broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether or
not to terminate her pregnancy” on its own normative judgment that anti-
abortion laws were undesirable. See id., at 153. We have since rejected
Roe’s holding that regulations of abortion must be narrowly tailored to
serve a compelling state interest, see Planned Parenthood v. Casey, 505
US., at 876 (joint opinion of O'CONNOR, KENNEDY, and SOUTER, JJ.); id.,
at 951-953 (REHNQUIST, C. J., concurring in judgment in part and
dissenting in part)—and thus, by logical implication, Roe’s holding that
the right to abort an unborn child is a “fundamental right.”

After discussing the history of antisodomy laws, the Court proclaims
that, “it should be noted that there is no longstanding history in this
country of laws directed at homosexual conduct as a distinct matter.” This
observation in no way casts into doubt the “definitive [historical]
conclusion,” on which Bowers relied: that our Nation has a longstanding
history of laws prohibiting sodomy in general—regardless of whether it
was performed by same-sex or opposite-sex couples.* * *

It is (as Bowers recognized) entirely irrelevant whether the laws in
our long national tradition criminalizing homosexual sodomy were
“directed at homosexual conduct as a distinct matter.” Whether
homosexual sodomy was prohibited by a law targeted at same-sex sexual
relations or by a more general law prohibiting both homosexual and
heterosexual sodomy, the only relevant point is that it was criminalized—
which suffices to establish that homosexual sodomy is not a right “deeply
rooted in our Nation’s history and tradition.” The Court today agrees that
homosexual sodomy was criminalized and thus does not dispute the facts
on which Bowers actually relied.

Next the Court makes the claim, again unsupported by any citations,
that “[Ilaws prohibiting sodomy do not seem to have been enforced
against consenting adults acting in private.” The key qualifier here is
“acting in private’—since the Court admits that sodomy laws were
enforced against consenting adults (although the Court contends that
prosecutions were “infrequent”). I do not know what “acting in private”
means; surely consensual sodomy, like heterosexual intercourse, is rarely
performed on stage. If all the Court means by “acting in private” is “on
private premises, with the doors closed and windows covered,” it is
entirely unsurprising that evidence of enforcement would be hard to come
by. (imagine the circumstances that would enable a search warrant to be
obtained for a residence on the ground that there was probable cause to
believe that consensual sodomy was then and there occurring.) Surely
that lack of evidence would not sustain the proposition that consensual
sodomy on private premises with the doors closed and windows covered
was regarded as a “fundamental right,” even though all other consensual

SEc.B A NEw RIGHT 159

sodomy was criminalized. There are 203 prosecutions for consensual.
adult homosexual sodomy reported in the West Reporting system and
official state reporters from the years 1880-1995. See W. Eskridge
Gaylaw: Challenging the Apartheid of the Closet 375 (1999) (hereinafter
Gaylaw). There are also records of 20 sodomy prosecutions and 4
executions during the colonial period. J. Katz, Gay/Lesbian Almanac 29
58, 663 (1983). Bowers’ conclusion that homosexual sodomy is not a
fundamental right “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition” is
utterly unassailable.

Realizing that fact, the Court instead says: “[W]e think that our laws
and traditions in the past half century are of most relevance here. These
references show an emerging awareness that liberty gives substantial
protection to adult persons in deciding how to conduct their private lives
in matters pertaining to sex” (emphasis added). Apart from the fact that
such an “emerging awareness” does not establish a “fundamental right,”
the statement is factually false. States continue to prosecute all sorts of
crimes by adults “in matters pertaining to sex”: prostitution, adult incest.
adultery, obscenity, and child pornography. Sodomy laws, too have been
enforced “in the past half century,” in which there have been 134 reported

cases involving prosecutions for consensual, adult, hi
Garaw syne ee ; , homosexual sodomy.

In any event, an “emerging awareness” i initi

vent, an is by definition not “deeply
rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition[s],” as we have said
fundamental right status requires. Constitutional entitlements do not
spring into existence because some States choose to lessen or eliminate
criminal sanctions on certain behavior. * * *

IV

I turn now to the ground on which the Court squarely rests its
holding: the contention that there is no rational basis for the law here
under attack. This proposition is so out of accord with our
jurisprudence—indeed, with the jurisprudence of any society w'

E ce—aneeees © know—
that it requires little discussion. ° ° aa

. The Texas statute undeniably seeks to further the belief of its
citizens that certain forms of sexual behavior are “immoral and
unacceptable,” Bowers, supra, at 196—the same interest furthered by
criminal laws against fornication, bigamy, adultery, adult incest
bestiality, and obscenity. Bowers held that this was a legitimate state
interest. The Court today reaches the opposite conclusion. The Texas
statute, it says, “furthers no legitimate state interest which can justify its
intrusion into the personal and private life of the individual,” (emphasis
added). The Court embraces instead Justice Stevens’ declaration in his
Bowers dissent, that “the fact that the governing majority in a State has
traditionally viewed a particular practice as immoral is not a sufficient
reason for upholding a law prohibiting the practice.” This effectively



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
160 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

decrees the end of all morals legislation. If, as the Court asserts, the
promotion of majoritarian sexual morality is not even a legitimate state
interest, none of the above-mentioned laws can survive yational-basis
review.

Vv

Finally, I turn to petitioners’ equa -protection challenge, which no
Member of the Court save Justice O'Connor embraces: On its face
§ 21.06(a) applies equally to all persons. Men and women, heterosexuals
and homosexuals, are all subject to its prohibition of deviate sexual
intercourse with someone of the same sex. To be sure, § 21.06 does
distinguish between the sexes insofar as concerns the partner with whom
the sexual acts are performed: men can violate the law only with other
men, and women only with other women. But this cannot itself be a
denial of equal protection, since it is precisely the same distinction
regarding partner that is drawn in state laws prohibiting marriage with
someone of the same sex while permitting marriage with someone of the
opposite sex.

The objection is made, however, that the antimiscegenation laws
invalidated in Loving v. Virginia, 388 US. 1, 8, similarly were applicable
to whites and blacks alike, and only distinguished between the races
insofar as the partner was concerned. In Loving, however, we correctly
applied heightened scrutiny, rather than the usual rational-basis review,
because the Virginia statute was “designed to maintain White
Supremacy.” Id., at 6, 11. A racially discriminatory purpose is always
sufficient to subject a law to strict scrutiny, even a facially neutral law
that makes no mention of race. No purpose to discriminate against men
or women as a class can be gleaned from the Texas law, so rational-basis
review applies. That review is readily satisfied here by the same rational
basis that satisfied it in Bowers—society’s belief that certain forms of
sexual behavior are “immoral and unacceptable,” 478 US., at 196. This is
the same justification that supports many other laws regulating sexual
behavior that make a distinction based upon the identity of the partner—
for example, laws against adultery, fornication, and adult incest, and laws
refusing to recognize homosexual marriage.

Justice O’Connor argues that the discrimination in this law which
must be justified is not its discrimination with regard to the sex of the
partner but its discrimination with regard to the sexual proclivity of the
principal actor. * * *

Of course the same could be said of any law. A law against public
nudity targets “the conduct that is closely correlated with being a nudist,”
and hence “is targeted at more than conduct”; it is “directed toward
nudists as a class.” But be that as it may. Even if the Texas law does deny
equal protection to “homosexuals as a class,” that denial still does not
need to be justified by anything more than a rational basis, which our

SEc. B A NEW RIGHT 161

cases show is satisfied by the enforcement of traditional notions of sexual
morality.

Justice O'Connor simply decrees application of “a more searching
form of rational basis review” to the Texas statute. The cases she cites do
not recognize such a standard, and reach their conclusions only after
finding, as required by conventional rational-basis analysis, that no
conceivable legitimate state interest supports the classification at issue.
Nor does Justice O’Connor explain precisely what her “more searching
form” of rational-basis review consists of. It must at least mean, however.
that laws exhibiting “‘a ... desire to harm a politically unpopular

group,’” are invalid even though there may be a conceivable rational basis
to support them.

This reasoning leaves on pretty shaky grounds state laws limiting
marriage to opposite-sex couples. Justice O'Connor seeks to preserve
them by the conclusory statement that “preserving the traditional
institution of marriage” is a legitimate state interest. But “preserving the
traditional institution of marriage” is just a kinder way of describing the
State’s moral disapproval of same-sex couples. Texas’s interest in § 21.06
could be recast in similarly euphemistic terms: “preserving the traditional
sexual mores of our society.” In the jurisprudence Justice O’Connor has
seemingly created, judges can validate laws by characterizing them as
preserving the traditions of society” (good); or invalidate them by
characterizing them as “expressing moral disapproval” (bad).

eK*

Today's opinion is the product of a Court, which is the product of a
law-profession culture, that has largely signed on to the so-called
homosexual agenda, by which I mean the agenda promoted by some
homosexual activists directed at eliminating the moral opprobrium that
has traditionally attached to homosexual conduct. * * *

; One of the most revealing statements in today’s opinion is the Court’s
grim warning that the criminalization of homosexual conduct is “an
invitation to subject homosexual persons to discrimination both in the
public and in the private spheres.” It is clear from this that the Court has
taken sides in the culture war, departing from its role of assuring, as
neutral observer, that the democratic rules of engagement are observed.
Many Americans do not want persons who openly engage in homosexual
conduct as partners in their business, as scoutmasters for their children.
_as teachers in their children’s schools, or as boarders in their home. They
“view this as protecting themselves and their families from a lifestyle that
they believe to be immoral and destructive. The Court views it as
“discrimination” which it is the function of our judgments to deter. So
imbued is the Court with the law profession’s anti-anti-homosexual
culture, that it is seemingly unaware that the attitudes of that culture
are not obviously “mainstream”; that in most States what the Court calls



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
162 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

“discrimination” against those who engage in homosexual acts is perfectly
legal; that proposals to ban such “discrimination” under Title VII have
repeatedly been rejected by Congress, see Employment Non-
Discrimination Act of 1994, S. 2238, 103d Cong., 2d Sess. (1994); Civil
Rights Amendments, H. R. 5452, 94th Cong., Ist Sess. (1975); that in
some cases such “discrimination” is mandated by federal statute, see 10
U.S. C. § 654(b)(1) (mandating discharge from the armed forces of any
service member who engages in or intends to engage in homosexual acts);
and that in some cases such “discrimination” is a constitutional right, see
Boy Scouts of America v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640, 147 L.Ed.2d 554, 120 S.Ct.
2446 (2000).

Let me be clear that I have nothing against homosexuals, or any
other group, promoting their agenda through normal democratic means.
Social perceptions of sexual and other morality change over time, and
every group has the right to persuade its fellow citizens that its view of
such matters is the best. That homosexuals have achieved some success
in that enterprise is attested to by the fact that Texas is one of the few
remaining States that criminalize private, consensual homosexual acts.
But persuading one’s fellow citizens is one thing, and imposing one’s
views in absence of democratic majority will is something else. I would no
more require a State to criminalize homosexual acts—or, for that matter,
display any moral disapprobation of them—than I would forbid it to do so.
What Texas has chosen to do is well within the range of traditional
democratic action, and its hand should not be stayed through the
invention of a brand-new “constitutional right” by a Court that is
impatient of democratic change. Tt is indeed true that “later generations
can see that laws once thought necessary and proper in fact serve only to
oppress,” and when that happens, later generations can repeal those
laws. But it is the premise of our system that those judgments are to be
made by the people, and not imposed by a governing caste that knows
best.

One of the benefits of leaving regulation of this matter to the people
rather than to the courts is that the people, unlike judges, need not carry
things to their logical conclusion. The people may feel that their
disapprobation of homosexual conduct is strong enough to disallow
homosexual marriage, but not strong enough to criminalize private
homosexual acts—and may legislate accordingly. The Court today
pretends that it possesses a similar freedom of action, so that that we
need not fear judicial imposition of homosexual marriage, as has recently
occurred in Canada. At the end of its opinion—after having laid waste the
foundations of our rational-basis jurisprudence—the Court says that the
present case “does not involve whether the government must give formal
recognition to any relationship that homosexual persons seek to enter.”
Do not believe it. More illuminating than this bald, unreasoned
disclaimer is the progression of thought displayed by an earlier passage

SEc.B A NEw RIGHT 163

in the Court’s opinion, which notes the constitutional protections afforded
to personal decisions relating to marriage, procreation, contraception
family relationships, child rearing, and education,” and then declares that
{p]ersons in a homosexual relationship may seek autonomy for these
purposes, just as heterosexual persons do.” Ante, at 18 (emphasis added)
Today's opinion dismantles the structure of constitutional law that has
permitted a distinction to be made between heterosexual and homosexual
unions, insofar as formal recognition in marriage is concerned. If moral
disapprobation of homosexual conduct is “no legitimate state interest” for
purposes of proscribing that conduct, and if, as the Court coos (castin:
aside all pretense of neutrality), “[w]hen sexuality finds overt expression
in intimate conduct with another person, the conduct can be but one
element in a personal bond that is more enduring,”; what justification
could there possibly be for denying the benefits of marriage to
homosexual couples exercising “[t]he liberty protected by the
Constitution,” ibid.? Surely not the encouragement of procreation, since
the sterile and the elderly are allowed to marry. This case “does not
involve” the issue of homosexual marriage only if one entertains the belief
that principle and logic have nothing to do with the decisions of this

Court. Many will hope that, as the Court comfortingly assures us, this is
0.

The matters appropriate for this Court’s resolution are only three:
Texas's prohibition of sodomy neither infringes a “fundamental right”
(which the Court does not dispute), nor is unsupported by a rational
relation to what the Constitution considers a legitimate state interest, nor
denies the equal protection of the laws. I dissent. ;

JUSTICE THOMAS, dissenting.

I join JUSTICE SCALI4’s dissenting opinion. I write separately to note
that the law before the Court today “is . .. uncommonly silly.” Griswold v
Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479, 527 (STEWART, J., dissenting). If I were a
member of the Texas Legislature, I would vote to repeal it. Punishing
someone for expressing his sexual preference through noncommercial
consensual conduct with another adult does not appear to be a worth
way to expend valuable law enforcement resources. °

Notwithstanding this, I recognize that as a member of this Court I
am not empowered to help petitioners and others similarly situated. My
duty, rather, is to “decide cases ‘agreeably to the Constitution and laws of
the United States.’” Id., at 530. And, just like Justice Stewart, I “can find
{neither in the Bill of Rights nor any other part of the Constitution a]
general right of privacy,” ibid., or as the Court terms it today, the “liberty
of the person both in its spatial and more transcendent dimensions.”



FrRomM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
164 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Does Justice Kennedy consider a homosexual orientation to be a
lifestyle choice or an aspect of personal identity more permanent? How
important does Justice Kennedy believe the sexual relations of two
homosexual adults are to them? How important to government?

2. Justice Scalia asserts:

“State laws against bigamy, same-sex marriage, adult incest,
prostitution, masturbation, adultery, fornication, bestiality and
obscenity are sustainable only in light of Bowers’ validation of laws
based on moral choices. Every single one of these laws is called into
question by today’s decision. . .”

Does Lawrence undermine state laws against masturbation? State laws
against adultery? What about laws against gambling and cocaine use
and possession?

3. Justice White in Bowers and Justice Scalia dissenting in Lawrence
assert that the issue is whether “homosexual sodomy” is a fundamental right.
What other descriptive terms for the interests the parties seek to protect
might be based on precedents such as Griswold v, Connecticut and Eisenstadt
v. Baird?

4, While the legislative trend all over the developed world was toward
decriminalization of sodomy, the Lawrence decision imposed a rights-based
prohibition on state regulation as a result of judicial action. What elements of
the sexual conduct at issue here separate the personal interests at stake from
decisions about alcohol and psychoactive drugs, from gambling, and from
commercial sex?

C. IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS

CASS SUNSTEIN—WHAT DID LAWRENCE HOLD? OF
AUTONOMY, DESUETUDE, SEXUALITY, AND MARRIAGE

2003 Supreme Court Review 27 (2004).

In 1900, Mr. Dooley famously said that “no matter whether th’
constitution follows th’ flag or not, th’ supreme court follows th’ ilection
returns.” The Court doesn’t really do that. But members of the Supreme
Court live in society, and they are inevitably influenced by what society
appears to think. My principal suggestion here is that the Court's
remarkable decision in Lawrence v. Texas represents judicial invalidation
of a law that had become hopelessly out of touch with existing social
convictions. So understood, Lawrence, like Griswold, reflects a distinctly
American variation on the old English idea of desuetude. Put too simply,
the basic idea is that when constitutionally important interests are at
stake, due process principles requiring fair notice, and banning arbitrary
action, are violated if criminal prosecution is brought on the basis of

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 165

moral judgments lacking public support, as exemplified by exceedingly
rare enforcement activity. On this reading, Lawrence had a great deal to
do with procedural due process, rather than the clause’s substantive
sibling.

In Griswold, it will be recalled, the Court invalidated a Connecticut
law forbidding married people to use contraceptives—a law that was
ludicrously inconsistent with public convictions in Connecticut and
throughout the nation. Griswold was decided in the midst of a substantial
national rethinking of issues of sex and morality. Whatever the outcome
of that rethinking, it was clear, by 1965, that reasonable people would no
longer support bans on the use of contraceptives within marriage. In this
respect, Griswold was quite similar to Reed v. Reed. There the Court
struck down an Idaho statute giving a preference to men over women in
the administration of estates of decedents who had died intestate—a law
that was unquestionably a holdover from views about sex roles that were
widely regarded as obsolete. Reed was decided in the midst of a
substantial rethinking of gender roles; whatever the outcome of that
rethinking, it was clear, by 1971, that a flat presumption in favor of men
over women in employment would no longer be acceptable in principle.
Lawrence belongs in the same family. In the area of sexual orientation,
America is in the midst of a civil rights revolution—one that has moved,
in an extraordinarily short time, toward delegitimating prejudice against
and hatred for homosexuals. Lawrence was made possible by that
revolution, of which it is now a significant part.

In making this argument, my principal goal is not to evaluate
Lawrence, but instead to obtain an understanding of its scope and of its
relationship to other apparently dramatic decisions in the Court’s past.
But even if my argument is correct, it must be acknowledged that the
Court’s remarkably opaque opinion has three principal strands. Each of
those strands supports a different understanding of the Court’s holding
and the principle that supports it.

1, Autonomy. A tempting reading of Lawrence is straightforward: A
criminal prohibition on sodomy is unconstitutional because it
intrudes on private sexual conduct that does not harm third parties.
On this view, the Court has endorsed a quite general principle:
Without a compelling justification, the state cannot interfere with
consensual sexual behavior, at least if that behavior is
noncommercial. On this view, consensual sexual behavior counts as a
fundamental right for purposes of the Due Process Clause. The state
is forbidden to intrude into the domain of consensual sexual behavior
unless it can show that its intrusion is the least restrictive means of
achieving a compelling state interest—a showing that will be
impossible to make, at least most of the time.



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
166 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

2. Rational basis. An alternative reading of Lawrence, also quite broad,
would take the Court to have held, not that sexual behavior counts as
a fundamental right requiring compelling justification, but that the
criminal prohibition on sodomy is unconstitutional because it ts not
supported by a legitimate state interest. The principle here is that the
government cannot interfere with consensual sexual behavior if it ts
attempting to do so for only moral reasons, unaccompanied by a risk
of actual harm. The implications of this reading are not so different
from those of the first; both are strongly Millian in nature. But the
two readings are nonetheless different, because the second depends
not on the fundamental nature of the right to engage in sexual
activity, but instead on the absence of even plausibly legitimate
grounds for interfering with that right in the context of consensual
sodomy. On this reading, Lawrence is rooted in an unusual form of
“ational basis” review that would doom a great deal of legislation.

3, Desuetude, American style. A narrower reading of Lawrence, my
emphasis here, would take the following form: (The criminal
prohibition on sodomy is unconstitutional because it intrudes on
private sexual conduct without having significant moral grounding in
existing public commitments. If this is the Court's holding, it is
undergirded by a more general principle: Without a_ strong
justification, the state cannot bring the criminal law to bear on
consensual sexual behavior if enforcement of the relevant law can no
longer claim to have significant moral support in the enforcing state
or the nation as a whole. This aspect of the opinion is connected to
the old idea of desuetude. It suggests that, at least in some
circumstances, involving certain kinds of human interests, a criminal
law cannot be enforced if it has lost public support.

It should be clear that while all three principles are potentially
broad, the first and the second are the most far-reaching. And there
is actually a fourth understanding of the opinion, one that cannot be
characterized as the Court’s holding, but one that is perhaps a
subtext:

4. Equality. Sodomy laws are unconstitutional because they demean the
lives of gays and lesbians and thus offend the Constitution’s equality
principle. The underlying principle is that at least as a general rule,
there is no legitimate basis for treating homosexuals differently from
heterosexuals. On this view, Lawrence is really a case about the social
subordination of gays and lesbians, whatever the rhetoric about
sexual freedom in general. Lawrence’s words sound in due process,
but much of its music involves equal protection.

Each of the four ideas can be found in Lawrence, a claim that I hope
to establish here. But I want to draw special attention to the third, which
is, I believe, central to the Court’s own analysis, and a key to the

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 167

development of substantive due process over the past decades. In fact
something like a desuetude principle is part and parcel of the Lawrence
Court’s treatment of the state’s interest, showing why that interest counts
as inadequate, and also of the Court’s explanation of why the case cannot
be distinguished from Griswold and its successors. When the Court
asserts the absence of a “legitimate state interest which can justify its
intrusion into the personal and private life of an individual,” it is best
understood to be saying that the moral claim that underlies the intrusion
has become hopelessly anachronistic. And the anachronistic nature of
that moral claim has everything to do with the Court’s rejection, not of
moral claims in general, but of the particular moral claim that underlies
criminal prohibitions on same-sex sodomy.

Lawrence might be read broadly as an effort to enact some version of
John Stuart Mill’s On Liberty, requiring respect for individual choices (at
least with respect to sex) unless there is some kind of harm to others. But
it is reasonable to understand the Court’s decision more narrowly, as a
ruling that forbids invocation of generally unenforced criminal law on the
basis of a moral justification that has become anachronistic—at least
when a constitutionally important interest is involved and when the
absence of significant enforcement activity can be explained only by
reference to the anachronistic nature of the relevant moral justification.
This reading also helps clarify what made the decision possible and its
fate. If I am correct, Lawrence was possible not because the Court
reached, all on its own, an ambitious and novel view of the nature of
constitutional liberty, or because it attempted to read a controversial view
of autonomy into the Due Process Clause. The decision was possible only
because of the ludicrously poor fit between the sodomy prohibition and
the society in which the justices live. And if I am correct, Lawrence will
have broad implications only if and to the extent that those broad
implications receive general public support. For example, the Supreme
Court may or may not read Lawrence to require states to recognize gay
and lesbian marriages. But if and when it does so, it will be following
public opinion, not leading it. Political and social change was a
precondition for Lawrence, whose future reach will depend on the nature
and extent of that change.

While I will spend most of my time on the Court’s due process ruling,
my own view is that the proper course in Lawrence was sketched by
Justice O'Connor in her concurring opinion. Rather than invalidating the
Texas statute on grounds of substantive due process, the Court should
have invoked the Equal Protection Clause to strike down, as irrational,
the state’s decision to ban homosexual sodomy but not heterosexual
sodomy. In important respects, this approach would have been more
cautious than the Court’s own. It would have had the large advantage of
making it unnecessary to overrule any precedent. At the same time, an
equal protection ruling would have recognized the fact, established by the



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
168 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

Court’s opinions, that the Equal Protection Clause does not build on long-
standing traditions, but instead rejects them insofar as they attempt to
devalue or humiliate certain social groups. The problem in Lawrence is
not adequately understood without reference to the social subordination
of gays and lesbians, not least through the use of the criminal law. Hence
Justice O’Connor’s approach suggests, lightly to be sure, the plausibility
of rationale (4) above, a rationale that seems to me essentially correct.
And if states are required to punish heterosexual sodomy if they are
attempting to punish homosexual sodomy, I believe that it is quite
implausible to think that any form of sodomy would be subject to criminal
prosecution; political safeguards are far too strong to permit significant
numbers of arrests and prosecutions of heterosexuals for engaging in
conduct that is quite widespread.

For all these reasons, invalidation on equal protection grounds would
have been preferable to the substantive due process route. But if the Due
Process Clause is to be invoked, the idea of desuetude provides a method
for understanding, disciplining, and narrowing what the Court did. This
reading of Lawrence prevents the opinion from being a simple invocation
of “liberty”; it also helps explain what made the Lawrence decision
conceivable from a generally conservative Supreme Court. Best of all, it
has considerable independent appeal. * * *

INTERPRETIVE PUZZLES

J will suggest that Lawrence is best understood as responsive to what
the Court saw as an emerging national awareness, reflected in a pattern
of nonenforcement, that it is illegitimate to punish people because of
homosexual conduct—and that the decision therefore embodies a kind of
American-style desuetude. But to support this suggestion, it will be
necessary to unpack the Court’s opaque opinion, which raises a number of
puzzles. Let us begin with the simplest.

A. A Fundamental Right or Rational Basis Review?

Was Lawrence based on rational basis review, or instead on
something else? It is astonishing but true that this question is
exceedingly difficult to answer.

If the Court had attempted to write a conventional due process
opinion, it would have taken one of two routes. First, the Court might
have said that the right to engage in consensual sexual activity qualifies
as fundamental, so that the government may not interfere with that right
unless it has a compelling justification. Second, the Court might have said
that whether or not the relevant right qualifies as fundamental, the state
cannot interfere with it, simply because it lacks a legitimate reason to
justify the interference. But the Court said neither, at least not in plain
terms. The Court did not unambiguously identify any “fundamental
interest” on the part of the plaintiffs that would support its ruling. In fact

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 169

it did not use the “fundamental interest” formulation at any point in its
analysis. Moreover, the Court did not say that the Texas statute lacked a

rational basis.” In fact it did not use the “rational basis” formulation at
any point in its analysis. Much of the opacity of the Court’s opinion stems
from its failure to specify what kind of review it was applying to the
Texas statute. The conventional doctrinal categories and terms are simply
missing.

To be sure, the Court did end its opinion with a reference to the
absence of any “legitimate interest” on the state’s part. Justice Scalia
seized on this point to urge that the Court issued a rational basis opinion
after all—a characterization to which the Court (revealingly?) does not
specifically object. Thus Justice Scalia contends that much of the Court’s
opinion “has no relevance to its actual holding,” which was that the
statute failed rational basis review. Justice Scalia’s reading cannot be
said to be senseless; it is not demonstrably wrong. But I believe that it is
incorrect, and that in the end the Court’s opinion treats the underlying

right as a fundamental one. Begin with the most relevant part of the
Court’s opinion:

The petitioners are entitled to respect for their private lives. The
State cannot demean their existence or control their destiny by
making their private sexual conduct a crime. Their right to liberty
under the Due Process Clause gives them the full right to engage in
their conduct without intervention of the government. “It is a
promise of the Constitution that there is a realm of personal liberty
which the government may not enter.” The Texas statute furthers no
legitimate state interest which can justify its intrusion into the
personal and private life of the individual.

; The Court immediately follows its reference to “no legitimate state
interest” with the phrase, “which can justify its intrusion intd the
personal and private life of the individual.” on “control [of] their destiny,”
suggests that the interest involved is not an ordinary one—and that the
Court is demanding something more than a rational basis. The same
point is strongly suggested by the Court’s reference, in this paragraph, to
Casey, which of course involved a fundamental right, not a rational basis
est.

; But there is a more basic reason for seeing the Court’s opinion as
finding the relevant interest to be fundamental. The Court begins with an
effort to assimilate the issue in Lawrence to the issues in Griswold,
Eisenstadt, Roe, Carey, and Casey—all.of which are now taken, by the
Court, to suggest a fundamental right in the domain of sex and
reproduction. Hence the Court refers to “the right to make certain
decisions regarding sexual conduct,” to the individual's interest in making
“certain fundamental decisions affecting her destiny,” and to the
emerging awareness that liberty gives substantial protection to adult



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
170 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

persons in deciding how to conduct their private lives in matters
pertaining to sex.” These statements would be unintelligible if Lawrence
were based solely on rational basis review. Indeed, much of the Court’s
opinion would be dicta. In the end, Lawrence is not plausibly a rational
basis decision.

An alternative reading is that the Court deliberately refused to
specify its “tier” of analysis because it was rejecting the idea of tiers
altogether. Perhaps the Court was signaling its adoption of a kind of
sliding scale, matching the strength of the interest to the demand for
state justification, without formally requiring identification of a
fundamental right. And, indeed, some of the Court’s decisions do suggest
a partial collapse of the traditional tiers approach to judicial review. For
many years, Justice Marshall complained of the rigidity of the usual tiers,
urging a more open-ended form of balancing. Justice Marshall’s views
appeared to fall on deaf ears. But perhaps Lawrence reflects some
appreciation of the difficulties in fitting all cases within the traditional
framework. This is not a wholly implausible reading, but it would be quite
surprising if the Court meant to adopt a sliding scale of analysis without
saying so. The more natural interpretation is simpler: The Court’s
assimilation of the Lawrence problem to that in Griswold and its
successors suggests that a fundamental right was involved.

B. Autonomy Simpliciter, or Desuetude-Informed Autonomy?

But why, exactly, does the relevant interest count as a fundamental
one? There are two possibilities. The first is that the right to engage in
consensual sex counts, simply as a matter of principle, as part of the
liberty that the Due Process Clause substantively protects. On this view,
in Lawrence the Court accepted, to this extent, Jobn Stuart Mill’s view in
On. Liberty, holding that the government may not interfere with (certain)
private choices unless there is harm to others. The second and narrower
idea is that this particular kind of sex—homosexual sex between
consenting adults—-counts as fundamental. It does so because of major
changes in social values in the last half-century. On this view, Lawrence
finds a fundamental right as a result of existing public convictions, with
which the Texas statute cannot be squared, simply because sodomy
prosecutions are so hopelessly out of step with them.

Lawrence could be read in either way. But the second interpretation
is far more plausible. A simple autonomy reading would have
consequences that the Court did not likely intend. As Justice Scalia
suggests, it would raise, even more than the first, serious doubts about
prohibitions on adult incest, prostitution, adultery, fornication, bestiality,
and obscenity. (I do not mention his suggestion that the Court has
questioned laws forbidding masturbation, for one reason: There are no
laws forbidding masturbation!) Now it might be possible, even under the
autonomy reading, to justify most or all of those prohibitions on the

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 171

ground that they counteract concrete harms, sufficient to support the
intrusion on a presumptively protected right. (I return to this question
below.) And cases involving commercial activity probably must be
analyzed in a way that gives the government more room to maneuver.
But it would be surprising if Lawrence were understood to require a
careful inquiry into the adequacy of government justifications for bannin:

(say) adult incest and bestiality. °

In any case, a simple autonomy reading would make the Court’s
apparently pivotal discussion of “emerging awareness” into an
irrelevancy. Recall that the Court rejected Bowers in large part by
pointing to a range of indications that bans on homosexual sodomy have
become | out of step with existing values. Hence two factors were
emphasized in the Court’s ruling: only thirteen states prohibited sodomy;
and the sodomy laws were rarely enforced, through criminal prosecution,
even in those states. It does appear that the Court was responding to and
requiring, an evolution in public opinion—something like a broad
consensus that the practice at issue should not be punished.

These points suggest that the Court’s decision was less about sexual
autonomy, as a freestanding idea, and closer to a kind of due process
variation on the old common law idea of desuetude. According to that
concept, laws that are hardly ever enforced are said, by courts, to have
lapsed, simply because they lack public support. The rationale here is
that unenforced laws lack support in public convictions, and they may not
be brought to bear, in what will inevitably be an unpredictable and
essentially arbitrary way, against private citizens. Most American courts
do not accept that idea in express terms. But long ago, Alexander Bickel
invoked the notion of desuetude to help account for Griswold. The simple
idea is that the ban on use of contraceptives by married people had
become hopelessly out of touch with existing convictions—so much so that
the ban could rarely if ever be invoked as a basis for actual prosecutions
The public would not accept a situation in which married people were
actually convicted of that crime. In those circumstances, the statutory
ban was a recipe for arbitrary and even discriminatory action, in a way
that does violence to democratic ideals and even the rule of law. It does
violence to democratic ideals because a law plainly lacking public support
is nonetheless invoked to regulate private conduct. It violates the rule of
law because a measure of this kind lacks, in practice, the kind of
generality and predictability on which the rule of law depends.

If anything, a ban on sodomy is even worse than the Connecticut law
struck down in Griswold. Such a ban is used, not for frequent arrests or
convictions, but for rare and unpredictable harassment by the police. An
advantage of this reading is that it mutes the apparent roots of Lawrence
in substantive due process. The idea of desuetude is, in a sense, a
procedural one. There is a procedural problem: a lack of fair notice



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
172 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

combined with denial of equal treatment, a problem that is inevitable in a
system in which criminal prosecutions are rare and episodic. In fact, the
idea of desuetude forbids criminal punishment not in spite of public
values but in their service—a claim that the Lawrence Court makes
explicitly.

Of course this interpretation of Lawrence raises its own problems; a
desuetude-informed reading is far from simple and straightforward. The
decision should not be read to say that each and every criminal statute
becomes unenforceable if it is rarely enforced; that reading would be far
too broad. (It could, for example, endanger laws forbidding domestic
violence or marital rape in jurisdictions in which enforcement is rare.) At
a minimum, it is also necessary to say that the rarity of enforcement is a
product of the anachronistic nature of the moral judgment that underlies
it. Building on this idea, the notion of desuetude might be applied
whenever a criminal statute is rarely invoked because the public no
longer supports the moral argument that lies behind it. Let us call this
the broad version of the basic idea. But it is true that the Court is not well
equipped to say when statutes are anachronistic, and any use of
desuetude, under the Due Process Clause, is likely to be limited to certain
interests that have a threshold of importance. Thus Lawrence must be
understood as involving another, less ambitious version of the idea,
suggesting that when those interests are implicated, the state may not
rely on a justification that has lost public support. Let us call this the
narrow version of the idea.

Because of its modesty, the narrow version is obviously preferable;
the Court should not be read to have gone as far as the broad version
suggests. But there is an evident problem with the narrow version. For it
to operate, we must have an antecedent way, to some extent independent
of public convictions, to determine whether an interest has some kind of
constitutional status. Without that independent way, the narrow version
dissolves into the broader one: Any interest on which the public no longer
wants to intrude becomes a fundamental one by definition. (is this true of
the right to use marijuana within the home? Of the right of sixteen-year-
olds to drink alcohol within the home?) In the end, the Lawrence Court
must have concluded that as a matter of principle, the right to engage in
same-sex relations had a special status in light of the Court’s precedents
taken along with emerging public convictions—and that the moral
arguments that supported the ban were no longer sufficient to justify it.

In this sense, the “emerging public awareness” emphasized by the
Court operated at two levels. First, it served to discredit the particular
moral justification for the law, in a conventional use of the idea of
desuetude. Second, it helped to inform the Court’s judgment that the
interest at stake could not be distinguished, in principle, from those
involved in Griswold, Eisenstadt, Carey, and Roe. Hence some idea about

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 173

autonomy is an inescapable part of the analysis. This second use of public
convictions is not a use of the idea of desuetude; but it does belong in the
same family. There are a number of complexities here, and I shall return
to them shortly.

C. The Dog That Barked Very Quietly: Equal Protection

Lawrence was rooted in the Due Process Clause, not the Equal
Protection Clause. But it defies belief to say that it is not, in a sense, an
equal protection ruling. Everyone knows that the case was about sexual
orientation. When Justice Scalia urges that the Court “has largely signed
on to the so-called homosexual agenda,” he is correct in an important
sense: The Court was not willing to legitimate, or to deem legitimate, “the
moral opprobrium that has traditionally attached to homosexual
conduct.” I have questioned Justice Scalia’s broader suggestion that the
Court meant to say that a moral position, unaccompanied by convincing
evidence of tangible harm, is an illegitimate basis for law. The Court was
concerned not to excise moral grounds from law, but instead to excise a
particular moral ground, that is, the moral ground that underlies
criminal prohibitions on same-sex relationships. The Court’s judgment to
this effect had a great deal to do with considerations of equality.

It is not hard to find support for this claim in the Court’s opinion. In
many places, the Court suggested that equality, and a particular sort of
moral claim, were pivotal to the outcome. Consider this suggestion:

Persons in a homosexual relationship may seek autonomy ... just as
heterosexual persons do.” Or this: “When homosexual conduct is made
criminal by the law of the State, that declaration in and of itself is an
invitation to subject homosexual persons to discrimination in both the
public and in the private spheres.” Or this: “Adults may choose to enter
upon this relationship ... and still retain their dignity as free persons .. .
The liberty protected by the Constitution allows homosexual persons the
right to make this choice.” Now delete, from the sentences just quoted, the
word “homosexual,” and replace it with the word “adulterous,” or
‘bigamous,” or “incestuous.” Somehow the sentences do not work. The
Court's due process decision was powerfully influenced by a claim of
equality.

D. What Lawrence Did, With an Evaluation
If we , emphasize the Lawrence Court’s reliance on “emerging
awareness,” we will see the decision as most closely analogous to

Griswold and Reed. When the Court held that married people could not
be prohibited from using contraceptives; it was using the Due Process

“ Clause to forbid the invocation of a law that could not be fit with current

values. When the Court began to invalidate sex discrimination of the
most arbitrary kinds, it was not making a revolution on its own. Lawrence
is in the same spirit. To the extent that the Lawrence Court treated
homosexual sodomy as equivalent, in principle, to opposite-sex



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE: cue
174 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION :

relationships, it was responding to the fact that with ceed » he
invocation of the criminal law, the American public had come to ne Se
conclusion. To the extent that the Court held that no Jogitima es are
interest justified the ban on same-sex relationshit™ * was imnen tre
i of widely held convictions. Juages pl
Constitution to please majorities. But widespread social convieHions. ia
likely to influence anyone who lives in society. Judges live in .
Lawrence is a testimonial to this process of influence.

If Lawrence is understood in these terms, should it be applauded? or
deplored? I do not intend to answer that question fully bere. ° vio. is
issue is: Compared to what? I do believe that Justice oO sano ecuse
protection approach would have been better and simpler— en or bee use
of its fit with precedent, simpler hecause it is ana ica alt 8 ance

i oreno, Cleburne, and Romer, But what | ves?
me aed that if Lawrence is a kind of American-style desuetuie can
claim to be rooted in a form of procedural due process. A aw ° fhe sort
that the Court invalidated, isa violation of sine mule of lew - oes

i fair notice; and it invites ar \

Pccment, of just the sort that occurred in the case itself Such ay

also lacks a democratic pedigree. Tt is able to persist only becaus

enforced so rarely. .

1. Specifying desuetude, American-style: National outers ay
enforcement? If a desuetude-type rationale is accepted, it 1 1 sear.
to know when, exactly, it will be triggered. We can imagine m ny
possibilities. The Lawrence Court emphasized two separate ponte
few states now forbid consensual sodomy; and even in states in Ww! ich
a ban is in place, prosecution is rare. The first point stressr* he
problem of states-as-outliers; the second is a more stang a poin .
about intrajurisdictional desuetude. In Lawrence itsel! 1 i e we
points marched hand-in-hand, but they could easily be pu . ane fe
A law might fit with existing social values in one state, ON ' noe °
values might be rejected in the rest of the union. This wou nee
simple case of desuetude, because the statute would, by ypo ee
receive support within the relevant state. By contrast, a sta resp ar
analysis, based on more conventional ideas about desve ude, woe
emphasize the ideas of fair notice and arbitrarimess an sugEes ine
at least when certain interests are involved, a state may ne 8
the criminal law to bear when the values that underlie those awe are
now anachronistic in that very state. Certainly _the stan ar

desuetude idea cannot be invoked in a state in which the law io
question is actively enforced. For the Supreme Court, the easies
cases are Lawrence and Griswold: those 1n which the relevant val ues
lack support both in the enforcing state and in the nation as a we e
My emphasis here is not on national outliers, but on the fac

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 175

Texas itself, the sodomy statute, hardly ever enforced, created
problems of both unpredictability and arbitrariness.

2. Too little? But for many defenders of the outcome in Lawrence, this
interpretation will give the plaintiffs far too little. One obvious
alternative is a more critical approach to conventional morality. Such
an approach would not define liberty by identifying society’s
“emerging awareness” as if it were a kind of brute fact for judicial
use, but would instead attempt to define the idea of liberty, and the
legitimacy of intrusions on it, by reference to an evaluative account
that is independent of whatever views now happen to prevail. For
those who prefer this more critical approach, the problem with a
desuetude-type interpretation is that it would allow states to have
sodomy laws, or adultery laws, or fornication laws, so long as those
laws are taken seriously and actually brought to bear against the
citizenry. Wouldn’t that situation be worse rather than better?

In fact it is possible to understand the Court’s opinion in this more
critical and evaluative way. Certainly the Court’s use of the word
“awareness” suggests that it believes the emerging view to be worth
attention not merely because it is emerging but also because it is right.
Consider too the Court’s suggest that the framers “knew times can blind
us to certain truths and later generations can see that laws once thought
necessary and proper in fact serve only to oppress.” Perhaps we might
build on the Court’s reference to “truths” and what happens “in fact” to
suggest its endorsement of a more independent and critical approach to
public convictions.

But a more critical approach, from the Court, should not be accepted
so readily, Let us agree that if the Court’s judgments on the appropriate
content of liberty were reliable, then a more critical approach would have
much to be said in its favor. But even those who endorse that approach
might agree that Lawrence, read in the way that I have suggested, has
the advantage of comparative modesty—and that it does not foreclose use
of the critical approach for the future. And for those who endorse the
critical approach, there are reasons for caution. The first is the simple
risk of judicial error. Unmoored from public convictions, there is a risk
that the Court’s conception of liberty will be confused or indefensible.
(Recall Dred Scott v. Sandford) The second problem is the danger of
unintended bad consequences. Even if the Court has the right conception
of liberty, it may not do much good by insisting on it when the nation
strongly disagrees. If the Court had held, in 1980, that the Due Process
Clause requires states to recognize same-sex marriage, it would Gn my
view) have been responding to the right conception of liberty. But it would
undoubtedly have produced a large-scale social backlash, and very likely
a constitutional amendment, that would have made same-sex marriage
impossible. The simple point is that judicial impositions may do little
good and considerable harm, even from the standpoint of the causes that



FRom ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
176 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

the Court hopes to promote. To be sure, these points are cautionary notes
and no more. But at the very least, they suggest that where the Court is
in a position to choose, a desuetude-type ruling, building on widespread
convictions, has considerable advantages over a ruling that is based on
the Court’s own conception of autonomy.

3. Too much? Of course Lawrence, read in the way I have suggested,
might be criticized from other directions. Perhaps a better alternative
is Thayerism: An approach that would uphold any intrusion on
liberty unless it lacks even a minimally rational basis. This approach
might be defended on the ground that a judicial judgment about
emerging public convictions is not very reliable, and certainly less so
than the evidence provided by actual legislation. If there is a serious
risk in judicial efforts, why not require people to resort to their
political remedies? I believe that the idea of desuetude provides a
partial answer. If legislation is infrequently enforced, most citizens
can treat it as effectively dead. They have nothing to worry about. At
least in clear cases, it seems plausible, and inoffensive to democratic
values, to use the Due Process Clause to forbid criminal prosecutions
in cases of this kind. Both Griswold and Lawrence are defining
examples.

But perhaps the Court would have done better, in Lawrence, to
continue on the path marked out by Bowers and Glucksberg, and hence to
uphold any intrusion on liberty unless it runs afoul of Anglo-American
traditions. Due process traditionalism might be supported on the ground
that federal judges are not especially good at evaluating our practices,
and that if a practice has endured there is good reason to support it, if
only because many people have endorsed it, or at least not seen fit to
change it. When the Court has urged that fundamental interests should
be so defined by reference to traditions, it has done so on the ground that
traditionalism helps to cabin judicial discretion and to minimize the risk
of judicial error. Constitutional traditionalism therefore makes decisions
simpler at the same time that it makes them less likely to go wrong. If
economic terminology is thought to be helpful here, the use of traditions
by imperfect human beings might not be perfect, but it is the best way to
go because it minimizes both “decision costs,” taken as the burdens of
deciding what to do, and “error costs,” taken as the problems introduced
by making mistakes.

A central question is whether tradition-bound judges will make more
or fewer errors than judges who depart from traditions and pay a great
deal of attention to conventional morality. At least some of those who are
skeptical about substantive due process might endorse traditionalism as a
possible source of law, but also conclude that it is proper for the Court to
strike down statutes that lack support in popular convictions. In other
words, the desuetude-type approach of the Lawrence Court might be a

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 177

modest, cautious supplement to due process traditionalism, rooted in
similar concerns. Indeed, a desuetude-type approach has the advantage of
underlining the procedural features of procedural due process. As we
have seen, a statute like that invalidated in Lawrence fails to provide
predictability, and it is a recipe for arbitrary enforcement. The Court’s
refusal to permit criminal convictions, under these circumstances, is not
radically inconsistent with democratic ideals. In a sense, it helps to
vindicate them.

4. Coherence, optimal deterrence, and expressive condemnation. Another
response is possible, one that would raise questions about the
coherence of any approach that draws on the idea of desuetude. For
governments, there is a trade-off between the magnitude and the
frequency of punishment. A government might decide to lessen the
deterrent signal simply by scaling back enforcement. In the context of
conduct that a state would like to deter, but not greatly, the sensible
strategy might be to maintain a prohibition but to enforce it rarely. It
is easy to imagine a city taking this approach with respect to
nonflagrant speeding (driving, say, ten miles over the speed limit), or
certain parking offenses (giving tickets rarely in certain places, for
example), or certain alcohol or drug offenses (rarely arresting or
convicting teenagers for use of alcohol, or infrequently arresting or
convicting people for marijuana use). In fact countless prohibitions
are rarely enforced. Is this situation unconstitutional? Why is a state
banned from making this particular trade-off between severity and
probability of sanction? If the desuetude idea is about absence of fair
notice and discriminatory enforcement, shouldn’t the Court strike
down any statute that suffers from these defects, including those that
not only have lost popularity, but also those that never had sufficient
support to be a basis for frequent enforcement? In any case, the ex
ante deterrent effect of a rarely enforced law, including the sodomy
law in Texas, applies equally to all those subject to it. Isn’t this ex
ante equality a sufficient response to the objection of
unpredictability?

To answer this objection, it is necessary to be more specific about the
due process ruling in Lawrence. We could imagine many possible
situations of rare or nonexistent enforcement, and these do not ordinarily
raise constitutional problems. For example, the conduct might itself be
unobjectionable, but prohibited to get at related conduct (as, perhaps, in
the case of certain gambling, outlawed because it invites organized
crime). Alternatively, the conduct might be mostly objectionable, but
banned as a way of enforcing a prohibition on a subset of it (as in the case
of sodomy laws used to punish nonconsensual sex). Or the conduct might
be mostly objectionable, but a subset of it is unpunished, because it is
close to the line (as in driving slightly over the speed limit). Or the
conduct might be objectionable, but problems in obtaining witnesses and



FRoM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
178 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

evidence are formidable (as, perhaps, in the cases of domestic violence
and more obviously marital rape).

The problem with the Texas sodomy law was not only the fact that it
was enforced rarely; infrequent enforcement stemmed from the particular
fact that the moral claim that underlay it could no longer claim public
support. The same cannot be gaid in the examples just described; in those
cases, there is public ambivalence about arrest and conviction, but not
because of a widespread belief that the prohibition is outmoded or rooted
in values that no longer deserve support. But Lawrence does not depend
on this factor alone. It is also important that the interest at stake is
similar, in principle, to those protected by earlier cases. In these
circumstances, the state is required to produce, by way of justification,
something other than a moral position that no longer fits with public
convictions. To be sure, the effect of a rarely enforced law is similar to
that of a lottery, and in that respect there is a degree of ex anée equality.
But that’s the problem. Criminal punishments should not operate like
lotteries. People are punished ex post, not ex ante, and it is the ex post
randomness that supports the Court’s ruling, at least in the light of the
particular interest involved.

Consider a final argument. One purpose of the criminal law is to
impose expressive condemnation. For some conduct, the social judgment
js in favor of expressive condemnation but opposed to much in the way of
actual prosecution. As examples, consider laws forbidding adultery or the
consumption of alcohol by sixteen-year-olds. Rare enforcement reflects a
belief that the law, operating in conjunction with social norms, will deter
misconduct optimally—and that criminal prosecution would be too heavy-
handed, at least in most cases. Does it follow, from Lawrence, that states
are forbidden from adopting the strategy of expressive condemnation with
rare prosecution? Why isn’t that strategy the most sensible one in some
circumstances? The answer is that when certain interests are involved,
states are indeed forbidden from following that strategy, and the reason
has to do with the lack of fair notice and the inevitability of randomness.
As I have emphasized, these are the conventional (procedural) concerns of
the Due Process Clause.

IV. Implications

What are the implications of Lawrence? Because of the opacity of the
Court’s opinion, this is not an easy question to answer. In the fullness of
time, it is imaginable that Lawrence will be a sport, a decision with no
descendants, one in which the Court struck down a law that shocked its
conscience but that proved unable to generate further doctrine. But it is
no less imaginable that Lawrence will turn out to have broad
consequences for regulation of sexual relationships, in a way that
vindicates a quite general interest in sexual autonomy. Bowers had
stopped a number of potential doctrinal innovations here; Bowers is no

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 179

longer good law. And it is wholly imaginable that Lawrence will draw into
question many forms of discrimination against gays and lesbians. If my
basic argument is correct, the eventual path of the law will have a great
deal to do with public convictions over time. My guess is that Lawrence
will have some of the features of Reed v. Reed: it will inaugurate a set of
judgments, from lower courts and the Court itself, that go, in case-by-case
fashion, toward eliminating the most arbitrary and senseless restrictions
on liberty and equality. I am concerned in this section with the logic of

the poure’s opinion and with its bearing on issues that the Court did not
resolve.

A, Sex

; Justice Scalia urged that Lawrence decrees an end to “morals”
legislation, and in the aftermath of the decision, it is natural to wonder
about the constitutionality of laws forbidding sexual harassment.
prostitution, adultery, fornication, obscenity, polygamy, and incest. Before
Lawrence, such laws seemed quite secure. The Court had made clear that
substantive due process would be used only to protect rights well
recognized by tradition; and in any event the privacy cases had originally
been defined with close reference to reproduction and its control, not to
sex itself. But after Lawrence, it would be possible to contend that many
statutory restrictions impose unconstitutional barriers to consensual
sexual activity. And in each of these cases, it would be possible to urge
both that the relevant right is a fundamental one and that the state lacks
a legitimate basis for interfering with consensual activity. Let us see how
the underlying issues might be assessed.

1. Coercion. The easiest cases involve coercion. In such cases, the
predicate for Lawrence—consent—is absent. If consensual sex is not
involved, there is no fundamental right that would require the state
to provide a compelling justification. And for the same reason, the
state has a perfectly legitimate, even compelling, reason to impose a
restriction. In cases of sexual harassment, coercion of one or another
sort is generally involved, and hence a legal ban is perfectly
acceptable. The same is true for many and indeed most cases
involving incest, which involve minors unable to give legal consent.
The interest in preventing coerced sex is sufficient. ,

But somewhat harder cases are imaginable even here. Suppose, for
example, that under a public university’s sexual harassment policy, a
teacher and a graduate student are banned from having a consensual
relationship, even though the teacher is not (and will not be) in a
supervisory position over the student. Or suppose that the incestuous
relations are between adults—first cousins, let us say. In an “as applied”
challenge, these would be genuinely difficult after Lawrence. If real
consent is found in either case, a fundamental right might well be
involved. But it would be possible to defend the broad sexual harassment



FRoM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
180 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

prohibition as a way of reducing risks and introducing clarity for all. And
it would be possible to defend the ban on incest among adults as a way of
eliminating certain psychological pressures and protecting any children
who might result from medical risk. In neither case can it be said that the
prohibitions run afoul of some emerging national awareness. These are
far weaker cases for invalidation than Lawrence, but some of the
underlying logic of the case seems to raise doubts in imaginable
applications.

2. Commerce. Other easy cases involve commerce. In the case of
prostitution, it is hard to urge that a fundamental right is involved.
Under Lawrence, commercial sex is to be treated differently. The
outcome is easy; but the analysis is not. Why the sharp distinction
between commercial and noncommercial sex? Why are sexual
relations unprotected, or less protected, if dollars are exchanged?
Books, after all, are protected, whether they are given away or sold.
Part of the analysis here might be that commercial sex should not be
treated more protectively than any other kind of commercial
interaction, now subject to rational basis review. But if sexual
relationships have a special constitutional status, this distinction is
far from obvious. The more basic claim must be that special
constitutional status attaches to sexual intimacy, not to sexual
relationships, and that intimacy in the relevant sense is not involved
when sex is exchanged for cash. Hence no fundamental right is
involved. To be sure, this argument is not entirely convincing. Many
sexual relationships (including many that fall within the category
protected by Lawrence) do not involve intimacy (except by definition).
But perhaps the Court can be said to be suggesting that
noncommercial sex involves intimacy frequently enough to justify
protection of the overall class, whereas the opposite is true of sex-for-
money.

But what justification does the state have for forbidding prostitution?
It is probably sufficient here to point to the adverse effects of prostitution
on the lives of prostitutes; the risk of exploitation (and worse) is real and
serious. Nor are moral justifications, pointing to the corrosive effects of
prostitution on sexuality and sex equality, ruled off-limits by Lawrence. I
am not taking a position on the complex and disputed question whether
and how prostitution should be outlawed. My suggestion is only that
under rational basis review, restrictions on prostitution are easily
defensible. The ban on the sale of obscenity should be understood in
similar terms; the use of obscenity raises different issues, but here too
Lawrence is best taken not to affect existing law.

3. Without coercion and without commerce. For the state, the most
serious problems, post-Lawrence, come in cases challenging
restrictions on genuinely consensual and noncommercial practices.

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 181

Begin with what might seem an intermediate case: bans on sexual
devices. Following the previous discussion, we should distinguish
here between sale on the one hand and use on the other. On one
view, the state could ban the sale itself, urging that it is attempting
to regulate a commercial enterprise, and that it is permitted to do so
in light of the commercial-noncommercial distinction just made. But
even this is not entirely clear. And could the state make it a crime for
people to use such devices? The right to do so might well fall within
the protection of fundamental interests. In any case, what is the
state’s justification for banning such use? It is easy to imagine an as-
applied challenge, in which a married couple (or for that matter an
unmarried one, or for that matter a single person) attacks a ban on
either the sale or the use of sexual devices with reference to Griswold
itself.

The difference is that in Griswold, the ban on use of contraceptives
was an effort to prevent nonprocreative sex, whereas in the hypothetical
case, the state is banning devices that are designed to increase sexual
pleasure. But why, exactly, would it seek to do that? Is there something
wrong with certain sources of sexual pleasure within constitutionally
protected relationships? Perhaps the answer would be affirmative if real
harms were involved, as for example through some (hardly all)
sadomasochistic practices. Almost certainly the state could justify a
prohibition on the public display of such devices. But we are not now
speaking of these questions. At first glance, individuals have a
fundamental interest here, and the state seems to lack a legitimate basis
for intruding on that interest.

; If there were laws forbidding masturbation, Lawrence would indeed
raise extremely serious questions about them. But, as I have noted, there
are no such laws. What about laws forbidding fornication, understood to
mean nonadulterous sex outside of marriage? Lawrence creates serious
doubts, simply because coercion and consent are not present. In any case.
there seems to be an emerging social awareness that fornication is not a
proper basis for criminal punishment. And with respect to consenting
adults, it is not easy to produce a legitimate ground for interfering with
nonadulterous sex. As I have noted, fully consensual incest is a somewhat
harder case. In the case of adult brothers and sisters, it might be urged
that the goal is to prevent harms to any children who might result, or
psychological difficulties that would predictably produce and accompany
any such relationships. Certainly the ban on sexual relations within the
family cannot be said to be anachronistic. There is no “emerging public
awareness” that such relations should be accepted. But imagine, for
example, that sex is banned among first cousins, in circumstances in
which any harms are highly speculative. Rational basis review would be
satisfied. But Lawrence does not apply rational basis review, and in some



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
182 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

applications, the ruling would seem to throw legal prohibitions on incest
into considerable doubt.

The most difficult cases involve laws forbidding adultery. We could
also imagine cases in which government takes adverse employment action
against those involved in adulterous relationships. Here, as in other
contexts, it would be possible to urge that a consensual relationship is
involved, one with which the state may not interfere on purely moral
grounds. On the other hand, it is possible to justify prohibitions on
adultery by reference to harms to third parties: children, in many cases,
and the betrayed spouse, in many more cases. The adultery laws can be
geen as an effort to protect the marital relationship, involving persons
and interests, including those of children, that are harmed if adultery
occurs. Marriage can and usually is understood as an exchange of
commitments, which have individual and social value; and a prohibition
on adultery, moral and legal, operates in the service of those
commitments. If rational basis review is involved, prohibitions on
adultery should certainly be acceptable—except, perhaps, in cases in
which the married couple has agreed to nonexclusivity (in which case
criminal prosecution would be especially surprising).

The difficulty here is that in the context of adultery, criminal
prosecutions are extremely unusual, at least as rare as criminal
prosecutions for sodomy. There is a good argument that criminal
prosecutions, in this context, are inconsistent with emerging social
values. This is not because adultery is thought to be morally acceptable; it
is not. It is because adultery is not thought to be a proper basis for the
use of the criminal law. Perhaps it could be said that Lawrence turned at
least in part on the Court’s evident desire to ensure against practices that
would “demean|] the lives of homosexual persons.” It is not plausible to
say that the Court should take special steps to ensure against practices
that would “demean the lives of’ adulterers. But in the end, it is not so
easy to distinguish an adultery prosecution from the sodomy prosecution
forbidden in Lawrence.

B. Sexual Orientation, Employment, and Marriage

1. Employment. May a public employer discharge or punish an
employee because of his sexual orientation or because of homosexual
acts? Before Lawrence, the lower courts were divided on the issue.
The logic of Bowers supported the decisions upholding such
discharges, at least against due process challenges. And it was
possible to urge that because homosexual activity is not protected by
the Constitution, government employees are permitted to
discriminate against those who engage in that activity. At first
glance, however, Lawrence resolves that question the other way. A
public employer is not permitted to discharge an employee because
she has exercised a constitutional right (an oversimplification to

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 183

which I shall return). If an employee has converted to Catholicism, or
voted for a Republican, she may not be adversely affected for that
reason. So too if an employee has exercised a right protected by the
Due Process Clause. A state may not refuse to hire a secretary who
has used contraception or had an abortion. Under Lawrence,
government may not refuse to hire people who have engaged in same-
sex relations. It could perhaps be argued that a criminal punishment
is worse than a civil disability, and hence that the prohibition on
criminal prosecution does not entail an equivalent prohibition on
adverse employment actions. But the cases just described should be
sufficient response to that argument.

; Most cases of adverse employment action, prompted by homosexual
activity, are easy after Lawrence. But there are some possible rejoinders.
One would emphasize the reading I have stressed here: Lawrence turned
not simply on a finding of a fundamental right, but more importantly on
the Court’s conclusion that the Texas criminal statute was no longer
supported by public convictions. If desuetude is involved, then perhaps
employment discrimination is permitted even if criminal prosecution is
not. This argument is not at all implausible or incoherent. If we
emphasize the idea of desuetude, then a moral judgment might be
permissible for use in the employment context even if it cannot be
invoked as a basis for criminal prosecution. A narrow reading of
Lawrence, then, would suggest that the Due Process Clause forbids
criminal punishment of sexual conduct not violative of existing moral
convictions, but that there is no barrier to judgments, by government
employers, that gays and lesbians should not be employed. But this
approach reads Lawrence a bit too finely; it would be most surprising if
the Court were to permit states not to hire, or to fire, people for engaging
in the conduct that the Court held to be protected. The Court is best read
to have found a fundamental interest, although desuetude-type ideas
played a role in its judgment; and if so, states may not refuse to hire
people who have engaged in the relevant behavior. In fact, a mild
extension of the Court’s own use of emerging convictions would suggest
that the moral judgments that underlie the Texas statute may not be
used for either criminal or civil disability.

Another response would emphasize that on occasion, the government
may indeed refuse to hire people for engaging in constitutionally
protected activity. The President is permitted to refuse to employ, as
Secretary of State, someone who has publicly criticized his policies; so too,
a public university is almost certainly allowed not to hire, or even to fire,
an admissions officer who has said that women should not go to college, or
that it is best for African-Americans to attend vocational school. In such
cases, the university can claim, plausibly, that it is not trying to censor
anyone, or to punish them for exercising a constitutional right, but
instead to accomplish the substantive task that it has set for itself. An



FROM ANTIL-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
184 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

admissions officer is not likely to be effective if he is on record as
supporting race or sex discrimination. Might discrimination against gays
and lesbians be similarly justified? This is not entirely unimaginable in
some contexts, but in general, it is hard to see how the justification could
be made convincing. Unless the state is to capitulate to private prejudice,
as it is generally forbidden from doing, it cannot easily invoke a distinct,
employment-related reason to discriminate on the basis of sexual
orientation.

Tt also follows that the “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy, in the military
setting, is under new pressure. Tt is no longer possible to defend that
policy simply by citing Bowers. If the policy is to be upheld, it is because
courts should give great deference to military judgments, applying a form
of rational basis review to them. I believe that federal courts are not
likely to interfere with military judgments here, and that there is good
reason for a general posture of deference to such judgments. In principle,
however, it is extremely difficult to defend “don’t ask, don’t tell” against
constitutional challenge, and this appears to be one of the exceedingly
rare settings in which judicial interference with military judgments is
probably justified.

2. Marriage. Of course the largest issue is the fate of same-sex
marriage. Under Lawrence, must states recognize such marriages? I
have suggested that Lawrence is akin to Griswold; but Griswold led
to Roe. Perhaps Lawrence will lead to its own Roe, in the form of a
requirement that states allow gays and lesbians, not less than
heterosexuals, to marry.

The issue is exceedingly complex. At first glance, Lawrence has
nothing at all to do with same-sex marriage. It involved sodomy
prosecutions, brought under anachronistic laws, and the due process
challenge to those prosecutions need not draw into doubt the still-
universal practice of defining marriage to involve one man and one
woman. In any case, the most natural challenge to laws rejecting such
marriages is rooted in the Equal Protection Clause; and Lawrence said
nothing about the Equal Protection Clause (perhaps because it sought to
avoid the marriage issue). To the extent that the Court was emphasizing
an “emerging awareness,” its decision does not touch prohibitions on
same-sex marriage—and will not do so unless and until such prohibitions
seem as outmoded as bans on homosexual sodomy do today. Existing
practice suggests universal opposition to same-sex marriage, and polling
evidence suggests that most Americans support existing practice.

But under current law, the issue cannot be disposed of so readily. In
Loving v. Virginia, the Court struck down a ban on racial intermarriage
on two grounds. The first is the familiar equal protection ground, seeing
that ban as a form of racial discrimination. But jn a separate ruling, the
Court also held that the ban violated the Due Process Clause. In the

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 185

Court's words, “the freedom to marry has long been recognized as one of
the vital personal rights essential to the orderly pursuit of happiness by
free men.” It added that “marriage is one of the ‘basic civil rights of man,’
fundamental to our very existence and survival.” The Loving Court’s due
process ruling was not free from ambiguity; the problem of racial
discrimination played a large role. But subsequent cases confirm that the
right to marry counts as fundamental for due process purposes—and is
sufficient by itself to take the analysis into the domain of heightened
scrutiny.

In Zablocki v. Redhail, the Court struck down a Wisconsin law
forbidding people under child support obligations to remarry unless they
had obtained a judicial determination that they had met those obligations
and that their children were not likely to become public charges. The
Court insisted that “the right to marry is of fundamental importance for
all individuals,” and that “the decision to marry has been placed on the
same level of importance as decisions relating to procreation, childbirth
child rearing, and family relationships.” The Court said that it would
uphold “reasonable regulations that do not significantly interfere with
decisions to enter into the marital relationship.” But any direct and
substantial interference with the right to marry would be strictly
scrutinized. In a concurring opinion, Justice Stevens underlined the
point, urging that the Constitution would cast serious doubt on any
classification which determines who may lawfully enter into the
marriage relationship.”

In this light, a prohibition on same-sex marriage is not so easy to
defend in the aftermath of Lawrence. Under the Court’s decisions, a
fundamental right does seem to be involved, one on which the state can
intrude only by pointing to a countervailing interest that is not merely
legitimate but also compelling. In the context of same-sex marriage, what
might that interest be? What sorts of social harms would follow from
recognizing marriages between people of the same sex? It is conventional
to argue that the refusal to recognize same-sex marriage is a way of
protecting the marital institution itself. But this is very puzzling; how do
same-sex marriages threaten the institution of marriage? Or perhaps the
state can legitimately reserve the idea of marriage to men and women for
expressive reasons. Perhaps the state can urge that it does not want to
give the same expressive support to same-sex unions as to opposite-sex
unions. But why not? As compared to a ban on same-sex marriages, a
prohibition on adultery seems easy to justify. Such a prohibition is likely
in numerous cases, to protect one or even both spouses, and to protect
children besides. Tf, as I have suggested, Lawrence draws prohibitions on
adultery into some doubt, it would seem to raise extremely serious
questions about prohibitions on same-sex marriage.



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
186 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

But perhaps criminal punishment is special. Perhaps such
punishment is quite different from, and to be assessed more skeptically
than, a statute that confers the benefits of marriage on some but not to
all. Perhaps Lawrence forbids the state from using the heavy artillery of
the criminal law—but without raising questions about civil rights and
civil duties. It would not be at all implausible to say that the Lawrence
Court was responsive to the assortment of disabilities associated with
criminal punishment—a set of disabilities that might be thought unique.
But Loving and Zablocki themselves raise questions for this kind of
distinction. Neither case involved a criminal prohibition. Both applied
careful judicial scrutiny to laws saying that certain people could not enter
into the marital relationship.

Perhaps we should read Loving and Zablocki more narrowly.
Notwithstanding the Court’s rhetoric, it is quite doubtful that the Court
really meant to raise serious questions about all state laws dictating who
may enter into a marital relationship. People are not permitted to marry
dogs or cats or cars. They are banned from marrying their first cousins or
their aunts. They cannot marry two people, or three, or twenty. Must
these restrictions be justified by showing that they are the least
restrictive means of achieving a compelling state interest? If so, at least
some of them would be in serious trouble. Perhaps the ban on incestuous
marriages could be defended by pointing to the risk of coercion and the
danger to any children who would result. But as we have seen, it is easy
to imagine some cases in which any such defense would be weak—as, for
example, where the would-be spouses are both adults and do not plan to
have children. Perhaps bans on polygamy could be defended by pointing
to the risk of exploitation, especially of the women involved. But we might
doubt whether Loving and Zablocki should be read to require a careful
judicial inquiry into that question.

A possible opinion would urge that by deeming the right to marry
fundamental, the Court did not mean to suggest that it would strictly
scrutinize any law that departed from the traditional idea that a
marriage is between (one) woman and (one) man. It meant only to say
that when a man and a woman seek to marry, the state must have good
reasons for putting significant barriers in their path. This rationale has
the advantage of fitting with both Loving and Zablocki. The problem is
that it seems somewhat arbitrary and opportunistic. Why, exactly, should
a marriage be defined in this way? Why, in any case, should the definition
be such as to allow the state not to recognize same-sex marriages?

It is not at all easy to answer this question. True, the slippery slope
problems are serious if it is said that the state must justify, in compelling
terms, any limitation on the right to marry. For this reason the idea that
there is any such right is deeply puzzling. But in my view, the major
difference between Lawrence and a ban on same-sex marriage is that the

CN  _—

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 187

sodomy law no longer fits with widespread public convictions, whereas
the public does not (yet) support same-sex marriages. If we rely heavily
on the desuetude-type passages of the Court’s opinion, then it would be
possible to sketch an opinion upholding the ban on same-sex marriages
while also invalidating any state law that punishes consensual sodomy.
Such an opinion would read Loving and Zablocki in the narrow way just
suggested, with reference to slippery slope problems, and conclude that a
rational basis is all that is required for a law that restricts the institution
of marriage to one woman and one man. This opinion would certainly be
plausible. The problem is a general one with any approach that relies on
public convictions: they might not be principled. The public might have
gone this far, and no further; but there may be no good reason for it not to
have gone further. It is not easy to identify a principled distinction, aside
from public convictions, between what the Court did in Lawrence and
what a court would do in striking down a state’s failure to recognize
same-sex marriages,

CONCLUSION

The Lawrence decision is susceptible to two broad readings. The
Court’s ruling could easily be seen as a recognition of the constitutionally
fundamental character of sexual liberty, disabling the state from
controlling the acts of consenting adults without an extremely powerful
justification. Alternatively, it could be seen as a rational basis holding
with a strong Millian foundation—a holding that invalidates “morals”
legislation, requiring harm to third parties whenever government is
regulating private sexual conduct. In practice, these two readings would

not be terribly far apart; they would use different doctrinal avenues to
similar results.

I have suggested the possibility of a third and narrower reading, one
that stresses, as the Court did, that a criminal ban on sodomy 1s
hopelessly out of accord with contemporary convictions. Thus understood,
the due process holding of Lawrence is genuinely procedural. It asserts a
constitutional objection to statutes that are rarely enforced and that
interfere with important human interests without anything like a
Justification in contemporary values. Such statutes are a recipe for
unpredictable and discriminatory enforcement practices; they do violence
to both democratic values and the rule of law. I have stressed the roots of
Lawrence in a narrow, American-style version of the idea of desuetude—
not because the broader readings are entirely implausible, but because
the Court would have been extremely unlikely to rule as it did if not for
its perception that the Texas law could not claim a plausible foundation
in widely shared moral commitments. I believe that an equal protection
ruling, of the sort sketched by Justice O’Connor, would have been
preferable, not least because it would have emphasized what should be
clear to all: The problem in Lawrence had everything to with the social



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
188 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

subordination of gays and lesbians. But a due process ruling, understood
in the relatively narrow terms outlined here, has considerable appeal.

What is the reach of Lawrence? Restrictions on sex that is
nonconsensual or commercial are surely valid. By contrast, laws
forbidding fornication (defined as extramarital but nonadulterous sex) are
surely invalid. The Constitution probably forbids government from
punishing, either criminally or civilly, those who have used sexual
devices. The state is almost certainly banned from discriminating against
those who have engaged in homosexual conduct, at least outside of
certain specialized contexts (most notably the military). In some
applications, bans on incest and adultery could be subject to serious
constitutional challenge.

The hardest cases involve the failure to recognize same-sex
marriages. If Lawrence is put together with Loving and Zablocki, it would
seem plausible to say that the government would have to produce a
compelling justification for refusing to recognize such marriages, and
compelling justifications are not easy to find. If we emphasize an. equality
rationale, the subtext of Lawrence, then bans on same-sex marriages are
in serious constitutional trouble. On the other hand, the ban on same-sex
marriages cannot, at this point in time, be regarded as an anachronism,
or as conspicuously out of touch with emerging social values; on the
contrary, the ban on same-sex marriage continues to have widespread
public support. In any case, there are strong prudential reasons for the
Court to hesitate in this domain and to allow democratic processes much
room to maneuver. The marriage issue, more than any other, will test the
question whether Lawrence is this generation’s Griswold—or the start of
something far more ambitious.

BERNARD E. HARCOURT—-YOU ARE ENTERING A GAY
AND LESBIAN FREE ZONE: ON THE RADICAL DISSENTS
OF JUSTICE SCALIA AND OTHER (POST-)QUEERS
94 Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 503—549 (2004).

The most renowned substantive criminal law decision of the October
2002 Term, Lawrence v. Texas, will go down in history as a critical
turning point in criminal law debates over the proper scope of the penal
sanction. For the first time in the history of American criminal law, the
United States Supreme Court has declared that a supermajoritarian
moral belief does not necessarily provide a rational basis for criminalizing
conventionally deviant conduct. The Court’s ruling is the coup de grdce to
legal moralism administered after a prolonged, brutish, tedious, and
debilitating struggle against liberal legalism in its various criminal law
representations. Henceforth—or at least until further notice—
majoritarian morality no longer automatically trumps liberal argument
(whether consequentialist or deontological) in defining the reasonable and

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 189

permissible contours of the penal code. Justice Byron White’s infamous
declaration in Bowers v. Hardwick that the criminal law is constantly,
and may properly be, “based on notions of morality” no longer stands.
Instead, Justice John Paul Stevens’s contrary statement from his dissent
in Bowers is elevated, in block quote, to supreme law of the land: “the fact
that the governing majority in a State has traditionally viewed a
particular practice as immoral is not a sufficient reason for upholding a
law prohibiting the practice.” With much pomp and circumstance, the
majority in Lawrence inters legal moralism and crowns liberal legalism.
As a matter of federal due process, courts reviewing penal legislation
must now deploy some other principle to distinguish between permissible
and impermissible majoritarian moral opprobrium.

What that other principle will consist of is not clear. Justice Anthony
Kennedy’s opinion for the majority in Lawrence offers a dizzying array of
possibilities, ranging from the watered-down harm principle of the
American Law Institute’s Model Penal Code, to evolving standards of
morality as reflected in the history of state legislative enactments (and
repeal) of sodomy provisions, to the critical commentary of reputedly
conservative American academic judges such as Charles Fried and
Richard Posner, to international law decisions of the European Court of
Human Rights, to the 1957 British Wolfenden Report of the Committee
on Homosexual Offenses and Prostitution, to the Romer v. Evans equal
protection anti-animosity principle, to state judicial resistance to the
Bowers ruling, to conceptions of privacy, notions of dignity, or what Cass
Sunstein refers to as “an American version of desuetude.” The result is a
rhetorical smorgasbord of legal authority, a judicial mélange of
bibliographic references. As Mary Anne Case observes, the Lawrence
opinion points to a “this” and “that” of ambiguous referents—it is, in
Case’s words, an opinion that “starts its readers off with this and in the
end may deliver that instead.”

Justice Kennedy’s pastiche in Lawrence is, at a legal theoretical level,
incoherent, and under normal circumstances—in many other cases—
would be internally contradictory. As a jurisprudential matter, utilitarian
welfare maximizing or harm calculations are anathema to a deontological
human rights paradigm, which in turn is in tension with jurisdictional
bean-counting. These different rules of decision have little in common
except, of course, when they converge on the same result, which is
apparently the case here—or at least, it is the case for decriminalizing
homosexual sodomy. The theoretical incoherence and rhetorical overkill of
Justice Kennedy’s opinion lends credence to Justice Antonin Scalia’s
incendiary dissent in Lawrence, specifically to the idea that the majority's
holding is no technical knock-out victory for liberal legalism, but rather a
politically or culturally partisan decision.



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
190 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

To Justice Scalia, the majority in Lawrence simply took sides in our
contemporary culture wars over the sexual and moral fabric of American
society. The Lawrence ruling, Justice Scalia declares, is a partisan
outcome that aligns the court with the pro-gay faction in large part
because of a law profession that is biased in favor of gay men and lesbian
women. “It is clear from this [decision] that the Court has taken sides in
the culture war, departing from its role of assuring, as neutral observer,
that the democratic rules of engagement are observed,” Justice Scalia
writes. “Today’s opinion is the product of a Court, which is the product of
a law-profession culture, that has largely signed on to the so-called
homosexual agenda... .” These are fighting words—a battle cry, a call to
arms in our contemporary culture wars—and according to the Associated
Press, Justice Scalia has continued to wage war outside the courthouse.
Several months after the Lawrence decision, Justice Scalia reportedly
ridiculed the majority’s ruling in a speech to the Intercollegiate Studies
Institute, reading from Justice Kennedy’s opinion with “a mocking tone,”
and deriding the majority for imposing, in his words, “the latest academic
understanding of liberal political theory.”

Despite the vitriolic tone, Justice Scalia’s dissent is remarkably
insightful—in certain respects prescient—in situating the Lawrence
decision in its proper social and political context, and it offers a useful
heuristic to help interpret the result. The fact is, there is today a war of
sexual projects that is being fought on American soil, and the federal
courts, including the United States Supreme Court, are inextricably
caught up in the ongoing battles. But what is missing in Justice Scalia’s
critique are the important nuances and subtleties that shape these
contemporary sex wars, that make them so fascinating and so
unpredictable—and that both resignify and ambiguate the purported gay
victory in Lawrence.

The heart of the problem is that Justice Scalia incorrectly models our
contemporary culture wars on two-sided military conflict—specifically on
a war between, on the one hand, liberal homosexual activists who are
promoting a pro-gay-rights agenda and the law profession with its “anti-
anti-homosexual culture,” and, on the other hand, mainstream anti-
homosexual attitudes represented by those “[m]any Americans [who] do
not want persons who openly engage in homosexual conduct as partners
in their business, as scoutmasters for their children, as teachers in their
children’s schools, or as boarders in their home.” This two-party model
does not—and cannot—begin to capture the complex social, political, and
sexual dynamics of our contemporary sex wars. While it is true, of course,
that everyone, if pushed to the limit, is either “for” or “against” the
legalization of homosexual relations—just as everyone, again if pushed to
the limit, is either “for” or “against” abortion, “for” or “against” the death
penalty, “for” or “against” gun control—it is necessary to focus not simply
on the ultimate polarity but rather on the much wider range of sexual

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND Limits 191

projects in order to begin to understand the unexpected alliances,
unanticipated tipping points, and surprising truces that characterize our
sex wars. Instead of two-sided military conflict, the model should
approximate more fluid and shifting patterns of temporary equilibria in a
continually interrupted, jarred, and hence moving medium.

Our present sexual landscape in the United States—and in the West
more generally—is marked by a multiplicity of sexual projects, at times
ambiguous and fluid, at other times rigid, doctrinaire, even fascistic;
sometimes overlapping or allied, at other times in tense conflict; some
militant and hard, others nurturing, warm, even embracing; some
exclusionary, some missionary. The battle lines are drawn not only over
the sex of sexual partners—that’s the least of it—but over multiple
dimensions of promiscuity, monogamy, child custody, sadomasochism,
commitment, “fisting,”!5 public sex, female-to-male sex change operations
(and male-to-female), “barebacking” and “bug chasing,”16 importuning,
“role-playing,”!7 “piercing” and “cutting,” “packing,”18 “fancying,”19
marrying, childbearing, adopting, pornography, and sexual assault-—to
name just a few. The very definitions of heterosexual, homosexual, bi-,
trans-, poly-, metro-, pomo-sexual, lesbian, queer—again, to name just a
few—are fought over,2° even whether the labels themselves should be
abandoned. The academy, the courts, the media and public sphere have
witnessed an explosion of sexual projects and related discourses of
sexuality.

If a male worker on an all-man oil rig is held down by his fellow guy
workers while they deliberately put their penises up against his body, if
he is threatened with same-sex rape, is he the victim of sexual
harassment under Title VII, as Justice Scalia writing for a unanimous
court makes possible in Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc.,24 or
should the lower federal court reread the factual allegations in a manner

18 The practice of inserting a fist and forearm into the anus or vagina.
16 The practice among some men of engaging i
; P 4 ging in unprotected same-gender anal sex or of
actively seeking to be infected with HIV.

17 For example, the femme/butch debates among lesbian women.

18 pe practice among some women of “the wearing of a dildé down the trouser leg to
suggest the existence of a penis.” SHEILA JEFFREYS, UNPACKING QUEER POLITICS 1 Cambrid;
UK: Polity Press, 2003). 8 ‘ meee

19 “Fancying” is “attraction based simply on physical appearance” and triggered significant
debate as to whether it is objectifying, racist, “ableist,” and reflects “a construction of sexuality
which was hostile to women’s interests.” SHEILA JEFFREYS, THE LESBIAN HERESY: A FEMINIST

in 199 Ne ON THE LESBIAN SEXUAL REVOLUTION, at xii (Melbourne, Australia: Spinifex Press,

. 20 Not to mention “post-queer” (referring to younger more radical queers who are
positioning themselves in opposition to assimilationist queer politics) and “breeder” (referring to
heterosexuals with children, and meant to connote that the child-bearing and child-raising
capabilities of heterosexuals are privileged over those of homosexual couples). See CHERRY
SMyTuH, LESBIANS TALK QUEER NOTIONS 57 (London: Scarlet Press, 1992),

21 523 U.S. 75 (1998). In Oncale, the Court held that this may amount to sex discrimination
under Title VII on a theory of same-sex sexual harassment. Id. at 75.



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
192 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH, 2

that ambiguates sexual desire, as Janet Halley, professor at Harvard Law
School, ingeniously and provocatively suggests in Sexuality
Harassment??? Could it be, as Halley writes, that the alleged victim in
Oncale “performs a feminine man to signal his willingness to be
mastered,” that “the other guys comply with a big display of masculinity,”
so that “‘man fucks woman’ but with a twist that undoes the capacity of
the male/female model to underwrite [the plaintiff Oncale] as a victim”?
Could it be, as Halley suggests, that in reality it is the plaintiff alleging
sexual harassment who may be attacking his fellow guy workers “by
invoking the remarkable powers of the federal court to restore his social
position as heterosexual?” And would we really want the average juror or
Justice Scalia using their common sense to resolve these questions? (For
the skeptical or unaccustomed reader, try mapping this on the rape
allegations of the concierge of the Lodge & Spa at Cordillera Colorado
against NBA superstar Kobe Bryant, and keep in mind that, shortly
before Bryant’s appearance in court, a USA Today/CNN/Gallup poll
revealed that forty-one percent of white respondents and sixty-eight
percent of African American respondents believed her allegations
probably untrue). Notice in the debate over Oncale how a gay-friendly
judicial opinion that has the potential of protecting gay men and lesbians
from same-sex sexual harassment, a decision supported by the liberal pro-
gay-rights forces, a ruling that promotes the “so-called homosexual
agenda” and that is authored, ironically, by Justice Scalia himself, is
attacked as potentially encroaching on same-gender sexual advances and
sexuality more generally from a gay-friendly theoretic perspective that
challenges the homosexual (as well as heterosexual) identity.

If four men nail the heads of their penises to a butcher block with
stainless steel needles while being photographed by an editor of a gay
newsmagazine, The Advocate, are they manifesting an unhealthy
psychotic internalization of their oppression as homosexual men, as
Sheila Jeffreys, professor of political science at the University of
Melbourne, suggests, or are they instead performing a valuable and
cathartic gay male initiation ritual that helps overcome the stigma of
unmanliness associated with gay male sex? Are they, in the words of
Jeffreys, “act[ing] out upon their bodies the woman-hating and gay-hating
of the societies they inhabit”? Or are similar acts of sadomasochism,
instead, as Leo Bersani reports, “passionate, erotic, growthful,
consensual, sometimes fearful, exorcism, reclamation, joyful, intense,
boundary-breaking, trust building, loving, unbelievably great sex, often
funny, creative, spiritual, integrating, a development of inner power as
strength.” Within the gay-friendly community—within the community of
scholars and activists whose agenda is, in the words of Justice Scalia,
“directed at eliminating the moral opprobrium that has traditionally

22 Janet Halley, Sexuality Harassment, in LEFT LEGALISM/LEFT CRITIQUE 80 (Wendy
Brown & Janet Halley eds.) (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2002).

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 193

attached to homosexual conduct”—where do we look for an answer to this
question? In gay male studies, in queer theory, in lesbian feminist
writings? And is it really true, as Jeffreys contends, that “the political
agenda of queer politics is damaging to the interests of lesbians, women
in general, and to marginalized and vulnerable constituencies of gay
men”?

If a male transvestite marries a male-to-female transsexual who has
undergone sexual-reassignment surgery, is he entitled to an annulment of
the marriage because his wife was a man and has refused to consummate
the marriage?34 Is homosexual public sex good or bad for gay politics? Is
John Rechy, author of The Sexual Outlaw, right when he argues that
promiscuous gay males are “the shock troops of the sexual revolution,”
that the “streets are the battleground,” that “the revolution is the
sexhunt,” and that “a radical statement is made each time a man has sex
with another on a street”? These types of questions—and the debates they
engender—reflect a proliferation of sexual projects in contemporary
Western culture that fractures Justice Scalia’s simple two-sided military
conflict model, undercuts the very coherence of an expression like
“homosexual agenda” or “anti-homosexual agenda,” and complexifies the
symbolic meaning of a decision like Lawrence.

In order to properly understand Lawrence—and other sex and
cultural wars—we need a much finer grained understanding of sexual
projects and of the fragmentation of those projects. In the Lawrence
litigation, the surprising coalitions, the telling alliances, the strange
bedfellows were most clearly visible on the libertarian side—with amicus
briefs filed in support of John Lawrence by Republican groups, Baptist
ministers and representatives of twenty-eight other religious
organizations, a conservative think-tank, the American Bar Association,
the American Psychiatric and Psychological Associations, and the
National Organization of Women, in addition to the usual suspects, such
as the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and ACLU of Texas,
Amnesty International, and gay-rights organizations. To be sure, the
cornucopia of amicus briefs reflects strategy and lobbying on the part of
John Lawrence’s lawyers. But, more important, it reflects the kind of
political coalition-formation that produced the result in Lawrence. The
same kind of fragmented politics occur on both sides of sex wars on most
issues—same-sex marriage, public sex, sadomasochism, for example. And
it is what will account for the outcomes there too.

The ruling in Lawrence simply does not lend itself to facile,

~ dichotomous interest-group political interpretation. The result in

Lawrence does not symbolize primarily an endorsement of homosexuality
or an embrace of a “homosexual agenda.” What it reflects much more is a

34 This is the legal question in Corbett v. Corbett, a British case from 1970. See Corbett v.
Corbett, 2 W.L.R. 1306 (P.D.A. 1970).



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
194 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

curious and fascinating alliance between liberal pro-gay-rights advocates,
conservative social libertarians, Republican gay men and lesbian women,
and pro-sex traditional liberal heterosexuals, among others. The loudest
message that Lawrence conveys is: “what two consenting mature adults
do in their own bedroom (as long as they are not hurting anyone) is none
of the government’s business.” The symbolic message of Lawrence is not
“We're on board with homosexuals,” it sounds more of “We're against
surveillance in adult bedrooms.”

More important, the result in Lawrence is not unambiguously pro-
gay. The fracturing of sexual projects in the West also means,
paradoxically, that the Lawrence decision does not so simply or
unambiguously advance the interests of all self-identified gay men,
lesbian women, queers, liberal (pro-gay) heterosexuals, or others who are
gay-friendly yet reject sexual labels. The problem is not just the potential
backlash against gay men and lesbian women that may follow the
Lawrence decision. The rub is that the proliferation of sexual projects
makes it far too simplistic today to think about a decision such as
Lawrence in dichotomous terms—as either “good” or “bad” for
“homosexuals.” Who wins and who loses depends on a much closer
parsing of sexual projects. Justice Scalia is only partly right: the decision
does favor the liberal pro-gay-rights position and in this sense is gay-
friendly. But it may, possibly, ill-serve the interests of many others who
oppose the dominance of what Judith Butler refers to as “the defining
institutions of phallogocentrism and compulsory heterosexuality.”45 There
may be more to be gained from resisting a criminal stigma where—or so
long as, or on the condition that—criminal enforcement and
accompanying punishments are in fact de minimis, than there is to be lost
in the normalization of conventional deviance.

This Article probes the fragmentation of sexual projects in the West
and its implications for the sex wars and the penal law. It is intended as a
guide or manual for the interpretation of the result in Lawrence and
future sex battles. Its goal is to help make sense of the dynamic
interactions that give rise to a political resolution such as Lawrence. In
this interpretive process, Justice Scalia’s incendiary dissent is perhaps
the most helpful starting point. Justice Scalia in Lawrence has begun to
put his finger on cultural conflict. This Article builds on Justice Scalia’s
radical dissent to tap the real pulse of the sex wars. Part I focuses on the
fracturing of sexual projects and demonstrates that it is, today, far too
simplistic—in fact profoundly counterproductive—to describe the culture
wars as a two-party conflict or to talk about a “homosexual agenda.” In
the Lawrence litigation, this pomt was brought home in the surprising
coalition opposing the Texas statute. The question this raises is, what

45 See Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity, at ix (New
York: Routledge, 1990).

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 195

kinds of fissures split the gay community? What would it sound like to
argue from a gay-friendly perspective against the ruling in Lawrence?
Part II explores this question and develops through a pastiche of radical
statements a politics that embraces the marginal, even criminal desire to
transgress for the sake of transgression, that thrives on rebellion against
hegemonic legal regimes. With this in place, Part II reconstructs Justice
Scalia’s radical dissent and sharpens it to produce a keener interpretive
framework to understand the result in Lawrence and future sex wars.
Justice Scalia is right that there is a culture war and that the courts are
inextricably involved in those wars. He is also right that the court is
shaped by the legal profession and that their decisions are largely shaped
by the law profession culture. This culture—and the legal academy that
reproduces it—are by and large more tolerant of homosexuality than
other sectors of society, such as listeners of talk radio or leaders of
organized religions, but also than other trade or professional networks,
such as, most probably, police or corrections officers, electricians, or
perhaps corporate executives. The decision in Lawrence is the product of
this law profession culture, and, at least on the surface, is gay-friendly—it
favors the interests of liberal pro-gay-rights advocates. But it does not
necessarily promote the interests of all the gay-friendly. It is here that
the Foreword probes Lawrence—dark side and all.

I.

Casually inspect a contemporary high school lunch room, a college or
university campus, a youth clothing store. Open the pages of a staid
alumni magazine. The sexual projects are, literally, all over the map—on
both sides of the traditional divides. They are wide and varied—in fact,
far more varied than a two-party model would suggest. This, from a cover
feature on Professor Robert George, a highly distinguished and
conservative professor of politics and jurisprudence at Princeton
University, in the staid pages of the Princeton Alumni Weekly:

{According to Professor Robert George,] “Good” sex is genital sex
between spouses, while “bad” (.e., immoral) sex is defined as sex
between unmarried partners, masturbation, or sex between spouses
other than the genital-to-genital variety. He writes in The Clash of
Orthodoxies, “The plain fact is that the genitals of men and women
are reproductive organs all of the time—even during periods of
sterility.... Insofar as the point or object of sexual intercourse is
marital union, the partners achieve the desired unity (i.e., become
‘two-in-one-flesh’) precisely insofar as they mate ... or, if you will,
perform the type of act—the only type of act—upon which the gift of a
child may supervene.”

. George explains in greater detail in The Clash of Orthodoxies that
masturbatory and sodomitical acts, by their nature, instrumentalize the
bodies of those choosing to engage in them in a way that cannot but



i

FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:

196 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

damage their integrity as persons.” This accounts, George contends, for
the “self-alienating and disintegrating qualities of masturbatory and
sodomitical sex.”

Contrast George—specifically on the question of homosexual
sodomy—with Judge Richard Posner. Posner’s sexual project is to treat
sex from a morally indifferent, purely economic perspective.4? Posner
views the homosexual life as an unhappier one than the heterosexual,
and for this reason does not wish homosexuality on anyone. Yet he favors
decriminalization. His argument takes three steps. First, approximately
2.5 percent of the American population is predominantly or exclusively
homosexual and thus legal discrimination imposes a significant aggregate
cost. Second, homosexual orientation is more innate than chosen and thus
decriminalization is unlikely to increase the number of homosexuals.
Third, the homosexual has a less happy life than the heterosexual—
stemming primarily from the biological difficulties associated with
childbearing and the resulting disruption of family life—and there is no
reason to add to their misery. Posner writes:

If l am correct that even in a tolerant society the male homosexual’s
Jot is likely to be a less happy one on average than that of his
heterosexual counterpart, still this is no reason in itself to strew legal
or other social obstacles in the path of the homosexual. On the
contrary, in itself it is a reason to remove those obstacles in order to
alleviate gratuitous suffering. It becomes a reason for repression only
if repression can change homosexual preference, incipient or settled,
into heterosexual preference at acceptable cost and thereby make
persons who would otherwise become or remain homosexuals
happier. There is no reason to think that repression, psychotherapy,
behavior modification, or any other technique of law or medicine can
do so in a large enough number of cases to warrant the costs, not
least to the “unconverted” homosexual, that legal and social
discrimination imposes.

Posner concludes that “the sodomy laws ought to be repealed.”
Though Posner agrees with the result in Lawrence, he deplores the
majority's reasoning. The homosexual sodomy laws are rarely enforced
and do little harm, he emphasizes. Although the country may not have
been ready for a pro-gay decision in 1986 at the time of Bowers v.
Hardwick, Posner believes that, by 2003, seventeen years later, “the
climate of opinion had changed sufficiently that the court could get away
with invalidating the sodomy laws as underenforced, irrational, and a
gratuitous insult to homosexuals.”

49 Posner develops in his work, Sex and Reason, an economic theory of sexuality that, as a
descriptive matter, embraces a yational choice perspective on sexual behavior and, from a
normative perspective, adopts a libertarian position on sexual regulation—"not to be confused,”
Posner emphasizes, “with either libertine or modern liberal.” RICHARD POSNER, SEX AND REASON
3 (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 1992).

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 197

Where does Posner, who does not wish homosexuality on anyone, yet
supports the result in Lawrence, fit in Scalia’s two-party model? How
about the Cato Institute, a conservative or classical liberal or libertarian
or market liberal think tank—notice the identity problems here too—
which retained William Eskridge, professor at Yale Law School and
author of one of the leading liberal pro-gay-rights texts, as counsel of
record for its intervention in the Lawrence litigation? How about the
many self-identified conservatives who think homosexuality is immoral
and who clearly “do not want persons who openly engage in homosexual
conduct as partners in their business, as scoutmasters for their children
as teachers in their children’s schools, or as boarders in their home,” yet
who support the Lawrence decision? As one of these many self-identified
conservatives writes on www.intellectualconservative.com:

Of course most of the displeasure among Conservatives over the
Supreme Court ruling stems from our belief that Homosexuality is
abnormal and morally wrong. And yes it is wrong; it is sinful, and I
strongly believe it is abnormal. Yet when it occurs between. two or
three, or more consenting adults, in the privacy of their homes it is
not my business. It is not your business. And certainly none of the
government’s business.

The fact is, there are a lot of people who do not want homosexuals
around them, yet who do not support the criminalization of homosexual
sodomy. Where do we place their sexual projects?

What about “metrosexuals,” whose sexual project is ambiguously
parasitic on the marginalization and taboo of homosexuality?
‘Metrosexuals” refer somewhat imprecisely to generally heterosexual
practicing males—sometimes hyper-heterosexual—who share aesthetic
sensibilities with the more traditional stereotype of the gay male. This
definition of metrosexual is sketchy precisely because the thrust of the
metrosexual identity—like so many others today—is to ambiguate
sexuality. According to William Safire of The New York Times, quoting
Mark Simpson who coined the term, “[h]e might be officially gay, straight
or bisexual, but this is utterly immaterial, because he has clearly taken
himself as his own love object and pleasure as his sexual preference.”
(The iconic figure of the metrosexual is the British soccer superstar
David Beckham, who reportedly wears nail polish, sports designer
clothes, braids his hair, poses for gay magazines, and has a well-
publicized hyper-heterosexual relationship with a member of the Spice
Girls). In seeking to ambiguate sexuality, the metrosexual is not only not
ad of being called or perceived as homosexual, he thrives off the taboo
the contributes to the mystique of being gay. Cultural critics have made
. analogy to the way that “white suburban teenagers have long cribbed
om hip-hop culture, as a way of distinguishing themselves from the
Pack.” It is the criminalization of drugs and guns, and the



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:

198 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

marginalization of black rap culture that makes hip hop, in part,
attractive to white suburban youths. The metrosexual too flirts with the
danger of outlaw status. Where then do we fit the “metrosexual” in a two-
party model?

At the other end of the political spectrum, how do we categorize the
radical anti-assimilationist queer activists who embrace a marginalized
status? How about the “lesbian outlaw” whose “status as outlaw is, for
many lesbians, one important source of the satisfaction to be gained from
lesbianism”? What about the homosexual public-sex activist “living fully
at the very edge, triumphant over the threats, repression, persecution,
prosecution, attacks, denunciations, hatred that have tried powerfully to
crush him from the beginning of ‘civilization’ ”? What about Gay Shame, a
queer activist group based in San Francisco whose web motto is “Don’t be
devoured by the consumerist monster of ‘Gay Pride-—Stop the monster of
assimilation, before it’s too late.” Listen carefully to how Gay Shame
describes itself:

GAY SHAME IS THE VIRUS IN THE SYSTEM. We are a radical
alternative to the gay mainstream and the increasingly complacent
left. We seek nothing less than a new queer activism that addresses
issues of race, class, gender, and sexuality to counter the self-serving
‘values’ of the gay mainstream. We are dedicated to fighting the rabid
assimilationist monster of corporate gay ‘culture’ with a devastating
mobilization of queer brilliance. Gay Shame is a celebration of
resistance: all are welcome.

Under the rubric “Queercore,” other radicals draw the line even more
sharply. Queercore refers to “the punky, anti-assimilationist,
transgressive movement on the fringe of lesbian and gay culture.” It has
produced a number of “zines”—e.g. “personal little xeroxed rags,” “a kind
of popular press’—-and has annual conventions that are far from
conventional, even by queer terms. This, from a 1991 editorial by Johnny
Noxema and Rex Boy, the editors of the Toronto zine BIMBOX:

You are entering a gay and lesbian-free zone.... Effective
immediately, BIMBOX is at war against lesbians and gays. A war in
which modern queer boys and queer girls are united against the
prehistoric thinking and demented self-serving politics of the above-
mentioned scum. BIMBOX hereby renounces its past use of the term
lesbian and/or gay in a positive manner. This is a civil war against
the ultimate evil, and consequently we must identify us and them in
no uncertain terms. ... So, dear lesbian woman or gay man to whom
perhaps BIMBOX has been inappropriately posted .. . prepare to pay
dearly for the way you and your kind have fucked things up.

The internal critique of gay culture is vitriolic. It verges on the
violent—at least, verbally—-as evidenced by this other pronouncement in
BIMBOX: “We will not tolerate any form of lesbian and gay philosophy.

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND Limits 199

We will not tolerate their voluntary assimilation into heterosexual
culture. vee [I]f we see lesbians and gays being assaulted on the streets, we
will not intervene, we will join in.... Effective immediately, [we are] at
war with lesbians and gays.” This does sound like a culture war, but
surely it defies a two-party model.

_ What about “queer punk,” a new music trend that cultivates anti-
assimilation? These bands, with names like The Skin Jobs and The
Rotten Fruits, are out to turn the queer left upside down. They “tear our
current notions of gay pride to shreds” with lyrics like: “Don’t imitate.
stop trying to fit in. If everyone looked like everyone, then tell me ‘Just
who would you fuck? And when the kids go ‘We're gonna burn your
rainbow and we’re having fun! Yeah! We don’t need you, we don’t care.”
Queer punk provokes its audiences with anti-assimilationist harangues
singing the virtues of promiscuity and rebellion. Here are The Rotten
Fruits from their song, “Fuck Media Faggots”: “I don’t want to be ‘Queer
as Folk,’ My life is no HBO joke... . Fuck Media Faggots, they don’t care
Fuck Media Faggots, they won’t dare.” ,

Where do these groups and others like them—the Whores of Babylon,
(Queers Fighting Religious Intolerance), SISSY (Schools Information
Services on Sexuality), or PUSSY (Perverts Undermining State
Scrutiny)—fit in the picture? Does embracing an anti-assimilationist,
radical pro-difference, pro-marginalization position constitute part of the
“so-called homosexual agenda”?

; We live in a post-identity politics—a politics where formerly cohesive
identities have fragmented to the point that it is no longer possible to talk
of a “homosexual agenda”—“so-called” or otherwise. The “homosexual
agenda” is fractured along multiple dimensions, including, classically, the
political. So some self-identified gay men and lesbian women oppose the
liberal pro-gay-rights project from the right, contesting the need for broad
anti-discrimination laws based on sexual orientation. Bruce Bawer, editor
of Beyond Queer: Challenging Gay Left Orthodoxy, Andrew Sullivan and
others offer what Bawer calls “a new gay paradigm:” the main thrust
(though it comes in different variations) is to seek an end to all public or
state-sanctioned forms of discrimination and to leavé the rest alone. “No
cures or re-educations; no wrenching civil litigation; no_ political
imposition of tolerance;” Andrew Sullivan writes, “merely a political
attempt to enshrine formal civil equality, in the hope that eventually the
_ Private sphere will reflect this public civility.” Within internal discussions
“on the right, it is acceptable to argue for social assimilation through
sexual restraint. As John Berresford writes:

Among ourselves, we must be willing to talk about morals, to impose
them on, ourselves, and to do so conspicuously. As long as our
primary image is one of gleeful promiscuity . . . we will be ostracized.
Until we start imposing honesty, fidelity, and emotion on our lives—



eee

From ANTLSODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
200 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

in other words, until we are willing to talk about moral standards—
we will make little real progress in social acceptance.

Other self-identified gay men, lesbian women, and queer theorists
oppose the gay-rights-project from the left, challenging the very notion of
sexual identities. Janet Halley’s critique of the same-sex harassment
protection in Oncale, discussed earlier, represents one variation. For
Halley, the queer project “emphasizes the fictional status of sex, gender,
and sexual orientation identity, and ... affirms rather than abhors
sexuality, ‘dark side’ and all.” It “regards the homosexual/heterosexual
distinction with skepticism and even resentment, arguing that it is
historically contingent and is itself oppressive.” From this perspective, it
is the gay-friendly construction of homosexuality that is problematic and
reflects a deep chasm between anti-discrimination approaches and a more
radical questioning of sexuality—a conflict “not simply between older ‘gay’
assimilationists ... and ‘queers’ asserting their ‘queerness’. Rather it is
between those who think of the politics of sexuality as a matter of
securing minority rights and those who are contesting the overall validity
and authenticity of the epistemology of sexuality itself.”

In research exploring the dominant sexual ideologies in lesbian, gay,
bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) communities published in the Journal
of Homosexuality in 2008, the authors identify two “prominent sexual
“deological types’ ”—assimilationist and radical. These positions are
familiar, especially in the context of the same-sex marriage debates. But
the truth is, each one of these positions comes in multiple flavors. Within
the assimilationist position, there are dignity strands, but there are also
moralist strands. So too in the radical position, where there is a wide
range of positions. In the gay-marriage context, for instance, there are
arguments against the institution of marriage per se, arguments against
the resulting exclusion of marriage laws, as well as more strategic
arguments against marriage for gays. And these tensions have been
present for a long time. The different variations are themselves different
ideologies. The two ideal types form a spectrum, not a dichotomous pair.
There are, in effect, moral assimilationists, incremental assimilationists,
strategic assimilationists, among others, as well as radical anti-
assimilationists, libertarian radicals, and separatists—a whole plethora
of gay-friendly ideologies in the jdentified LGBT community.

Even within a single narrower community—the lesbian community,
for example—there are recurring, sharp, often caustic conflicts. In fact,
from a historical perspective, what may be most characteristic of lesbian
cultural discourse and activism is its constant need to transgress—itsel/.
Lesbian feminists of the 1970s—Adrienne Rich, Sheila Jeffries, Mary
Daly, among others—reacted against the patriarchal elements that they
perceived in lesbianism, especially the role-playing butch/femme
identities that pervaded the lesbian underworld of the 1950s and 60s, and

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 201

turned toward a more separatist approach. This sparked, in the 1980s, a
reaction to what women saw as an “anti-sex” attitude and a turn to S/M—
to ‘a new politics of outlawry, of sexual deviance.” As Emma Healey tells
it, the 1990s “saw a new orthodoxy that trumpeted S/M sexuality while at
the same time decrying anything vanilla.” This new lesbian ideology was
more willing to ally itself with gay men, giving rise to queer politics. This
in turn engendered a rebirth of the lesbian feminist movement. In essa: 8
such as Queer Straights, critics railed against the new politics of queer as
a regression to patriarchy and heterosexuality:

[T]he ‘in your face radicalism’ which is claimed to be the most

important signifier of queer, is, in the end, hard to distinguish from

plain od Hberalism: iueer’s ‘shocking’ tactics constitute little more
n a plea to be included in straight societ:

that we chaos i g y, rather than a demand

The bottom line is that, today, the “lesbian agenda” would be a
meaningless term: it would be necessary to distinguish between “lesbian
feminists,” “lesbians who are also feminists,” “radical lesbians” or “lesbian
separatists,” “heterofeminists,” queer theorists, post-queer theorists
“libertarian lesbians,” among others, to properly define a political
intervention. Monique Wittig famously remarked that “Lesbians are not
women. By this, I take it, she meant that the interests of lesbians do not
coincide with those of lesbian feminists. Perhaps a more a t
statement would be, “Lesbians are not.” sour’

The point is that to refer to a “homosexual agenda” is as meaningless
as to talk about an “American sexual agenda,” an “American criminal law
agenda,” or for that matter an anti-”homosexual agenda.” The internal
positions vary widely. Even the more specific concept of a “homosexual
agenda ... directed at eliminating the moral opprobrium that has
traditionally attached to homosexual conduct” is incoherent. This agenda
ranges from homosexual public-sex activism—from engaging in
homosexual sex in public—to embracing sexual restraint and moral
puritanism. How the myriad sexual projects compare is complex and it is
what makes the sex wars unpredictable. It is not a war between
homosexual activists (and their companions de route) against mainstream
heterosexual Americans who don’t want to be around gay and lesbians. It
isa complex, multi-party conflict that affects conceptions of the self
relations to others, eroticism, sexual practices, etc. As one commentator

writes in the Daily Targum, the Rut: i i
, gers Universit, i
same-sex marriage: Y Paper, on the topic of

The media has constructed a binary opposition between all Queers
along with their straight alliances, and the conservative Christian
Right's wish for the state to prohibit the sanctioning of homosexual
sins. But, as a radical, a lesbian and a feminist, my opposition to



FRom ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
202 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

[normalizing homosexual relations] does not fall into these
dichotomous categories.

Sexuality is so central to each individual that every person has a
sexual project—by which I mean a position on how others should act
sexually, an other regarding ideology of sexual practice. These sexual
projects may or may not be related to one’s own sexual practices—some
may actively engage in one type of practice only, yet firmly believe that
others should (or should be allowed) to engage in other practices. (Sexual
projects may also include complete indifference to the practices of others).
What is important is not the sexual practices that the individual
personally engages in, nor the bottom line dichotomous “pro” or “against”
position on homosexuality or the morality of any particular sex act. They
may vary widely as between individuals who engage in very similar
sexual acts—in fact, whether two persons engage in similar or different
sex acts tells us very little about how their sexual projects compare. What
matters is the ideology that surrounds other-regarding sexual views. Are
they, for instance, based on a libertarian impulse, a libertine penchant, a
pro-sex attitude, morality, religion, or other grounds? This matters
because it will determine the future shape of coalitions and conflict in
other sex wars in the criminal law and elsewhere.

The proliferation and fracturing of sexual projects destabilizes simple
dichotomies. In the more technical terms of Arrow’s Theorem, the
fractiousness creates a multidimensional political voting model that may
make it difficult to predict how coalitions will form or whether they will
remain stable in future sex wars in criminal law and elsewhere. So, for
instance, the alliances that formed in the Lawrence context become
unstable in the same-sex marriage debates, where anti-marriage
libertarians and gays may ally with conservative legal moralists to
overcome the pro gay-rights and liberal coalition. This is precisely what
makes the sex wars so unpredictable, and why we need to engage in a far
more nuanced analysis of the different sexual projects to understand how
they result in coalitions, alliances, and ultimately victories or losses. It
also implies, paradoxically, that we need to attend more carefully to
fractiousness in the gay-friendly camp of the Lawrence decision.

I.

What would it sound like to ambiguate the result in Lawrence from a
gay-friendly perspective? In her review in Ariforum of the Diane Arbus
exhibition Revelations, Judith Butler probes the curious relationship
between generations of prohibitory norms. Diane Arbus, in her
photographs, rebelled against the prevailing norms of bourgeois society
that erased the stigmatized body from view—the prohibitory norms that
hid the physically or mentally handicapped from the public gaze. Arbus’s
photographs are renowned for their many disturbing representations of
the deviant—a veritable freak show of deformed bodies, dwarves, muscle

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 203

men, and the mentally ill. Her photographs exposed oddity, buried in
everyday portraits. The Human Pincushion, Ronald C. Harrison, N.dJ.
(1962) depicts the proud, perhaps defiant, bare chested, tattooed Mr.
Harrison with three-inch pins sticking through his throat, forehead.
cheeks, lips, arms and chest. The photographs are “fascinated by human
distortions, playing on spectacle, pandering to the unseemly desire to
gawk at what might seem aberrant, to peer, to invade.”

In their time, Arbus’s photographs challenged the prohibitory norm
of surface aesthetics. Today, however, the photographs trigger a different
prohibitory norm—the norm against objectifying the deviant, against
gawking at the stigmatized body. “We are not supposed to make into
visual spectacles human bodies that are stigmatized within public life or
to treat them as objects available for visual consumption.” Few are willing
to pander to the desire to gawk. Yet the more modern prohibition against
gazing at the formerly prohibited reproduces its own desire. As Judith
Butler explains,

[O]ne finds oneself wanting to see what one “should not” enjoy seeing,
and now partly to test the thesis that these photos are nothing but
specularization or objectification. One does not, from a critical
perspective, want to accept such a blanket judgment without first
seeing for oneself, so the desire to “see for oneself” is instigated by the
newer prohibition as well. There is in Arbus—and in the discomfort
with her work—always that struggle: a certain solicitation to see
what one should not see.

Is it the original prohibition that accounts for our fascination today?
Are the photographs more irresistible because of the redoubled
prohibition, like some kind of return of the repressed? Does the desire to
see what we should not see make the seeing all that more intriguing?
Would there be any fascination with seeing at all if there had not been

the original prohibition? Does our present fascination require a former
prohibition?

The notorious debates over “camp”—an older, equally ambiguated
and highly contested term of sexual identity—reflect much of this subtle
interaction between norm and prohibition. For some cultural critics, camp
could only exist against the norm. In his response to Susan Sontag’s
essay, “Notes on ‘Camp,’” Andrew Britton proposed that camp could
simply not exist without the conventions of masculinity. Although camp
may define itself precisely in opposition to those conventions of
masculinity, it depends on their continuing to exist. “The camp gay man
declares,” Britton states, “‘Masculinity is an oppressive convention to
which I refuse to conform’; but his non-conformity depends at every point
on the preservation of the convention he ostensibly rejects—in this case, a
general acceptance of what constitutes ‘a man.’” The rejection of the
norm, Britton suggests, requires the norm. Role-playing demands the foil.



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
204 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

“Camp behavior is only recognisable as a deviation from an implied norm,
and without that norm it would cease to exist, it would lack definition. It
does not, and cannot, propose for a moment a radical critique of the norm
itself.” This is so because the camp identity, according to Britton, plays off
the convention.

Part of the vitality of camp, then, is the transgression. “Camp
requires the frisson of transgression, the sense of perversity in relation to
bourgeois norms which characterises the degeneration of the Romantic
impulse in the second half of the nineteenth century, and which
culminates in England with Aestheticism and in France with the
décadence,” Britton writes. “Camp is a house-trained version of the
aristocratic, anarchistic ethic of transgression, a breach of decorum which
no longer even shocks, and which has gone to confirm the existence of a
special category of person—the male homosexual.” This idea of frisson
harks back to Jean Genet—and, before him, to the Surrealist, André
Breton. Genet’s romanticization of the delinquency of homosexuality—of
homosexual rape in Querelle—did not aspire to decriminalization. As
Jean-Paul Sartre writes in his study of Genet, Saint Genet, “Genet does
not want to change anything at all. Do not count on him to criticize
institutions. He needs them, as Prometheus needs his vulture.”

Part of what may be going on is the erotic attraction to the utterly
deviant—but only part. There is far more to desire than the erotic, and
the biological dimensions of homosexuality undermine any simple
association between sexual orientation and the appeal of deviance. Yet
there may well be an erotic dimension to the prohibited. Sheila Jeffreys
quotes a delicious passage from Sarah Schulman’s novel, After Dolores,
where a character says:

It’s too easy to be gay today in New York City. I come from those

times when sexual excitement could only be in hidden places. Sweet

women had to put themselves in constant danger to make love to me.

All my erotic life is concerned with intrigue and secrets. You can’t

understand that these days, not at all. Lesbians will never be that

sexy again.

Lesbians will never be that sexy again. To what extent does the erotic
derive from the forbidden? Glamour magazine reports having conducted,
in partnership with MensHealth.com, a survey of 2793 men to explore
issues of sexual practices. One question they asked was “Why are men so
fixated on having anal sex?” (Who knew?) Forty-seven percent of the
respondents answered “because it’s taboo.” (Twenty-two percent chose
“because it feels great,” and thirty-one percent “because it’s an
accomplishment just talking her into it.”) Does the taboo really account
for the erotic practice? And is the practice really erotic if it is brought on
by taboo, or is it some other kind of desire? Chicago public radio reports
an increase in rates of sexually transmitted diseases. One explanation is

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 205

a lot more experimenting with bisexual relations among teenagers in part
because of the stigma of same-sex intercourse, Survey data from the
period 1988 to 1998 suggests an increase in the percentage of people with
same-sex partners, despite constant levels of “exclusively” homosexual
men and women. The survey data—from the General Social Surveys
conducted by the National Opinion Research Center at the University of
Chicago over the period 1988 to 1998—revealed between a doubling and
tripling of the likelihood of having a same-gender sex partner over the
period (though the number remained low in 1998, 4.1 percent for men and
2.8 percent for women). The increase could not be attributed to changing
demographics, increased urbanization or educational attainment. or
racial or ethnic shifts in the population. Is the increase due to greater
social acceptance of homosexual relations or to the taboo associated with
same-sex relations?

Think of unsafe sex among gay men in urban areas—what is known
as “barebacking,” a term used to describe unprotected anal sex. Or even
more troubling, “bug chasing,” the practice of some gay men of actively
trying to acquire HIV through unprotected same-gender sex. A recent
documentary by filmmaker Louise Hogarth, The Gift, documents the new
development. The title derives “from the term ‘gift givers,’ or HIV-positive
men who give ‘the gift’ of HIV infection.” In the documentary, “a soft-
spoken, Midwestern college youth named Doug Hitzel tearfully recalls
what drove him to become a ‘bug chaser’—an HIV-negative man who
seeks to be infected with the virus that causes AIDS.” The attraction to
danger and to deviance must play a role in these practices.

Criminality, prohibition, danger—seduction. As Jack Katz powerfully
demonstrates in Seductions of Crime, the thrill of breaking the law can
produce an emotional high. Katz describes in compelling detail the thrill-
seeking of some of his students who shoplift. He shows, through their own
words, how merchandise in stores become so much more irresistible
because they are forbidden.

There we were, in the most lucrative department Mervyn’s had to
offer... . Once my eyes caught sight of the beautiful white and blue
necklaces alongside the counter, a spark inside me was once again
ignited. ... Those exquisite puka necklaces were calling out to me
“Take me! Wear me! I can be yours!”

It is the criminality of shoplifting that makes the jewelry so
attractive, the theft so thrilling, and the object so compelling. One student

»_ explains: “Every time I would drop something into my bag, my heart

would be pounding and I could feel this tremendous excitement, a sort of
rush, go through me.” Another student reports, “The experience was
almost orgasmic for me. There was a build-up of tension as I
contemplated the danger of the forbidden act, then a rush of excitement
at the moment of committing the crime, and finally a delicious sense of



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
206 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

release.” Yet another recalls: “It’s really funny being 23 years old now and
in writing this, I can’t stop feeling how thrilling it was, certainly a feeling
much like the anticipation of sex.”

The same prohibition helps make guns so seductive to detained
youths, gangsta-rap so exciting for suburban youths, and pink underwear
so attractive to adults. Pink underwear? Sheriff Arpaio of Maricopa
County, Arizona, started issuing pink boxers to his jail inmates in order
to stem vandalism of underwear stock—Arpaio reported losing more than
$40,000 worth of purloined underwear in a nine-month period in 1995.
The pink boxers became such a phenomenon, that Arpaio started selling
the pink boxers on the free market for $10 per boxers. According to the
Phoenix New Times writing in 1995, “Souvenir versions of the boxer
shorts have become all the rage. Volunteers in the 2,500-member Sheriffs
Posse have sold 3,000 pairs of pink skivvies, grossing $30,000” in 1995
alone.

But there is more to homosexual erotic attraction than the forbidden,
and there must also be more to the forbidden than erotic attraction. There
is something else, something deeper about the attraction of deviance,
about the urge to resist hegemonic power, about the felt need to “question
authority,” about the desire to “subvert the dominant paradigm.” How do
these emotions, desires, urges, personalities depend on, relate to, derive
from prohibitory norms? Sheila Jeffreys writes about “the lesbian
romance with outlaw status.” She suggests that “[t]he lesbian’s status as
outlaw is, for many lesbians, one important source of the satisfaction to
be gained from lesbianism.... [Llesbianism offers the glamour and
excitement of outlawry.” As Ruby Rich explains,

For many women, the drive toward lesbianism was not only sexual
but also a will to be the outlaw, the same drive that moved other
subcultures, like the Beats, to cross to the ‘wrong’ side of the tracks,
if only metaphorically. Thus, there was a very real sense of loss
associated with the hard-won respectability: a loss of taboo and with
it eroticism.

In fact, some of these critics argue that, as lesbianism became more
acceptable, the appeal of the outlaw led to “outlaw sexuality’—
sadomasochism. “Where once outlawry could be assured simply by
adoption of lesbian sexuality and lifestyle it seems that the apparently
greater social possibilities gained for lesbians by lesbian liberation have
made things too easy,” thus leading to the new “sexual outlaw” lesbians
engaging in S/M. “A political movement of sexual outlawry has developed
in the eighties amongst lesbians of which the glamourising of prostitution
is but one part. The new lesbian politics of transgression is an offshoot of
an older tradition in gay male culture and politics.”

The outlaw impulse, Jeffreys suggests, is tied closely to the attraction
to the lesbian bar and bar culture—places that are often described as

EE

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 207

“dingy” or “decadent.” “Lesbian bars,” at least in London, “have
traditionally been sited in cellars or basements with backed up toilets
crush, smoke, and terrible food,” likely in order to escape the attention of

homophobes. In part, what may
. . h account for this attraction is Jeffreys
?

nostalgie de la boue, an expression coined in the end of century
decadence of the 1890s to denote a fascination with ‘low-life’ amongst
the bourgeoisie. This fascination was acted out by middle-class
straight men mainly through consorting with prostitutes in London
bars. se Oscar Wilde was fascinated with his favourite version of
boue ie. use of young working class male prostitutes and drugs and
not Just in practice but in art. In The Picture of Dorian Gray Wilde
painted a romantically decadent picture of the opium den.

The opium den of the late nineteenth century pl.
mystical role in the work of Charles Baudelaire. ‘The Yrbidden the
haunting pleasures of escape, the fascination with spleen, run through
Les Fleurs du Mal. The romanticized Bohemian life of the late nineteenth
century cohabited parasitically alongside, within, and against the
dominant bourgeois society. It fed off the moral and legal opprobrium of
e bourgeoisie. It needed i iety i
the pow in salinity bourgeois society in the same way that camp

_Perhaps the best way to understand the constitutive dimensions of
deviance is to listen carefully to the more radical activists today—the
second wave of more militant, radical, younger queer activists, sometimes
called “post-queer,” Queercore, or pomo-queer. What do they seek from
deviance? In the introduction to their edited volume, PomoSexuals, Carol
Queen and Lawrence Schimel write: ,

Pomosexuality lives in the space in which all other non-binary forms
of sexual and gender identity reside—a boundary-free zone in which
fences are crossed for the fun of it, or simply because some of us can’t
be fenced in. It challenges either/or categorizations in favor of largely
unmapped possibility and the intense charge that comes with
transgression. It acknowledges the pleasure of that transgression, as

well as the need to transgress limits that do not make room for all of
us. :

Writing about Queercore, Dennis Cooper suggests:

Based on everything I’ve read, heard, interpreted, and felt they are
disappointed that so many lesbians and gays have accepted the
heterosexual model of normalcy, reiterating all of society’s mistakes
in Disneyesque ghettos like West Hollywood, the Castro, the Village.
The new queers accept that assimilation [is] irreversible for much of
lesbian/gay culture at this point. So they’re trying to construct an
alternate culture in and around it. They don’t pretend for a moment



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
208 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

that they can alter the dominant culture—gay or straight. They don’t
want to. All they really want is to be taken seriously. And left alone.

Left alone. Could that possibly mean left alone while leaving in place
the legal prohibition against homosexual relations?

In the U.K., there developed a group called “Homocult-perverters of
culture” based in Manchester in the early 1990s that positioned itself in
opposition to the queer activist group OutRage as “too queer to be
OutRaged.” In their poster, they declare that the terms “lesbian and gay’
describe:

Persils fucked up by privilege who wish to blend with sick society
rather than change it.... OutRage is a cosy sham. You can only be
outraged by what surprises you. It’s no surprise to common queers
that there is no justice for us. We are not outraged. WE ARE
DEFIANT.

This defiance is a form of radical critique that goes beyond mere
reform. It aims instead at “radical social change: change which strikes at
the ‘root,’ at the ‘source,’ at the ‘structural foundations’ of the social
‘system,’ pushing change forward towards transformation of the social
totality rather than mere reformation of even conservation of this existing
system.” There are more theorized statements of this position—or
perhaps less radical positions that nevertheless seek more than reform.
Cathy Cohen expresses this position in her article Punks, Bulidaggers,
and Welfare Queens: The Radical Potential of Queer Politics?, where she
too laments the failed potential of queer politics. She argues that “a truly
radical or transformative politics has not resulted from queer activism,”
in large part because “instead of destabilizing the assumed categories and
binaries of sexual identity, queer politics has served to reinforce simple
dichotomies between heterosexual and everything ‘queer.’” What has
been left unchallenged is “an understanding of the ways in which power
informs and constitutes privileged and marginalized subjects on both
sides of this dichotomy.” Cohen argues for a “new politics”:

I envision a politics where one’s relation to power, and not some
homogenized identity, is privileged in determining one’s political
comrades. I’m talking about a politics where the nonnormative and
marginal position of punks, bulldaggers, and welfare queens, for
example, is the basis for progressive transformative coalition work.
Thus, if there is any truly radical potential to be found in the idea of
queerness and the practice of queer politics, it would seem to be
located in its ability to create a space in opposition to dominant
norms, a space where transformational political work can begin.

The thrust of this “new politics” is opposition to dominant norms by
all those “who stand on the outside of the dominant constructed norm of
state-sanctioned white middle-and upper-class heterosexuality.” It

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 209

focuses on a close analysis of “the intersection of systems of oppression.”
It proposes a more expansive understanding of political coalitions that
embraces other marginalized identities based on race, class, etc. It is a
politics different from liberal or civil rights—frameworks that are
ineffective at confronting homophobia, Cohen argues. Civil rights, Cohen
asserts, “do not change the social order in dramatic ways; they change
only the privileges of the group asserting those rights.” The reason is that
civil rights movements seek only access to the dominant framework, they
do not challenge the framework of rights. But it is that framework of
rights—not the lack of civil rights—that produces the systematic
homophobia. It is “the nature and construction of the political, legal,
economic, sexual, racial and family systems within which we live.”

The problem, of course, is that Cohen simply substitutes “white
middle-and upper-class heterosexual” for “heterosexual,” without in any
way problematizing the category, the idea of class, or the concept of
heterosexuality itself. It seems that the more theorized the expression of
the radical position, the less well it captures the positive underbelly of
deviance. There has to be something more than simple class or identity
warfare. There must exist a space for a genuine non-assimilationist, non-
reformist, nihilist, hedonistic appreciation of marginalization.

Perhaps the best or only way to express this politics, then, is through
a pastiche of post-queer venom. It has something to do with “the intense
charge that comes with transgression and the pleasure of that
transgression.” It involves “an alternate culture in and around it, to be
taken seriously, and left alone.” It is a “boundary-free zone in which fences
are crossed for the fun of it, or simply because some of us can’t be fenced in.
It challenges either/or categorizations in favor of largely unmapped
possibility.” It is nostalgic, transgressive, full of hope and hopeless at the
same time. It is a politics of spleen—an expression that refers back and
captures the uncomfortable co-dependence of nineteenth-century
Bohemia on bourgeois law and society.

I have endeavored here to explore the constitutive, dark side of the
penal sanction. There are, of course, other friendly but skeptical accounts
of Lawrence—but they only scratch the surface. There is the backlash
argument—the incrementalist argument against Lawrence-type
litigation. Some pro-gay activists warn that the Lawrence decision may
Scare many away from the prospect of gay marriage or create a more
hostile environment for gay men and lesbian women. And of course, there

» have been a number of judicial decisions rendered since Lawrence, as well

as polling data, that flame these debates. With each new ruling, with
each new poll, there are loud waves of “I told you so” rolling through the
legal academy—on both sides of the debate. The Eleventh Circuit upheld
Florida’s adoption laws which preclude adoption by any person who
engages in homosexual activity. A Kansas court of appeals upheld a



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
210 SExUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

disparate sentencing scheme that punishes far more severely an older
teenager when he engages in sex with a same-sex younger voonaeer as
opposed to a different-sex younger teenager. The Massachusetts upreme
Judicial Court, in two separate decisions, has required same-sex
marriage, not just civil union, And the polling data reflect a backlash 2
public opinion regarding both whether homosexual relations shou e
legal—the Lawrence issue—and whether the state should allow same-sex
marriage—at least in the short term.

But the backlash critique—whether right or wrong—still aspires to
the elimination of criminal sodomy laws. It is a strategic argument, not
an outlaw argument. The same is true of the other friendly but. skeptical
critique, the accommodation argument—namely the idea that civil rig! ‘s
litigation never really challenges the anti-gay norms. These argumen:
all aspire to a liberation ideal that does not necessarily embrace deviance.
I have sought instead to explore the positive side of the deviant impulse.

II.

With all this in place, it may be possible to reconstruct Justice
Scalia’s incendiary dissent, to tweak it so that it reflects more accurately
the nuances and subtleties of our contemporary sex wars. To begin,
Justice Scalia is certainly right that there is a culture war in this country
that encompasses, among other things, the trilogy of sexuality, family,
and morality/religion—what I would call a war of sexual projects. Justice
Scalia is also right that the Supreme Court partakes in the culture wars
in Lawrence. The Court’s engagement, however, is by no means new or a
departure from some neutral role as arbiter of the democratic rules O'
engagement. The Supreme Court has been a central player in t ese
culture wars since at least the mid-twentieth century. There is a ric’
tradition of gay-rights cases going back to the 1950s. Joyce Murdoch and
Deb Price chronicle the history of Supreme Court cases affecting the
rights of gay men and lesbian women in their excellent book, Courting
Justice: Gay Men and Lesbians v. the Supreme Court. They trace the start
of the gay-rights lineage of cases back to ONE v. Olesen, a 1957 Supreme
Court ruling on the censorship, on obscenity grounds, of the nation’s first
homosexual publication, ONE—where the court ruled in favor of the gay
publication and imposed the same standard of obscenity on homosexual
as heterosexual material. Murdoch and Prince chronicle over eighteen
cases decided on the merits—and list in an appendix over eighty cases
including important certiorari denials—that dealt with homosexuality.
These included cases addressing the deportation of immigrants for
homosexuality, employment discrimination against homosexuals, the
right of teachers to advocate gay rights issues, and the use of the term
“Olympics” for the Gay Olympic Games, as well as the more well-known
recent cases involving the exclusion of a gay group from Boston’s St.
Patrick’s Day Parade, Colorado’s anti-gay Amendment 2, and the Boy

SEC. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 211

Scouts of America’s exclusion of gays. Moreover, the court has addressed
the issue of homosexual sodomy on several previous occasions, including
Wade v. Buchanan in 1971, Wainwright v. Stone in 1973, Doe v. City of
Richmond in 1976, New York v. Uplinger in 1984, and, of course, Bowers
v. Hardwick in 1986. Several of the justices had dealt with homosexuality
cases as well before acceding to the Supreme Court. Justice Kennedy, for
instance, while serving on the Ninth Circuit, had ruled in five cases
involving homosexual issues and had written the decision in a case
upholding Navy regulations that banned homosexuals.

Moreover, the justices themselves actively partake in the culture
wars, not only through their written opinions, but also and importantly
through their speeches. Justice Scalia is notorious for making provocative
statements in speeches. As noted earlier, he has taken the fight over
homosexual sodomy beyond the courthouse. He has also made comments
about other cultural conflicts, including the controversy over the Pledge of
Allegiance which has caused him to recuse himself from hearing that
case. Justice Scalia is very much of a cultural warrior, and he is, of
course, not alone. Justices O’Connor and Ginsburg have made politically-
engaged comments about the death penalty, and Justices Kennedy and
Breyer about mandatory minimum sentencing.

To be sure, in his dissenting opinion Justice Scalia maintains that
the court only participates in the culture wars when it “depart[s] from its
role of assuring, as neutral observer, that the democratic rules of
engagement are observed.” Justice Scalia contends, in the sodomy
context, that finding a federal constitutional right is partaking in the
culture war, but leaving it to the democratic process is not. It is not
entirely clear whether Justice Scalia is being completely sincere in this
respect, given that much of his dissenting opinion is turned over to
arguing that Roe v. Wade should be overruled—in other words, givenithat
he too, like the majority which he criticizes, is playing fast and loose with
the standard of stare decisis. But if sincere, then Justice Scalia’s
argument definitely needs to be tweaked because it fundamentally
misunderstands the concept of “war” and fails to appreciate that any
decision about the rule of decision to apply in the sodomy context—
whether to accept legal moralism or impose a harm principle—represents
a judicial choice. In this respect, Toni Massaro is‘right: “The Court in
Lawrence did step into a cultural fray, to be sure. But no matter how the
Court resolved Lawrence, it would have been engaged in that fray... .”

The ultimate decision about which rule to follow is itself a choice and
is never neutral. Justice Scalia misses a basic existentialist insight.
Bowers itself was not neutral: the decision to let morality simpliciter
satisfy rational basis review—without a showing of harm—is itself a
loaded choice. It requires continuing to buy into legal moralism. It is not
dictated. Instead it reaffirms. The same is true of adopting or reaffirming



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
212 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cx. 2

a harm principle. Requiring a showing of harm in order to satisfy rational
basis review is not a neutral act. It may well be the case that, for many
years, majoritarian morality was a valid basis for penal prohibition. But
each time the court decided to keep it that way, the court had the option
of changing the decisional rule, of inching toward a harm principle. Every
time it chose not to, it chose not to. To suggest that the court would not
engage in the culture war by leaving the democratic process to its own
devices is blinking reality.

Moreover, in this culture war, the very rules of war are at stake. The
court is not an outside observer overseeing the sex wars. The court is not
a referee, because it is precisely the rules of the game that are being
fought over. The rule whether there is foul play—whether a party, like
the state, has overreached or gone off-sides—is up for grabs. Justice
Scalia is, in effect, mixing metaphors and in the process, forgetting that
this is a war, not a refereed game. The way to think about this conflict is
not in terms of a formal game with established rules where the court is
there to make sure that the game is being played properly. The way to
think about this is in war terms: there are no rules, there is no arbiter,
there is no referee. And when a case is filed in federal court, the federal
courts inextricably takes sides. They have no option not to participate.
Dismissing the claim under Rule 12(b)(6) is no more neutral than ruling
on the merits of the constitutional argument. Granting certiorari, denying
certiorari—these are not neutral acts.

Next, Justice Scalia is undoubtedly right that the majority’s decision
in Lawrence is indeed shaped by the legal-professional complex within
which the Supreme Court exists and operates. In claiming that the
decision “is the product of a law-profession culture,” Justice Scalia is
making an accurate statement. In identifying the legal academy as an
important institution in shaping the legal-professional complex, Justice
Scalia is also right. And in claiming that the law-profession culture “has
largely signed on to the so-called homosexual agenda,” Justice Scalia is, to
be sure, painting with a broad brush, perhaps too broad a brush, but
there is nevertheless a grain of truth in what he says. The legal-
professional structure that most closely touches the Supreme Court—
namely, the elite legal academy that produces not only most of the
justices, but also most of their law clerks, most of the constitutional
commentators, and many of the regular oral advocates—tends ta be
liberal, equal-rights-oriented and, at least superficially, gay friendly. But
it is a far stretch from this to say that the law profession has “signed on”
to the pro-gay-rights position. A more fair characterization is that, despite
patches of extreme to mild homophobia, the legal profession may be
slightly more tolerant of gays and lesbians than other identifiable sectors
of society. It would be difficult—though fascinating—to get more precise
than that and to calibrate exactly how gay-friendly the legal profession is

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 213

compared to the medical profession, the psychiatric profession, the
ministry, commercial bankers or accountants.

Justice Scalia is right that the Court and its members are deeply
embedded in a network of institutions, social networks, practices and
discourses that shape the way that they reason, deliberate and judge; the
way that they write opinions and express themselves; and the way that
they reproduce law clerks and lawyers. The justices themselves are the
product of the elite American legal academy, sporting law degrees from
Harvard, Stanford, Yale, Columbia, and Northwestern. Many of the
justices were faculty members at elite law schools before acceding to the
bench. Justice Scalia, for instance, was a professor at the University of
Chicago, and the University of Virginia before that, and in that capacity,
was himself at least indirectly associated with the American Association
of Law Schools. Justice Ginsburg was a law professor at Columbia Law
School, Justice Breyer a professor at Harvard Law School, and Justice
Stevens taught as well at Northwestern and the University of Chicago.
Their closest employees—their elbow clerks with whom they spend the
most time—are hand-picked from an elite group of top-ranking law
students from the country’s elite law schools. From 1997 through 2003,
Justice Scalia has hired at least six Harvard Law grads, five University of
Chicago Law grads, two from Columbia, two from Notre Dame, and one
each from Yale, Stanford, Boalt, New York University, Michigan,
Northwestern and Penn. Justice Scalia is certainly not alone. During the
2001 and 2002 Terms alone, the nine justices hired a combined total of
seventeen Harvard law graduates, eleven Yale law graduates, nine
University of Chicago law graduates, five from Columbia, three each from
Stanford and New York University, and another twenty-one graduates
from an assortment of elite law schools. Most of the justices are on
speaking circuits that take them frequently back to law schools, and
naturally they socialize with elite Washington, D.C. lawyers. Justice
Scalia, for instance, is a regular at what has been called “one of
Washington’s most exclusive poker games,” which includes the Chief
Justice, William Rehnquist, and elite D.C. lawyers such as Robert S.
Bennett (the personal attorney to President Bill Clinton and numerous
other cabinet members, such as former defense secretary Caspar
Naan and Leonard Garment (counselor to President Richard

ixon).

In addition, beginning in the early-to mid-1990s, gay and lesbian law
clerks and former law clerks began coming out to their justices in part as

*. an effort to normalize homosexual relations at the Supreme Court. Bill

Araiza, law clerk to Justice Souter during the 1991-92 Term, reportedly
was committed to coming out to any justice who hired him, wanting to
make sure that the justice did not, reportedly in his own words, “walk
away thinking he’s never met a gay person.” So, in spring 1992, Araiza
told Justice Souter “very bluntly” that he was gay. Professor Chai



FRoM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
214 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu, 2

Feldblum of Georgetown University, who clerked for Justice Blackmun
during the 1986-87 Term, recounts coming out to Justice Blackmun in
1992, reportedly coaxing herself in the following terms: Come on, Chai.
You know he really likes you. You know it makes a difference when
people know someone who’s gay. You should do it.” According to Murdoch
and Price, “Feldblum was one of a number of current and former gay
clerks who by the early 1990s were coming out to justices. Michael
Conley and J. Paul Oetken were openly gay when they clerked for Justice
Blackmun in 1990-91 and 1993-94 respectively, referring openly to their
respective partners as “boyfriend” or “partner.” In fact, by 1998, Justice
Blackmun included in his list of “office family’ members the same-sex
partners of Feldblum, Conley, Oetken and Al Lauber. According to
Murdoch and Price, “some [gay and/or lesbian clerks] have taken their
partners to court reunions.” At least one justice has had a male law clerk
who has had a child in a same-sex relationship and has included the child

among the chamber’s “grand clerks.”

Murdoch and Price report that, going back to the mid 1950s, “We
found 22 gay former Supreme Court clerks—18 gay men and four
lesbians.... (Another gay man and a lesbian clerked for appeals court
judges who later became justices).” However, practically all of those clerks
were closeted during their clerkships, and the prevalence of closeted gay
law clerks does not guarantee a gay-friendly vote—Justice Powell's
notorious swing vote in Hardwick is testament to that. As Murdoch and
Price emphasize, “[t]he impact of gay Supreme Court clerks has been very
muted until very recent years because clerks tended to come out only
after the justice for whom they’d worked had left the court.

The role of gay and lesbian clerks—closeted or open—may be offset
by the role of more conservative chamber colleagues. The Hardwick case
is a notorious case study. Justice Powell was the swing vote—the fifth
vote that would decide the case—and originally voted for Michael
Hardwick. That term, Justice Powell had four clerks: Carter Cabell
Chinnis Jr., a self-identified gay man who was in the closet at the time of
his clerkship, a graduate of Yale Law School, and now a partner in a
leading law firm, Mayer, Brown, Rowe, and Maw, in Washington, D.C.;
Michael Mosman, a conservative Mormon from Idaho, married at the
time with three children, a graduate of Brigham Young University’s law
school, recently appointed by President George W. Bush to the federal
district court in Portland, Oregon; Anne Coughlin, a graduate of New
York University School of Law, now professor of law at the University of
Virginia; and William Stuntz, a graduate of the University of Virginia
School of Law, now professor at Harvard Law School. (Note, the
knowledge/power dimensions should be obvious even to the uninitiated
reader).

SEc. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 215

Justice Powell assigned the case to Michael Mosman, his more
conservative, Mormon clerk. Much controversy surrounds the exact role of
Mosman still today. It was in fact raised during his confirmation for
federal district court in Oregon. What is known is that Mosman wrote a
twelve-page bench memo for Powell dated March 29, 1986, which Powell
received on the Saturday before oral argument. In the bench memo,
Mosman argued against Michael Hardwick on due process grounds: “The
right to privacy calls for the greatest judicial restraint, invalidating only
those laws that impinge on those values that are basic to our country,”
Mosman wrote. “I do not think that this case involves any such values. I
recommend reversal [of the Eleventh Circuit decision].” “Personal sexual
freedom is a newcomer among our national values,” Mosman emphasized,
“and may well be, as discussed earlier, a temporary national mood that
fades.” On the memo in the Powell archives, a hand-written note reads:
“Well written as usual. Mike would find no fundamental right.” In a
memo received by Justice Powell on April 1, 1986, in response to Justice
Powell’s suggestion to Mosman that there may be room for protection of
“homosexual relationships that resemble marriage,” Mosman wrote to
Justice Powell:

I think this is not a good approach, for several reasons. .. . [T]he kind
of marriage that our society has traditionally protected is
heterosexual, not homosexual, It would be bootstrapping to say that
marriage is protected because of our history and tradition, and then
add that homosexual relationships are protected because they
“resemble” marriage.

Justice Powell originally voted, in conference after oral argument, to
affirm Judge Johnson’s Eleventh Circuit decision for Michael Hardwick.
He based his decision at the time on the Eighth Amendment, along the
lines of Robinson v. California: it would be cruel and unusual to punish
someone for being gay. The opinion writing was assigned to Justice
Blackmun by Justice Stevens, with Justices Powell, Brennan, and
Marshall in majority. By letter dated April 3, 1986, Chief Justice Burger
lobbied Powell to change his vote, declaring that “[t]his case presents for
me the most far reaching issue of those 30 years [that I have sat on the
bench].” Whether influenced or not by Chief Justice Burger's letter,
Justice Powell switched his vote pre-draft and ‘joined Chief Justice
Burger, who now assigned the majority opinion to Justice White. Mosman
may also have had a role in convincing Justice Powell to join Justice
White’s opinion and minimize his concurrence. The extent of Mosman’s
influence on Justice Powell will never be known. What is clear, though, is
that Justice Powell’s actions were not the product of gay clerks or gay-
leaning law schools.

Nevertheless, it is probably fair to say that, by and large, within legal
academic and law profession circles, homosexuality became relatively



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
216 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

more tolerated over the decade or decades preceding Lawrence—or, at the
very least, that the centrists on the Supreme Court have become more
gay-friendly. The decision in Hardwick itself was a close call—closer than
we tend to think. Had Justice Powell not changed his vote, Justice
White’s opinion would have been the dissent. But Lawrence was much
less of a close call. From Hardwick to Lawrence, the court composition
changed significantly. Justices Rehnquist, Stevens, and O’Connor were
the only justices who sat on both cases. The new justices included Justices
Scalia, Kennedy, Souter, Thomas, Ginsburg, and Breyer. If you stack
them up against each other, substituting relatively comparable political
ideologies on homosexual sodomy, the game card would look something
like the following:

Hardwick Lawrence Hardwick Lawrence
pro-gay pro-gay pro-state pro-state
Stevens > Stevens Rehnquist — Rehnquist

Blackmun -> Souter Burger > Scalia
Brennan -—> Ginsburg White. > Thomas
Marshall —> Breyer

O’Connor << O’Connor
Kennedy < Powell

Hardwick may have been a close call, but Lawrence, it turns out, was
not: a strong five-person majority with a change in vote by Justice
O'Connor (on other grounds). The additional votes of Justices Kennedy
and Souter—liberal replacements on this issue—made all the difference.
If you eliminate the extremes at both ends of the political spectrum—
Justices Stevens, Brennan, Marshall, Ginsburg and Breyer at one end,
and Justices Rehnquist, Burger, White, Scalia and Thomas at the other—
then the court’s center has moved to the left on gay-rights issues. It was
composed of Justices Blackmun, O’Connor and Powell in Hardwick. It is
now composed of Justices O'Connor, Kennedy and Souter—clearly a more
gay-friendly center court.

None of this is to suggest that the legal profession or the court is
overly sensitive to gay issues. To the contrary, at every turn there are
significant disadvantages in terms of contacts and opportunities. Justice
Scalia, after all, is not going duck hunting with Evan Wolfson, the former
director of the marriage project at Lambda. And there are recurring
incidents of homophobia and prejudice. This is still a court that is lead by
a Chief Justice who, in 1978, “publicly compared homosexuality to a
contagious disease requiring a quarantine.” But still, it is an institutional
and practice milieu that has come to some form of negotiated existence
that tolerates and in some cases affirmatively protects the interests of gay
men and lesbian women more than other social networks.

SEC. C IN SEARCH OF MEANINGS AND LIMITS 217

Justice Scalia’s last point—that the six-member majority in Lawrence
largely signs on to the liberal pro-gay-rights agenda, defined as the
project to eliminate the moral opprobrium attached to homosexual
practices—requires the most reworking. On the surface, it is right. The
Lawrence decision is gay-friendly. Spending the night in jail and leaving
the station house with a criminal arrest for a consensual intimate act is,
from a gay-friendly perspective, abhorrent. Insofar as the criminal law
shapes the society that we live in and distributes status, power, and
wealth, the Lawrence decision helps to neutralize material harms to gay
men and lesbian women. The consequences of criminalization and
marginalization are material: homosexual partners may not get health
benefits, testamentary succession rights, or an opportunity to adopt the
child they are raising. As Nan Hunter emphasizes,

[slodomy laws have functioned as the lynchpin for denial of
employment, housing and custody or visitation rights; even when we
have proved that there was no nexus between homosexuality and job
skills or parenting ability, we have had the courts throw the ‘habitual
criminal’ label at us as a reason to deny relief.

In this sense, gay men and lesbian women won a major battle. But in
order to understand how Lawrence happened and what it tells us about
future sex wars, it is critical to dispense with the notion of a “homosexual
agenda” and to explore, instead, the proliferation of sexual projects in
contemporary society, to examine the surprising alliances that form on
sex matters, and to reconsider all the different interests at stake. This

may lead us, in the process, to revisit exactly who won and who lost in
Lawrence.

IV.

In the end, the politics of spleen may be fundamentally unstable in
the criminal law context. Maybe the penal sanction, punishment, ' and
state coercion change everything. After all, who in their right mind would
want to live in fear of criminal prosecution? And even if they did, how on
earth would they justify imposing that fear on others? That would be
utterly deviant. Perhaps the politics of spleen, in reality, is nothing more
than a coping mechanism—a way of making the best of a terrible
situation. The Warsaw ghetto, some might say,‘may also have had
positive, constitutive effects—so what? Or maybe the politics of spleen, by
definition, simply cannot willingly embrace the prohibition. It may be
internally incoherent to choose criminalization, to will the oppression: the
transgressive impulse may not allow for the prohibition norm to be self-
inflicted. In this sense, the politics of spleen may be unspeakable—and for
that reason, unspoken.213

213Ty all my extensive research, I have not identified one academic or activist willing to
advance, in writing, a gay-friendly position opposed to Lawrence that embraces the
criminalization of homosexual sodomy.

EEE



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
218 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH, 2

But this leaves me with a nagging sense that the discourse of
equality, of justice, of non-discrimination against gay men and lesbian
women serves to render more palatable a gradual extension of the
traditional heterosexual-marriage model. The surface discourse on
Lawrence is that gays were repressed, coerced, punished for their sexual
orientation, and that the larger society has now liberated gays from the
oppression of the homophobic state sanction. The question is, has society
instead simply made the world safe for the heterosexual-marrie -with-
children model? Under the cover of a discourse of justice, have we ret
reshaped our institutions and practices in a hetero-mono mold? Instead o:
liberating homosexual relations, perhaps the law has figured out 8 better
way to administer, to manage, to shape gays. Thomas Grey points in t is
direction in his marvelous essay, Eros, Civilization and the Burger Court:

For [the gay community] to be governed effectively, it must be
recognized as legitimate. Perhaps something like marriage will have
to be recognized for homosexual couples, not because they need it for
their happiness (though they may), but because society needs it to
avoid the insecurity and instability generated by the existence in its
midst of a permanent and influential subculture outside the law.

Could that possibly be right? Some part of it? Some fraction? It is
hard to know. What is clear, though, is that if it is right, then we do need
to probe further, to dig deeper, to explore, again, the politics of spleen.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Does Lawrence mean that laws against fornication (traditionally
defined as heterosexual intercourse between two unmarried individuals) are
also unconstitutional?

2. What is the effect of Lawrence on laws against solicitation and
importuning?

8. These materials on the regulation of sexuality are all about notions
of individual autonomy and the importance of sexual expression to individual
life. In this sense, they raise important questions about sexual identity and
its role in creating the self. Notice that this is nowhere in the Hart-Devlin
debate and as we will see, it is nowhere in Chapter 3 on drugs. What is it
about sexuality that triggers these identity issues—when other similar
contexts do not seem to?

NN NNY_n EO” oe

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 219
D. SAME-SEX MARRIAGE

UNITED STATES Vv. WINDSOR

Supreme Court of the United States, 2013.
570 U.S. ___, 183 S.Ct. 2675,

JUSTICE KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.

Two women then resident in New York were married in a lawful
ceremony in Ontario, Canada, in 2007. Edith Windsor and Thea Spyer
returned to their home in New York City. When Spyer died in 2009, she
left her entire estate to Windsor. Windsor sought to claim the estate tax
exemption for surviving spouses, She was barred from doing so, however,
by a federal law, the Defense of Marriage Act, which excludes a same-sex
partner from the definition of “spouse” as that term is used in federal
statutes. Windsor paid the taxes but filed suit to challenge the
constitutionality of this provision. The United States District Court and
the Court of Appeals ruled that this portion of the statute is
unconstitutional and ordered the United States to pay Windsor a refund.

This Court granted certiorari and now affirms the judgment in Windsor’s
favor.

I

In 1996, as some States were beginning to consider the concept of
Same-sex marriage, and before any State had acted to permit it, Congress
enacted the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA), 110 Stat. 2419. DOMA
contains two operative sections: Section 2, which has not been challenged
here, allows States to refuse to recognize same-sex marriages performed
under the laws of other States. Section 3 is at issue here. It amends the
Dictionary Act in Title 1, § 7, of the United States Code to provide a

federal definition of “marriage” and “spouse.” Section 3 of DOMA provides
as follows:

“In determining the meaning of any Act of Congress, or of any
ruling, regulation, or interpretation of the various administrative
bureaus and agencies of the United States, the word ‘marriage’
means only a legal union between one man and one woman as
husband and wife, and the word ‘spouse’ refers only to a person of the
opposite sex who is a husband or a wife.”

The definitional provision does not by its terms forbid States from
enacting laws permitting same-sex marriages or civil unions or providing

», State benefits to residents in that status. The enactment’s comprehensive
definition of marriage for purposes of all federal statutes and other

regulations or directives covered by its terms, however, does control over
1,000 federal laws in which marital or spousal status is addressed as a
matter of federal law.



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
220 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

Edith Windsor and Thea Spyer met in New York City in 1963 and
began a long-term relationship. Windsor and Spyer registered as domestic
partners when New York City gave that right to same-sex couples in
1993. Concerned about Spyer’s health, the couple made the 2007 trip to
Canada for their marriage, but they continued to reside in New York
City. The State of New York deems their Ontario marriage to be a valid
one.

Spyer died in February 2009, and left her entire estate to Windsor.
Because DOMA denies federal recognition to same-sex spouses, Windsor
did not qualify for the marital exemption from the federal estate tax,
which excludes from taxation “any interest in property which passes or
has passed from the decedent to his surviving spouse.” Windsor paid
$363,053 in estate taxes and sought a refund. The Internal Revenue
Service denied the refund, concluding that, under DOMA, Windsor was
not a “surviving spouse.” Windsor commenced this refund suit in the
United States District Court for the Southern District of New York. She
contended that DOMA violates the guarantee of equal protection, as
applied to the Federal Government through the Fifth Amendment.* * *

[Discussion of question of justiciability. The Court holds that it has
jurisdiction to consider the merits of the case].* anal

Til

When at first Windsor and Spyer longed to marry, neither New York
nor any other State granted them that right. After waiting some years, in
2007 they traveled to Ontario to be married there. It seems fair to
conclude that, until recent years, many citizens had not even considered
the possibility that two persons of the same sex might aspire to occupy
the same status and dignity as that of a man and woman in lawful
marriage. For marriage between a man and a woman no doubt had been
thought of by most people as essential to the very definition of that term
and to its role and function throughout the history of civilization. That
belief, for many who long have held it, became even more urgent, more
cherished when challenged. For others, however, came the beginnings ofa
new perspective, a new insight. Accordingly some States concluded that
same-sex marriage ought to be given recognition and validity in the law
for those same-sex couples who wish to define themselves by their
commitment to each other. The limitation of lawful marriage to
heterosexual couples, which for centuries had been deemed both
necessary and fundamental, came to be seen in New York and certain
other States as an unjust exclusion.

Slowly at first and then in rapid course, the laws of New York came
to acknowledge the urgency of this issue for same-sex couples who wanted
to affirm their commitment to one another before their children, their
family, their friends, and their community. And so New York recognized
same-sex marriages performed elsewhere; and then it later amended its

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 221

own marriage laws to permit same-sex marriage. New York, in common
with, as of this writing, 11 other States and the District of Columbia,
decided that same-sex couples should have the right to marry and so live
with pride in themselves and their union and in a status of equality with
all other married persons. After a statewide deliberative process that
enabled its citizens to discuss and weigh arguments for and against same-
sex marriage, New York acted to enlarge the definition of marriage to
correct what its citizens and elected representatives perceived to be an
injustice that they had not earlier known or understood.

Against this background of lawful same-sex marriage in some States,
the design, purpose, and effect of DOMA should be considered as the
beginning point in deciding whether it is valid under the Constitution. By
history and tradition the definition and regulation of marriage, as will be
discussed in more detail, has been treated as being within the authority
and realm of the separate States. Yet it is further established that
Congress, in enacting discrete statutes, can make determinations that
bear on marital rights and privileges. Just this Term the Court upheld
the authority of the Congress to pre-empt state laws, allowing a former
spouse to retain life insurance proceeds under a federal program that
gave her priority, because of formal beneficiary designation rules, over
the wife by a second marriage who survived the husband. Hillman v.
Maretta, 569 U.S. __ (2018); see also Ridgway v. Ridgway, 454 U.S. 46
(1981); Wissner v. Wissner, 338 U.S. 655 (1950),* * *

Though these discrete examples establish the constitutionality of
limited federal laws that regulate the meaning of marriage in order to
further federal policy, DOMA has a far greater reach; for it enacts a
directive applicable to over 1,000 federal statutes and the whole realm of
federal regulations. And its operation is directed to a class of persons that
the laws of New York, and of 11 other States, have sought to protect.

In order to assess the validity of that intervention it is necessary to
discuss the extent of the state power and authority over marriage as a
matter of history and tradition. State laws defining and regulating
marriage, of course, must respect the constitutional rights of persons, see,
eg., Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1 (1967); but, subject to those
guarantees, “regulation of domestic relations” is “an area that has long
been regarded as a virtually exclusive province of the States.” Sosna v.
Iowa, 419 U.S. 398 (1975).

The recognition of civil marriages is central to state domestic
relations law applicable to its residents and citizens. The definition of
marriage is the foundation of the State’s broader authority to regulate the
subject of domestic relations with respect to the “[p]rotection of offspring,
property interests, and the enforcement of marital responsibilities.”
“{T]he states, at the time of the adoption of the Constitution, possessed
full power over the subject of marriage and divorce ... [and] the



eee

From ANTI-SoDOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
222 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

Constitution delegated no authority to the Government of the United
States on the subject of marriage and divorce.” Haddock v. Haddock, 201
U.S. 562, 575 (1906).* * *
The States’ interest in defining and regulating the marital relation,
subject to constitutional guarantees, stems from the understanding that
marriage is more than a routine classification for purposes 0: certam
statutory benefits. Private, consensual sexual intimacy between two al Wl
persons of the same sex may not be punished by the State, and it can
form “but one element in a personal bond that is more enduring.
Lawrence v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 567 (2003). By its recognition of ie
validity of same-sex marriages performed in other jurisdictions and ‘ on
by authorizing same-sex unions and same-sex marriages, New Yor
sought to give further protection and dignity to that bond. For same-se
couples who wished to be married, the State acted to give their aw: uu
conduct a lawful status. This status 1s a far-reaching lega
acknowledgment of the intimate relationship between two people, 8
relationship deemed by the State worthy of dignity in the community
equal with all other marriages. It _Teflects both the community &
considered perspective on the historical roots of the institution oO!
marriage and its evolving understanding of the meaning of equality.

IV

DOMA seeks to injure the very class New York seeks to protect. By
doing so it violates basic due process and equal protection principle
applicable to the Federal Government. See US. Const., Amdt. ig ‘0 ting
v. Sharpe, 347 U.S. 497 (1954). The Constitution 8 guarantee of equality
“must at the very least mean that a bare congressional desire to harm a
politically unpopular group cannot” justify disparate treatment ae t] at
group. Department of Agriculture v. Moreno, 413 US. 528 (1973). In
determining whether a law is motived by an improper animus or Purpore
“ (djiscriminations of an unusual character’” especially require carefu
consideration. DOMA cannot survive under these principles. ; The
responsibility of the States for the regulation of domestic relations is an
important indicator of the substantial societal impact the State's
classifications have on the daily lives and customs of its people. DOMA’s
unusual deviation from the usual tradition of recognizing and accepting
state definitions of marriage here operates to deprive same-sex couples of
the benefits and responsibilities that come with the federal recognition of
their marriages. This is strong evidence of a law having the purpose and
effect of disapproval of that class. The avowed purpose and practical effect
of the law here in question are to impose a disadvantage, a separate
status, and so a stigma upon all who enter into same-sex marriages made
lawful by the unquestioned authority of the States.

The history of DOMA’s enactment and its own text demonstrate that
interference with the equal dignity of same-sex marriages, a dignity

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 223

conferred by the States in the exercise of their sovereign power, was more
than an incidental effect of the federal statute. It was its essence. The
House Report announced its conclusion that “it is both appropriate and
necessary for Congress to do what it can to defend the institution of
traditional heterosexual marriage. ... H.R. 3396 is appropriately entitled
the ‘Defense of Marriage Act.’ The effort to redefine ‘marriage’ to extend
to homosexual couples is a truly radical proposal that would
fundamentally alter the institution of marriage.” H.R.Rep. No. 104-664,
pp. 12-13 (1996). The House concluded that DOMA expresses “both moral
disapproval of homosexuality, and a moral conviction that heterosexuality
better comports with traditional (especially Judeo-Christian) morality.”
Id., at 16. The stated purpose of the law was to promote an “interest in
protecting the traditional moral teachings reflected in heterosexual-only
marriage laws.” Ibid. Were there any doubt of this far-reaching purpose,
the title of the Act confirms it: The Defense of Marriage.

The arguments put forward by BLAG! are just as candid about the
congressional purpose to influence or interfere with state sovereign
choices about who may be married. As the title and dynamics of the bill
indicate, its purpose is to discourage enactment of state same-sex
marriage laws and to restrict the freedom and choice of couples married
under those laws if they are enacted. The congressional goal was “to put a
thumb on the scales and influence a state’s decision as to how to shape its
own marriage laws.” Massachusetts, 682 F.3d, at 12-18. The Act’s
demonstrated purpose is to ensure that if any State decides to recognize
same-sex marriages, those unions will be treated as second-class
marriages for purposes of federal law. This raises a most serious question
under the Constitution’s Fifth Amendment.

DOMA’s operation in practice confirms this purpose. When New York
adopted a law to permit same-sex marriage, it sought to eliminate
inequality; but DOMA frustrates that objective through a system-wide
enactment with no identified connection to any particular area of federal
law. DOMA writes inequality into the entire United States Code. The
particular case at hand concerns the estate tax, but DOMA is more than a
simple determination of what should or should not be allowed as an
estate tax refund. Among the over 1,000 statutes and numerous federal
regulations that DOMA controls are laws pertaining to Social Security,
housing, taxes, criminal sanctions, copyright, and veterans’ benefits.

DOMA’s principal effect is to identify a subset of state-sanctioned
marriages and make them unequal. The principal purpose is to impose
inequality, not for other reasons like governmental efficiency.
Responsibilities, as well as rights, enhance the dignity and integrity of

Editors: The Bipartisan Legal Advisory Group (“BLAG”) of the House of Representatives
was permitted by the District Court to intervene in this case to defend the constitutionality of
DOMA after the United States Attorney General notified the Speaker of the House of
Representatives that the Department of Justice would not defend its constitutionality.



FRoM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
224 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

the person. And DOMA contrives to deprive some couples married under
the laws of their State, but not other couples, of both rights and
responsibilities. By creating two contradictory marriage regimes within
the same State, DOMA forces same-sex couples to live as married for the
purpose of state law but unmarried for the purpose of federal law, thus
diminishing the stability and predictability of basic personal relations the
State has found it proper to acknowledge and protect. By this dynamic
DOMA undermines both the public and private significance of state-
sanctioned same-sex marriages; for it tells those couples, and all the
world, that their otherwise valid marriages are unworthy of federal
recognition. This places same-sex couples in an unstable position of being
in a second-tier marriage. The differentiation demeans the couple, whose
moral and sexual choices the Constitution protects, see Lawrence, 539
U.S. 558, and whose relationship the State has sought to dignify. And it
humiliates tens of thousands of children now being raised by same-sex
couples. The law in question makes it even more difficult for the children
to understand the integrity and closeness of their own family and its
concord with other families in their community and in their daily lives.

Under DOMA, same-sex married couples have their lives burdened,
by reason of government decree, in visible and public ways. By its great
reach, DOMA touches many aspects of married and family life, from the
mundane to the profound. It prevents same-sex married couples from
obtaining government healthcare benefits they would otherwise receive.
See 5 U.S.C. §§ 8901(5), 8905. It deprives them of the Bankruptcy Code’s
special protections for domestic-support obligations. See 11 U.S.C.
§§ 101(14A), 507(a)(1)(A), 523(a)(5), 523(a)(15). It forces them to follow a
complicated procedure to file their state and federal taxes jointly.
Technical Bulletin TB-55, 2010 Vt. Tax LEXIS 6 (Oct. 7, 2010). It
prohibits them from being buried together in veterans’ cemeteries.
National Cemetery Administration Directive 3210/1, p. 37 (June 4, 2008).

For certain married couples, DOMA’s unequal effects are even more
serious. The federal penal code makes it a crime to “assaul[t], kidna[p], or
murde[r] ... a member of the immediate family” of “a United States
official, a United States judge, [or] a Federal law enforcement officer,” 18
U.S.C. § 115(a)(1)(A), with the intent to influence or retaliate against that
official, § 115(a)(1). Although a “spouse” qualifies as a member of the
officer's “immediate family,” § 115(c)(2), DOMA makes this protection
inapplicable to same-sex spouses.

DOMA also brings financial harm to children of same-sex couples. It
raises the cost of health care for families by taxing health benefits
provided by employers to their workers’ same-sex spouses. And it denies
or reduces benefits allowed to families upon the loss of a spouse and
parent, benefits that are an integral part of family security.

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 225

DOMA divests married same-sex couples of the duties and
responsibilities that are an essential part of married life and that they in
most cases would be honored to accept were DOMA not in force. For
instance, because it is expected that spouses will support each other as
they pursue educational opportunities, federal law takes into
consideration a spouse’s income in calculating a student’s federal
financial aid eligibility. Same-sex married couples are exempt from this
requirement. The same is true with respect to federal ethics rules.
Federal executive and agency officials are prohibited from “participatfing]
personally and substantially” in matters as to which they or their spouses
have a financial interest. A similar statute prohibits Senators, Senate
employees, and their spouses from accepting high-value gifts from certain
sources, and another mandates detailed financial disclosures by
numerous high-ranking officials and their spouses. Under DOMA
however, these Government-integrity rules do not apply to same-sex
spouses.

The power the Constitution grants it also restrains. And though
Congress has great authority to design laws to fit its own conception of
sound national policy, it cannot deny the liberty protected by the Due
Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment.

What has been explained to this point should more than suffice to
establish that the principal purpose and the necessary effect of this law
are to demean those persons who are in a lawful same-sex marriage. This
requires the Court to hold, as it now does, that DOMA is unconstitutional

as a deprivation of the liberty of the person i
protected by the Fifth
Amendment of the Constitution.* * * °

DOMA instructs all federal officials, and indeed all persons with
whom same-sex couples interact, including their own children, that their
marriage is less worthy than the marriages of others. The federal statute
is invalid, for no legitimate purpose overcomes the purpose and effect to
disparage and to injure those whom the State, by its marriage laws
sought to protect in personhood and dignity. By seeking to displace this
protection and treating those persons as living in marriages less
respected than others, the federal statute is in violation of the Fifth
Amendment. This opinion and its holding are confined to those lawful
marriages.

The judgment of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit is
affirmed.

It is so ordered.
CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS, dissenting.

*** The majority sees a more sinister motive, pointing out that the
Federal Government has generally (though not uniformly) deferred to
state definitions of marriage in the past. That is true, of course, but none



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
226 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

of those prior state-by-state variations had involved differences over
something—as the majority puts it—‘thought of by most people as
essential to the very definition of [marriage] and to its role and function
throughout the history of civilization.” That the Federal Government
treated this fundamental question differently than it treated variations
over consanguinity or minimum age is hardly, surprising—and hardly
enough to support a conclusion that the “principal purpose of the 342
Representatives and 85 Senators who voted for it, and the President who
signed it, was a bare desire to harm. Nor do the snippets of legislative
history and the banal title of the Act to which the majority points suffice
to make such a showing. At least without some more convincing evidence
that the Act’s principal purpose was to codify malice, and that it
furthered no legitimate government interests, I would not tar the political
branches with the brush of bigotry. * * *

JUSTICE SCALIA, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins, and with whom
THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins as to Part I, dissenting.

This case is about power in several respects. It is about the power of
our people to govern themselves, and the power of this Court to
pronounce the law. Today’s opinion aggrandizes the latter, with the
predictable consequence of diminishing the former. We have no power to
decide this case. And even if we did, we have no power under the
Constitution to invalidate this democratically adopted legislation. The
Court’s errors on both points spring forth from the same diseased root: an
exalted conception of the role of this institution in America.

I

[In this section, Justice Scalia argues that the Court does not have
jurisdiction to hear the case because the executive branch did not contest
the lower court’s ruling, thereby creating no case or controversy].

I

Given that the majority has volunteered its view of the merits, I
proceed to discuss that as well.* * *

As I have observed before, the Constitution does not forbid the
government to enforce traditional moral and sexual norms. See Lawrence
v. Texas, 539 U.S. 558, 599 (2003) (SCALIA, J., dissenting). I will not
swell the U.S. Reports with restatements of that point. It is enough to say
that the Constitution neither requires nor forbids our society to approve
of same-sex marriage, much as it neither requires nor forbids us to
approve of no-fault divorce, polygamy, or the consumption of alcohol.

However, even setting aside traditional moral disapproval of same-
sex marriage (or indeed same-sex sex), there are many perfectly valid—
indeed, downright boring—justifying rationales for this legislation. Their
existence ought to be the end of this case. For they give the lie to the

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 227

Court’s conclusion that only those with hateful hearts could have voted
“aye” on this Act. And more importantly, they serve to make the contents
of the legislators’ hearts quite irrelevant: “It is a familiar principle of
constitutional law that this Court will not strike down an otherwise
constitutional statute on the basis of an alleged illicit legislative motive.”
United States v. O’Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968). Or at least it was a familiar
principle. By holding to the contrary, the majority has declared open
season on any law that (in the opinion of the law’s opponents and any
panel of like-minded federal judges) can be characterized as mean-
spirited.

The majority concludes that the only motive for this Act was the
“bare... desire to harm a politically unpopular group.” Bear in mind that
the object of this condemnation is not the legislature of some once-
Confederate Southern state (familiar objects of the Court’s scorn), but our
respected coordinate branches, the Congress and Presidency of the United
States. Laying such a charge against them should require the most
extraordinary evidence, and I would have thought that every attempt
would be made to indulge a more anodyne explanation for the statute.
The majority does the opposite—affirmatively concealing from the reader
the arguments that exist in justification. It makes only a passing mention
of the “arguments put forward” by the Act’s defenders, and does not even
trouble to paraphrase or describe them. I imagine that this is because it is
harder to maintain the illusion of the Act’s supporters as unhinged
members of a wild-eyed lynch mob when one first describes their views as
they see them.

To choose just one of these defenders’ arguments, DOMA avoids
difficult choice-of-law issues that will now arise absent a uniform federal
definition of marriage. Imagine a pair of women who marry in Albany and
then move to Alabama, which does not “recognize as valid any marriage
of parties of the same sex.” Ala.Code § 30-1-19(e) (2011). When the
couple files their next federal tax return, may it be a joint one? Which
State’s law controls, for federal-law purposes: their State of celebration
(which recognizes the marriage) or their State of domicile (which does
not)? (Does the answer depend on whether they were just visiting in
Albany?) Are these questions to be answered as a matter of federal
common law, or perhaps by borrowing a State’s choice-of-law rules? If 80,
which State’s? And what about States where the status of an out-of-state
same-sex marriage is an unsettled question under local law? DOMA
avoided all of this uncertainty by specifying which marriages would be

= recognized for federal purposes. That is a classic purpose for a definitional

provision.

Further, DOMA preserves the intended effects of prior legislation
against then-unforeseen changes in circumstance. When Congress
provided (for example) that a special estate-tax exemption would exist for



FROM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
228 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

spouses, this exemption reached only opposite-sex spouses—those being
the only sort that were recognized in any State at the time of DOMA’s
passage. When it became clear that changes in state law might one day
alter that balance, DOMA’s definitional section was enacted to ensure
that state-level experimentation did not automatically alter the basic
operation of federal law, unless and until Congress made the further
judgment to do so on its own. That is not animus—just stabilizing
prudence. Congress has hardly demonstrated itself unwilling to make
such further, revising judgments upon due deliberation. See, e.g., Don’t
Ask, Don’t Tell Repeal Act of 2010, 124 Stat. 3515.

The Court mentions none of this. Instead, it accuses the Congress
that enacted this law and the President who signed it of something much
worse than, for example, having acted in excess of enumerated federal
powers—or even having drawn distinctions that prove to be irrational.
Those legal errors may be made in good faith, errors though they are. But
the majority says that the supporters of this Act acted with malice—with
the “purpose” “to disparage and to injure” same-sex couples. It says that
the motivation for DOMA was to “demean;” to “impose inequality;” to
“impose ... a stigma;” to deny people “equal dignity;” to brand gay people
as “unworthy;” and to “humiliat[e]” their children (emphasis added).

J am sure these accusations are quite untrue. To be sure (as the
majority points out), the legislation is called the Defense of Marriage Act.
But to defend traditional marriage is not to condemn, demean, or
humiliate those who would prefer other arrangements, any more than to
defend the Constitution of the United States is to condemn, demean, or
humiliate other constitutions. To hurl such accusations so casually
demeans this institution. In the majority’s judgment, any resistance to its
holding is beyond the pale of reasoned disagreement. To question its high-
handed invalidation of a presumptively valid statute is to act (the
majority is sure) with the purpose to “disparage,” “injure,” “degrade,”
“demean,” and “humiliate” our fellow human beings, our fellow citizens,
who are homosexual. All that, simply for supporting an Act that did no
more than codify an aspect of marriage that had been unquestioned in our
society for most of its existence—indeed, had been unquestioned in
virtually all societies for virtually all of human history. It is one thing for
a society to elect change; it is another for a court of law to impose change
by adjudging those who oppose it hostes humani generis, enemies of the
human race.

The penultimate sentence of the majority's opinion is a naked
declaration that “[t]his opinion and its holding are confined” to those
couples “joined in same-sex marriages made lawful by the State.” I have
heard such “bald, unreasoned disclaimer[s]” before. Lawrence, 539 U.S.,
at 604. When the Court declared a constitutional right to homosexual
sodomy, we were assured that the case had nothing, nothing at all to do

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 229

with “whether the government must give formal recognition to any
relationship that homosexual persons seek to enter.” Id., at 578. Now we
are told that DOMA is invalid because it “demeans the couple, whose
moral and sexual choices the Constitution protects,” with an
accompanying citation of Lawrence. It takes real cheek for today’s
majority to assure us, as it is going out the door, that a constitutional
requirement to give formal recognition to same-sex marriage is not at
issue here—when what has preceded that assurance is a lecture on how
superior the majority’s moral judgment in favor of same-sex marriage is
to the Congress’s hateful moral judgment against it. I promise you this:
The only thing that will “confine” the Court’s holding is its sense of what
it can get away with.

I do not mean to suggest disagreement with THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s
view (dissenting opinion), that lower federal courts and state courts can
distinguish today’s case when the issue before them is state denial of
marital status to same-sex couples—or even that this Court could
theoretically do so. Lord, an opinion with such scatter-shot rationales as
this one (federalism noises among them) can be distinguished in many
ways. And deserves to be. State and lower federal courts should take the
Court at its word and distinguish away.

In my opinion, however, the view that this Court will take of state
prohibition of same-sex marriage is indicated beyond mistaking by today’s
opinion. As I have said, the real rationale of today’s opinion, whatever
disappearing trail of its legalistic argle-bargle one chooses to follow, is
that DOMA is motivated by “‘bare ... desire to harm’” couples in same-
sex marriages. How easy it is, indeed how inevitable, to reach the same
conclusion with regard to state laws denying same-sex couples marital
status. Consider how easy (inevitable) it is to make the following
substitutions in a passage from today’s opinion:

“DOMA’s This state law’s principal effect is to identify a subset of
state-sanctioned marriages constitutionally protected sexual
relationships, see Lawrence, and make them unequal. The principal
purpose is to impose inequality, not for other reasons like
governmental efficiency. Responsibilities, as well as rights, enhance
the dignity and integrity of the person. And DOMA this state law
contrives to deprive some couples married under the laws of their
State enjoying constitutionally protected sexual relationships, but not
other couples, of both rights and responsibilities.”

Or try this passage, from ante:
“[DOMA] This state law tells those couples, and all the world, that
their otherwise valid marriages relationships are unworthy of federal

state recognition. This places same-sex couples in an unstable
position of being in a second-tier marriage relationship. The



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
230 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

differentiation demeans the couple, whose moral and sexual choices
the Constitution protects, see Lawrence,....”

Or this, from ante—which does not even require alteration, except as to
the invented number:

“And it humiliates tens of thousands of children now being raised by
same-sex couples. The law in question makes it even more difficult
for the children to understand the integrity and closeness of their
own family and its concord with other families in their community
and in their daily lives.”

Similarly transposable passages—deliberately transposable, I
think—-abound. In sum, that Court which finds it so horrific that
Congress irrationally and hatefully robbed same-sex couples of the
“personhood and dignity’ which state legislatures conferred upon them,
will of a certitude be similarly appalled by state legislatures’ irrational
and hateful failure to acknowledge that “personhood and dignity” in the
first place. As far as this Court is concerned, no one should be fooled; itis
just a matter of listening and waiting for the other shoe.* * *

As to that debate: Few public controversies touch an institution so
central to the lives of so many, and few inspire such attendant passion by
good people on all sides. Few public controversies will ever demonstrate
so vividly the beauty of what our Framers gave us, a gift the Court pawns
today to buy its stolen moment in the spotlight: a system of government
that permits us to rule ourselves. Since DOMA’s passage, citizens on all
sides of the question have seen victories and they have seen defeats.
There have been plebiscites, legislation, persuasion, and loud voices—in
other words, democracy. Victories in one place for some, see North
Carolina Const., Amdt. 1 (providing that “[mlJarriage between one man
and one woman is the only domestic legal union that shall be valid or
recognized in this State”) (approved by a popular vote, 61% to 39% on
May 8, 2012), are offset by victories in other places for others, see
Maryland Question 6 (establishing “that Maryland’s civil marriage laws
allow gay and lesbian couples to obtain a civil marriage license”)
(approved by a popular vote, 52% to 48%, on November 6, 2012). Even in
a single State, the question has come out differently on different
occasions. Compare Maine Question 1 (permitting “the State of Maine to
issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples”) (approved by a popular vote,
53% to 47%, on November 6, 2012) with Maine Question 1 (rejecting “the
new law that lets same-sex couples marry’) (approved by a popular vote,
53% to 47%, on November 8, 2009).

In the majority's telling, this story is black-and-white: Hate your
neighbor or come along with us. The truth is more complicated. It is hard
to admit that one’s political opponents are not monsters, especially in a
struggle like this one, and the challenge in the end proves more than
today’s Court can handle. Too bad. A reminder that disagreement over

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 231

something so fundamental as marriage can still be politically legitimate
would have been a fit task for what in earlier times was called the judicial
temperament. We might have covered ourselves with honor today, by
promising all sides of this debate that it was theirs to settle and that we
would respect their resolution. We might have let the People decide.

But that the majority will not do. Some will rejoice in today’s
decision, and some will despair at it; that is the nature of a controversy
that matters so much to so many. But the Court has cheated both sides,
robbing the winners of an honest victory, and the losers of the peace that
comes from a fair defeat. We owed both of them better. I dissent.

JUSTICE ALITO, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS joins as to Parts II and
III, dissenting.

“es * Same-sex marriage presents a highly emotional and important
question of public policy—but not a difficult question of constitutional
law. The Constitution does not guarantee the right to enter into a same-

sex marriage. Indeed, no provision of the Constitution speaks to the
issue.* * *

It is beyond dispute that the right to same-sex marriage is not deeply
rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition. In this country, no State
permitted same-sex marriage until the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial
Court held in 2003 that limiting marriage to opposite-sex couples violated
the State Constitution. Nor is the right to same-sex marriage deeply
rooted in the traditions of other nations. No country allowed same-sex
couples to marry until the Netherlands did so in 2000. ,

What Windsor and the United States seek, therefore, is not the
protection of a deeply rooted right but the recognition of a very new right,
and they seek this innovation not from a legislative body elected by the
people, but from unelected judges. Faced with such a request, judges have
cause for both caution and humility.

The family is an ancient and universal human institution. Family
structure reflects the characteristics of a civilization, and changes in
family structure and in the popular understanding of marriage and the
family can have profound effects. Past changes in the understanding of
marriage—for example, the gradual ascendance of the idea that romantic
love is a prerequisite to marriage—have had far-reaching consequences.
But the process by which such consequences come about is complex,
involving the interaction of numerous factors, and tends to occur over an
extended period of time. :

We can expect something similar to take place if same-sex marriage
becomes widely accepted. The long-term consequences of this change are
not now known and are unlikely to be ascertainable for some time to



FROM ANTI-SoDOMyY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
232 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

come.5 There are those who think that allowing same-sex marriage will
seriously undermine the institution of marriage. See, e.g., 5. Girgis, R.
Anderson, & R. George, What is Marriage? Man and Woman: A Defense
53-58 (2012); Finnis, Marriage: A Basic and Exigent Good, 91 The Monist
388, 398 (2008). Others think that recognition of same-sex marriage will
fortify a now-shaky institution. See, e.g., A. Sullivan, Virtually Normal:
An Argument About Homosexuality 202-203 (1996); J. Rauch, Gay
Marriage: Why It Is Good for Gays, Good for Straights, and Good for

America 94 (2004).

At present, no one—including social scientists, philosophers, and
historians—can predict with any certainty what the long-term
ramifications of widespread acceptance of same-sex marriage will be. And
judges are certainly not equipped to make such an assessment. The
Members of this Court have the authority and the responsibility to
interpret and apply the Constitution. Thus, if the Constitution contained
a provision guaranteeing the right to marry a person of the same sex, it
would be our duty to enforce that right. But the Constitution simply does
not speak to the issue of same-sex marriage. In our system of
government, ultimate sovereignty rests with the people, and the people
have the right to control their own destiny. Any change on a question so
fundamental should be made by the people through their elected officials.

Tl

Perhaps because they cannot show that same-sex marriage is a
fundamental right under our Constitution, Windsor and the United
States couch their arguments in equal protection terms. They argue that
§3 of DOMA discriminates on the basis of sexual orientation, that
classifications based on sexual orientation should trigger a form of

5 As sociologists have documented, it sometimes takes decades to document the effects of
social changes—like the sharp rise in divorce rates following the advent of no-fault divorce—on
children and society. See generally J. Wallerstein, J. Lewis, & S. Blakeslee, The Unexpected
Legacy of Divorce: The 25 Year Landmark Study (2000).

6 Among those holding that position, some deplore and some applaud this predicted development.
Compare, e.g., Wardle, “Multiply and Replenish”: Considering Same-Sex Marriage in Light of State Interests in
Marital Procreation, 24 Harv. JL. & Pub. Pol’y 771, 799 (2001) (“Culturally, the legalization of same-sex
marriage would send a message that would undermine the social boundaries relating to marriage and family
relations. The confusion of social roles linked with marriage and parenting would be tremendous, and the
message of ‘anything goes’ in the way of sexual behavior, procreation, and parenthood would wreak its greatest
havoc among groups of vulnerable individuals who most need the encouragement of bright line laws and clear
social mores concerning procreative responsibility”) and Gallagher, (How) Will Gay Marriage Weaken
Marriage as a Social Institution: A Reply to Andrew Koppelman, 2 U. St. Thomas L.J. 33, 58 (2005) (“If the
idea of marriage really does matter—if society really does need a social institution that manages opposite-sex
attractions in the interests of children and society—then taking an already weakened social institution,
subjecting it to radical new redefinitions, and hoping that there are no consequences is probably neither a wise
nor a compassionate idea”), with Brownworth, Something Borrowed, Something Blue: Is Marriage Right for
Queers? in I Do/I Don’t: Queers on Marriage 53, 58-59 (G. Wharton & L. Phillips eds. 2004) (Former President
George W. “Bush is correct ... when he states that allowing same-sex couples to marry will weaken the
institution of marriage. It most certainly will do so, and that will make marriage a far better concept than it
previously has been”) and Willis, Can Marriage Be Saved? A Forum, The Nation, p. 16 (2004) (celebrating the
fact that “conferring the legitimacy of marriage on homosexual relations will introduce an implicit revolt
against the institution into its very heart”).

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 233

“heightened” scrutiny, and that § 3 cannot survive such scrutiny. They
further maintain that the governmental interests that § 3 purports to
serve are not sufficiently important and that it has not been adequately
shown that § 3 serves those interests very well. The Court’s holding, too
seems to rest on “the equal protection guarantee of the Fourteenth
Amendment,” although the Court is careful not to adopt most of
Windsor’s and the United States’ argument.

In my view, the approach that Windsor and the Uni
advocate is misguided.* * * By asking the Court to strike down DOMA
not satisfying some form of heightened scrutiny, Windsor and the United
States are really seeking to have the Court resolve a debate between two
competing views of marriage.

. The first and older view, which I will call the “traditional” or
conjugal” view, sees marriage as an intrinsically opposite-sex institution
BLAG notes that virtually every culture, including many not influenced
by the Abrahamic religions, has limited marriage to people of the opposite
sex. And BLAG attempts to explain this phenomenon by arguing that the
institution of marriage was created for the purpose of channeling
heterosexual intercourse into a structure that supports child rearing
Others explain the basis for the institution in more philosophical terms.
They argue that marriage is essentially the solemnizing of a
comprehensive, exclusive, permanent union that is intrinsically ordered
to producing new life, even if it does not always do so. See, eg. Girgis
Anderson, & George, What is Marriage? Man and Woman: A Defense at
23-28. While modern cultural changes have weakened the link between
marriage and procreation in the popular mind, there is no doubt that.
throughout human history and across many cultures, marriage has been
viewed as an exclusively opposite-sex institution and as one inextricabl.
linked to procreation and biological kinship. °

The other, newer view is what I will call the “consent-based” vision of
marriage, a vision that primarily defines marriage as the solemnization of
mutual commitment—marked by strong emotional attachment and
sexual attraction—between two persons. At least as it applies to
heterosexual couples, this view of marriage now plays a very prominent
role in the popular understanding of the institution. Indeed, our popular
culture is infused with this understanding of marriage. Proponents of
Same-sex marriage argue that because gender differentiation is not
relevant to this vision, the exclusion of same-sex couples from the
Institution of marriage is rank discrimination.

The Constitution does not codify either of these views of marriage
(although I suspect it would have been hard at the time of the adoption of
the Constitution or the Fifth Amendment to find Americans who did not
ae the traditional view for granted). The silence of the Constitution on

his question should be enough to end the matter as far as the judiciary is



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
234 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

concerned. Yet, Windsor and the United States implicitly ask us to
endorse the consent-based view of marriage and to reject the traditional
view, thereby arrogating to ourselves the power to decide a question that
philosophers, historians, social scientists, and theologians are better
qualified to explore.7 Because our constitutional order assigns the
resolution of questions of this nature to the people, I would not presume
to enshrine either vision of marriage in our constitutional jurisprudence.

Legislatures, however, have little choice but to decide between the
two views. We have long made clear that neither the political branches of
the Federal Government nor state governments are required to be neutral
between competing visions of the good, provided that the vision of the
good that they adopt is not countermanded by the Constitution. See, e.g.,
Rust v. Sullivan, 500 U.S. 173 (1991) (“(T]he government ‘may make a
value judgment favoring childbirth over abortion”). Accordingly, both
Congress and the States are entitled to enact laws recognizing either of
the two understandings of marriage. And given the size of government
and the degree to which it now regulates daily life, it seems unlikely that
either Congress or the States could maintain complete neutrality even if
they tried assiduously to do so.* * *

In any event, § 3 of DOMA, in my view, does not encroach on the
prerogatives of the States, assuming of course that the many federal
statutes affected by DOMA have not already done so. Section 3 does not
prevent any State from recognizing same-sex marriage or from extending
to same-sex couples any right, privilege, benefit, or obligation stemming
from state law. All that § 3 does is to define a class of persons to whom
federal law extends certain special benefits and upon whom federal law
imposes certain special burdens. In these provisions, Congress used
marital status as a way of defining this class—in part, I assume, because
it viewed marriage as a valuable institution to be fostered and in part
because it viewed married couples as comprising a unique type of

7 The degree to which this question is intractable to typical judicial processes of
decisionmaking was highlighted by the trial in Hollingsworth v. Perry, 558 U.S. 183 (2010). In
that case, the trial judge, after receiving testimony from some expert witnesses, purported to
make “findings of fact” on such questions as why marriage came to be (Marriage between a man
and a woman was traditionally organized based on presumptions of division of labor along
gender lines. Men were seen as suited for certain types of work and women for others. Women
were seen as suited to raise children and men were seen as suited to provide for the family”),
what marriage is (“Marriage is the state recognition and approval of a couple’s choice to live with
each other, to remain committed to one another and to form a household based on their own
feelings about one another and to join in an economic partnership and support one another and
any dependents”), and the effect legalizing same-sex marriage would have on opposite-sex
marriage (“Permitting same-sex couples to marry will not affect the number of opposite-sex
couples who marry, divorce, cohabit, have children outside of marriage or otherwise affect the
stability of opposite-sex marriages”). At times, the trial reached the heights of parody, as when
the trial judge questioned his ability to take into account the views of great thinkers of the past
because they were unavailable to testify in person in his courtroom. And, if this spectacle were
not enough, some professors of constitutional law have argued that we are bound to accept the
trial judge’s findings—including those on major philosophical questions and predictions about
the future—unless they are “clearly erroneous.” Only an arrogant legal culture that has lost all
appreciation of its own limitations could take such a suggestion seriously.

Sec. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 235

economic unit that merits special regulatory treatment. Assuming that
Congress has the power under the Constitution to enact the laws affected

by § 3, Congress has the power to define the category of persons to whom
those laws apply.

; For these reasons, I would hold that § 3 of DOMA does not violate the
Fifth Amendment. I respectfully dissent.

HOLLINGSWORTH V. PERRY

Supreme Court of the United States, 2018.
570 U.S. , 183 S.Ct. 2652.

CHIEF JUSTICE ROBERTS delivered the opinion of the Court.

The public is currently engaged in an active political debate over
whether same-sex couples should be allowed to marry. That question has
also given rise to litigation. In this case, petitioners, who oppose same-sex
marriage, ask us to decide whether the Equal Protection Clause
“prohibits the State of California from defining marriage as the union of a
man and a woman.” Respondents, same-sex couples who wish to marry,
view the issue in somewhat different terms: For them, it is whether
California—having previously recognized the right of same-sex couples to
marry—may reverse that decision through a referendum.

Federal courts have authority under the Constitution to answer such
questions only if necessary to do so in the course of deciding an actual
“case” or “controversy.” As used in the Constitution, those words do not
include every sort of dispute, but only those “historically viewed as
capable of resolution through the judicial process.” Flast v. Cohen, 392
U.S. 83, 95 (1968). This is an essential limit on our power: It ensures that

we act as judges, and do not engage in policymaking properly left to
elected representatives.

For there to be such a case or controversy, it is not enough that the
party invoking the power of the court have a keen interest in the issue.
That party must also have “standing,” which requires, among other
things, that it have suffered a concrete and particularized injury. Because
we find that petitioners do not have standing, we have no authority to
decide this case on the merits, and neither did the Ninth Circuit.

I

; In 2008, the California Supreme Court held that limiting the official
designation of marriage to opposite-sex couples violated the equal
protection clause of the California Constitution. In re Marriage Cases, 183
P.3d 384. Later that year, California voters passed the ballot initiative at
the center of this dispute, known as Proposition 8. That proposition
amended the California Constitution to provide that “[o]nly marriage
between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in California.” Cal.
Const., Art. I, § 7.5. Shortly thereafter, the California Supreme Court



FRoM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
236 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

rejected a procedural challenge to the amendment, and held that the
Proposition was properly enacted under California law.

According to the California Supreme Court, Proposition 8 created a
“narrow and limited exception” to the state constitutional rights
otherwise guaranteed to same-sex couples. Under California law, same-
sex couples have a right to enter into relationships recognized by the
State as “domestic partnerships,” which carry “the same rights,
protections, and benefits, and shall be subject to the same
responsibilities, obligations, and duties under law ... as are granted to
and imposed upon spouses.” Cal. Fam. Code Ann. § 297.5(a) (West 2004).
In In re Marriage Cases, the California Supreme Court concluded that the
California Constitution further guarantees same-sex couples “all of the
constitutionally based incidents of marriage,” including the right to have
that marriage “officially recognized” as such by the State. Proposition 8,
the court explained in Strauss, left those rights largely undisturbed,
reserving only “the official designation of the term ‘marriage’ for the
union of opposite-sex couples as a matter of state constitutional law.”

Respondents, two same-sex couples who wish to marry, filed suit in
federal court, challenging Proposition 8 under the Due Process and Equal
Protection Clauses of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution. After a 12-day bench trial, the District Court declared
Proposition 8 unconstitutional, permanently enjoining the California
officials named as defendants from enforcing the law, and “directing the
official defendants that all persons under their control or supervision”
shall not enforce it. Perry v. Schwarzenegger, 704 F.Supp.2d 921, 1004
(N.D.Cal.2010).

Those officials elected not to appeal the District Court order. When
petitioners [the official proponents of the initiative] did, the Ninth Circuit
asked them to address “why this appeal should not be dismissed for lack
of Article IMT standing.” Perry v. Schwarzenegger, Civ. No. 10-—16696
(C.A.9, Aug. 16, 2010), p. 2. After briefing and argument, the Ninth
Circuit certified a question to the California Supreme Court.

[Discussion of question of justiciability].***

On the merits, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the District Court. The
court held the Proposition unconstitutional under the rationale of our
decision in Romer v. Evans, 517 U.S. 620 (1996). In the Ninth Circuit’s
view, Romer stands for the proposition that “the Equal Protection Clause
requires the state to have a legitimate reason for withdrawing a right or
benefit from one group but not others, whether or not it was required to
confer that right or benefit in the first place.” 671 F.3d, at 1083-1084.
The Ninth Circuit concluded that “taking away the official designation” of
“marriage” from same-sex couples, while continuing to afford those
couples all the rights and obligations of marriage, did not further any
legitimate interest of the State. Proposition 8, in the court’s view, violated

a ,_

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 237

the Equal Protection Clause because it served no purpose “but to impose
on gays and lesbians, through the public law, a majority’s private
disapproval of them and their relationships.” Ibid.

We granted certiorari to review that determination, and directed that
the parties also brief and argue “Whether petitioners have standing
under Article III, § 2, of the Constitution in this case.” ***

[The Supreme Court then addresses the justiciability question and
the Court finds that the petitioners do not have standing]. ***

We have never before upheld the standing of a private party to
defend the constitutionality of a state statute when state officials have
chosen not to. We decline to do so for the first time here.

Because petitioners have not satisfied their burden to demonstrate
standing to appeal the judgment of the District Court, the Ninth Circuit
was without jurisdiction to consider the appeal. The judgment of the
Ninth Circuit is vacated, and the case is remanded with instructions to
dismiss the appeal for lack of jurisdiction.

It is so ordered.

JUSTICE KENNEDY, with whom JUSTICE THOMAS, JUSTICE ALITO, and
JUSTICE SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.

*** There is much irony in the Court’s approach to justiciability in
this case. A prime purpose of justiciability is to ensure vigorous advocacy,
yet the Court insists upon litigation conducted by state officials whose
preference is to lose the case. The doctrine is meant to ensure that courts
are responsible and constrained in their power, but the Court’s opinion
today means that a single district court can make a decision with far-
reaching effects that cannot be reviewed. And rather than honor the
principle that justiciability exists to allow disputes of public policy to be
resolved by the political process rather than the courts, see, eg., Allen v,
Wright, 468 U.S. 787 (1984), here the Court refuses to allow a State’s
authorized representatives to defend the outcome of a democratic election.

The Court’s opinion disrespects and disparages both the political
process in California and the well-stated opinion of the California
Supreme Court in this case. The California Supreme Court, not this
Court, expresses concern for vigorous representation; the California
Supreme Court, not this Court, recognizes the necessity to avoid conflicts
of interest; the California Supreme Court, not this Court, comprehends
the real interest at stake in this litigation and identifies the most proper
party to defend that interest. The California Supreme Court’s opinion
reflects a better understanding of the dynamics and principles of Article
III than does this Court’s opinion.

Of course, the Court must be cautious before entering a realm of
controversy where the legal community and society at large are still



FRomM ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
238 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

formulating ideas and approaches to a most difficult subject. But it is
shortsighted to misconstrue principles of justiciability to avoid that
subject. As the California Supreme Court recognized, “the question before
us involves a fundamental procedural issue that may arise with respect to
any initiative measure, without regard to its subject matter.” If a federal
court must rule on a constitutional point that either confirms or rejects
the will of the people expressed in an initiative, that is when it is most
necessary, not least necessary, to insist on rules that ensure the most
committed and vigorous adversary arguments to inform the rulings of the
courts.

In the end, what the Court fails to grasp or accept is the basic
premise of the initiative process. And it is this. The essence of democracy
is that the right to make law rests in the people and flows to the
government, not the other way around. Freedom resides first in the
people without need of a grant from government. The California initiative
process embodies these principles and has done so for over a century.
“Through the structure of its government, and the character of those who
exercise government authority, a State defines itself as sovereign.”
Gregory v. Ashcroft, 501 U.S. 452, 460 (1991). In California and the 26
other States that permit initiatives and popular referendums, the people
have exercised their own inherent sovereign right to govern themselves.
The Court today frustrates that choice by nullifying, for failure to comply
with the Restatement of Agency, a State Supreme Court decision holding
that state law authorizes an enacted initiative’s proponents to defend the
law if and when the State’s usual legal advocates decline to do so. The
Court’s opinion fails to abide by precedent and misapplies basic principles
of justiciability. Those errors necessitate this respectful dissent.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. In his dissent, Justice Scalia suggests that the Court’s decision in
United States v. Windsor betrays the Court’s previous assurance that the
decision in Lawrence would not affect the Court’s analysis of same-sex
marriage. Is this a fair criticism of the majority? Does Windsor backpedal on
this question? What exactly is the relationship between Lawrence and
Windsor?

2. The Supreme Court in United States v. Windsor did not address
Section 2 of DOMA, which allows States to refuse to recognize legally
sanctioned same-sex marriages from other States. How could the Court’s
opinion, or Justice Scalia’s dissenting opinion, be used to argue the
constitutionality of Section 2? What do you think lies in the future for States
that refuse to recognize same-sex marriages from other States?

3. How did the arguments of harm play out in the Windsor case? Is it
fair to say that, once again, the harm argument has been inverted, insofar as
it applied mostly to the potential harm of the DOMA legislation, rather than
to the “harm” of same-sex marriage?

SEc.D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 239

ha 4, Do you think these cases support or undermine the “collapse of the
rm principle” argument? In light of this question, consider the following.

THE COLLAPSE OF THE HARM PRINCIPLE REDUX

from Bernard E. Harcourt, “On Same-Sex Marria:

: . : ge, the Supreme Court’s Opinion in United
States v. Windsor, John Stuart Mill’s essay On Liberty (1859), and H.1.A. Hart’s Modern Harm
Principle,” University of Chicago Public Law Working Paper No. 437 (2013).

SSRN 2311329.

In this article, I demonstrate the continued vitality of the “collapse of
the modern harm principle” argument by exploring the recent United
States Supreme Court decision on same-sex marriage—a context
involving a civil, not a criminal prohibition on behavior that is viewed by
some as immoral. United States v. Windsor involved a challenge to the
constitutionality of Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act (DOMA)
which defined marriage for purposes of federal law as the union between
a man and woman-—thereby excluding legal same-sex marriages
conducted in States that allow such marriages from the federal
definitions of “marriage” and “spouse.” Insofar as DOMA enacts a moral
objection to same-sex marriage, DOMA should be conceived here as a
federal legal prohibition on same-sex marriage, in other words as the
legal enforcement of morals.

From this perspective, the Supreme Court’s decision in Windsor
reflects perfectly the collapse of the modern harm principle. Notice, first,
that DOMA was enacted because of a conservative harm argument about
the potential injuries that same-sex marriages may cause to traditional
marriage and the family. DOMA itself reflects the proliferation of harm
arguments and the turn to harm by social conservatives. The statute
after all, was called the defense of marriage act: Congress (and President
Bill Clinton) were defending traditional marriage from the potential harm
that same-sex unions could have on heterosexual marriage and on the
traditional family. The legislative history from the House of
Representatives reflects this well and explicitly: the House Report states
that “it is both appropriate and necessary for Congress to do what it can
to defend the institution of traditional heterosexual marriage.... H.R
3396 is appropriately entitled the ‘Defense of Marriage Act.’ The effort. to
redefine ‘marriage’ to extend to homosexual couples is a truly radical
proposal that would fundamentally alter the institution of marriage.”7
Justice Samuel Alito, in his dissenting opinion in Windsor, gives voice to
what he clearly considers to be potential non-trivial harms: “The family is
an ancient and universal human institution,” Alito writes in Windsor.’
Family structure reflects the characteristics of a civilization, and
changes in family structure and in the popular understanding of marriage

7H R Rep No 104-664 (1996) 12-18, quoted in Windsor, __.
8 Windsor (J. ALITO, dissenting), 570 U.S. __.



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
240 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

and the family can have profound effects.” These changes, Alito
emphasized, can have “far-reaching consequences.” Alito warns: “We can
expect something similar to take place if same-sex marriage becomes
widely accepted. The long-term consequences of this change are not now
known and are unlikely to be ascertainable for some time to come.” Alito
added in a footnote that “As sociologists have documented, it sometimes
takes decades to document the effects of social changes—like the sharp
rise in divorce rates following the advent of no-fault divorce—on children
and society,” and Alito cited a study about the “Unexpected Legacy of
Divorce.” Alito is clearly referencing potential non-trivial harms: harms to
children and society potentially equivalent to those (purported real
harms) associated with no-fault divorce.

Second, these potential harms of same-sex marriage satisfy, and
thereby neutralize the modern harm principle. Let me spell this out step-
by-step: the conservative moral position, in this context, is that same-sex
marriage is morally wrong. On this basis, a legal moralist would argue
that there should be a prohibition on same-sex marriage—or, in other
words, that DOMA should be upheld since it represents a prohibition on
immoral conduct. The modern harm principle would state that same-sex
marriage can only be prohibited—i.e. DOMA should only be upheld—if
same-sex marriage causes “harm to others.” Inversely, the modern harm
principle would disallow DOMA if same-sex marriage causes no “harm to
others.” But given that the legislation is based on a claim of non-trivial
harm, the modern harm principle cannot function here as a limiting
principle to strike down DOMA. The modern harm principle cannot limit
the prohibition on same-sex marriage—it cannot strike down DOMA—
precisely because the traditionalists have turned to harm as well. And
what is fascinating about the Supreme Court liberal majority in Windsor
is that not a single justice takes the position that same-sex marriage
causes no potential harm to others. Faced with the conservative harm
argument, all of the justices defer to the political process on the question
whether same-sex marriage causes harm to others. No one on the Court is
prepared to say that Section 3 of DOMA should be struck down because
same-sex marriage does not cause harm to traditional marriage or the
family, and that morals enforcement does not satisfy reasonable basis
review (as the Court announced in Lawrence). As a result, the modern
harm principle has been neutered by the proliferation of conservative
harm arguments.

Third, rather than argue that same-sex marriage causes no harm,
the liberal thinkers on the Supreme Court ratchet up the harm, and
outdo the conservative harm arguments: they double the harm, by
claiming an even greater harm. That greater harm, according to the
liberal thinkers on the Court, is the injury that Congress (and President
Clinton) inflicted on same-sex couples by enacting DOMA. Just as HLL.A.
Hart would argue that the prohibition on homosexual sodomy does

Sec. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 241

greater harm than the harm of sodomy itself, just as the drug legalization
lobby would argue that the War on Drugs does more harm than drug use,
the liberals on the Court pile on more harm arguments: “the principal
purpose and the necessary effect of this law,” Justice Kennedy writes for
the majority, “are to demean those persons who are in a lawful same-sex
marriage.”? DOMA, Kennedy writes, “brings financial harm to children of
same-sex couples. It raises the cost of health care for families by taxing
health benefits provided by employers to their workers’ same-sex spouses.
And it denies or reduces benefits allowed to families upon the loss of a
spouse and parent, benefits that are an integral part of family security.”
The opinion is all about harms. In his usual way, Justice Scalia, in
dissent, offers a succinct restatement of the liberal majority’s harm
arguments: “the majority says that the supporters of this Act acted with
malice—with the ‘purpose’ ‘to disparage and to injure’ same-sex couples. It
says that the motivation for DOMA was to ‘demean; to ‘impose
inequality; to ‘impose ... a stigma; to deny people ‘equal dignity; to
brand gay people as ‘unworthy; and to ‘humiliat[e]’ their children
(emphasis added).”"! In effect, the liberal response to the conservative
harm arguments is to double the harm and to ratchet things up—which,
incidentally, succeeds.

Fourth, what we are left with in Windsor is a rather typical harm
free-for-all: a cacophony of harm claims that the modern harm principle—
which is intended to be a limiting principle—cannot resolve. As a limiting
principle, the harm principle cannot adjudicate between these competing
non-trivial harm arguments. Instead, we are forced to resort to “harm
decisionism”: we have to decide which harm is more important to us and
then act accordingly. That is precisely what happened at the Supreme
Court. Now, to be sure, the Supreme Court did not apply the harm
principle: this was constitutional adjudication and the legal question was
whether DOMA’s Section 3 violates equal protection or due process under
the U.S. Constitution. But the majority in effect did take sides in the
harm competition: Justice Kennedy’s opinion for the majority does
ultimately hold that it is the harm to same-sex couples that violates equal
protection: “The Constitution’s guarantee of equality ‘must at the very
least mean that a bare congressional desire to harm a politically
unpopular group cannot justify disparate treatment of that group.”

Now, you might respond that the harm principle prevailed in
Windsor either (1) because the majority prohibited morals legislation on.
the ground that DOMA itself caused “harm to others,” or (2) because the
Supreme Court was focused on the issue of harm—perhaps net harm or
overall harm—and that, basically, is what the harm principle is all about,

2 United States v. Windsor, 570 U.S. __ (emphasis added).
10 Tbid. (emphasis added) :
1L_ United States v. Windsor, 570 U.S. __ J. SCALIA, dissenting).



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
242 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION CH. 2

ie. about avoiding overall net harm. But neither of those responses are
consistent with the modern harm principle.

The first response turns the modern harm principle on its head and
completely inverts the logic: the majority did not address the harm of the
underlying behavior, rather the harm of the morals legislation. But of
course morals legislation is going to cause harm. It is intended to cause
harm. It is intended to prohibit certain behaviors that are deemed, and in
the process labeled or stigmatized, as immoral. All morals legislation is
going to cause that kind of harm. The criminalization of incest or
bestiality causes harm by punishing persons who engage in that behavior
and labeling them as immoral. What the modern harm principle is all
about is avoiding that kind of harm if the underlying conduct does not
cause harm to others. The harm principle is premised on the assumption
that legal enforcement causes harm. But that secondary harm is simply
not a problem for the harm principle once it is established that the
underlying conduct causes “harm to others.” For instance, prohibiting
polygamy causes harm to polygamists and labels them as criminal and
immoral. In fact, it is intended to do them harm and disrupt their
families, send them to prison and punish them. But the harm principle is
silent about all of that secondary harm, so long as the principle is
satisfied, i.e. so long as it is the case that polygamy causes harm to others.
The first response simply fails to appreciate that all regulation,
eriminalization, punishment, and legal enforcement of morality causes
harm to the targets of enforcement, and therefore that there will always
be an argument to strike down prohibitions because they cause harm. But
jt is not an application of the harm principle to strike down morals
legislation because the legislation causes harm—that is assumed; it is
only the job of the harm principle to strike down morals legislation if the
underlying conduct does not cause harm to others. The first response, in
other words, is inside out: it incorrectly takes the premise as the
principle.

The second response—namely that the harm principle continues to
do work at the level of overall, net harm—completely misconstrues the
modern harm principle: the harm principle is a limiting principle that is
intended to shield behavior that does not harm others. It is not the
equivalent of the larger utilitarian principle that legislation should
minimize social harm or maximize social utility. Once there exists “harm
to others,” conduct is no longer shielded by the harm principle and the
harm principle does no more work. And once you have gotten past the
limiting effect of the harm principle, then any number of rules of decision
could apply. To say that overall net harm becomes the most important
factor in deciding whether to legislate does not mean that the harm
principle has triumphed, it simply means that society has adopted a
utilitarian calculus focused on maximizing well-being. It is just plain
utilitarianism. And it is not required by, jt does not implicate, and it is

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 248

not even akin to the limiting harm principle. Society could, just as easily
or reasonably, adopt the harm principle and beyond that a rule of thumb
that young people decide: in other words, if behavior causes harm to
others Gf it satisfies the harm principle), it can be prohibited, but society
decides whether to prohibit based on a survey of 17 to 19-year-olds There
could be any number of rules of decision whether to prohibit behavior
once the limiting harm principle has been satisfied and the behavior is
deemed to cause harm to others. To try to maximize happiness in society
by minimizing the amount of social harm and human suffering is
orthogonal to the modern harm principle—which states only that conduct
should not be prohibited unless it causes “harm to others.”

In sum, the modern harm principle has ‘prevailed over legal
moralism, but its victory and the resulting proliferation of prohibitionist
harm arguments have sapped the modern harm principle of any limiting
function on the legal enforcement of morals.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. How convincing do you find this argument? Do the same-sex
marriage cases bolster or undermine the “collapse of the harm principle”
argument?

2. With the advent of same-sex marriage, some commentators have
begun to write about same-sex separation. Professor Katherine Franke at
Columbia Law School raises some concerns about the implications of same-
sex marriage in an article “Lesbian Husbands and Gay Wives: The Gendering
of Gay Divorce” in The Nation (July 8, 2013), suggesting that “others, myself
included, worry that the diverse, non-traditional relationships and families
we formed before marriage was a possibility will be shoe-horned into a one-
size-fits-all kind of justice, slotting gay men and lesbians into the pre-
determined gender roles of marriage: husbands and wives.” Franke notes
that ‘It’s not obvious that family law is equipped to adjudicate fair
separations of same-sex couples when it encounters the ways we've busted
out of gendered notions of relationship, responsibility, and family. Even
worse, modern divorce law may end up gendering us into ‘wives’ and
husbands’ because that’s all it is equipped to recognize.” Should the courts be
concerned about these implications when deciding cases involving same-sex
marriage? Should the public be concerned in its democratic debates?

3. Few gay-friendly voices have been heard recently challenging same-
sex marriage advocacy or raising questions about the Supreme Court’s
decisions in Windsor and Perry. In part, this may be a strategic decision given

* the political stakes. But there are some voices emerging. See, e.g., articles

collected in Carceral Notebooks Volume 10 (2014), available on-line at
www.thecarceral.org/journal-vol10.html. Consider in closing this passage

from the preface of the volume, written by the editors, Mia Ruyter and Chuck
Thurow.



From ANTI-SODOMY LAWS TO SAME-SEX MARRIAGE:
244 SEXUAL AUTONOMY AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION Cu. 2

MIA RUYTER AND CHUCK THUROW-—-WHY MARRIAGE?
Carceral Notebooks Volume 10 (2014).

The possibility that marriage equality may exist in our country in the
near future is a major civil rights advancement. The prohibition on gay
marriage treats gays as not full citizens. However, of all the battles for
civil rights, the battle for marriage equality is one of the most
compromised from the beginning. Marriage has a long tradition of
subordinating half of the population. Marriage equality means equality
among couples, but it doesn’t mean equality within couples. And the
desire for equality can bring the risk of homogeneity. To be equal, do we
have to be the same?

This project is an exploration of these two concerns—that marriage
institutionalizes inequality, and that equality requires assimilation. * * *
Marriage [it turns out] is a tricky proposition. It is the kind of cultural
institution that is so familiar and common that we take it for granted—
we don’t usually appreciate its true importance and consequences. The
interest the government has in people marrying is usually invisible to
those who are most affected by it. The current debates about same sex
marriage aren’t making things any clearer. Conservatives claim that
marriage has to be between a man and a woman because the true purpose
of marriage is the production of children. Marriage equality advocates
claim that even if civil unions gave all the same rights as traditional
marriages, it wouldn’t be the same thing. Without the word “marriage”
they claim their love has not been affirmed by society. But what is
marriage, and why do people want it so bad? * * *

The works selected [in this volume] include the radical queer
challenges to the marriage activists. One of our project’s first events was
a screening of Homotopia, a 2007 film by Eric A. Stanley and Chris
Vargas. In this satirical farce, the confusions between casual sex and true
love lead to a plot to blow up a society-page style gay wedding. For us, its
importance lies in the insistence of the creative energies of camp, the
solidarity within the socially marginalized gay community, and its
manifesto that marriage by its nature is a repressive institution.

Does marriage equality also imply relinquishing the important queer
role of the outsider and of being comrades of society’s other marginalized
communities. As an activist in the Gay Liberation movement of the 60s
and 70s, I was proud how much the movement embraced the bar flies, the
street transvestites. We were saying that gay culture may be weird and
marginal, but also it is also creative and valuable. We demanded to be
accepted on our own terms, not because we were doctors, lawyers,
teachers like you. Indeed, in the political rhetoric of the day, we were
going to “smash the nuclear family” — what we saw as an oppressive
institution.

SEc. D SAME-SEX MARRIAGE 245

Likewise, during the initial phases of AIDS activism, the gay
community again found that all-embracing political approach. Act Up put
its arms around the prostitutes and drug addicts at the same time it was
fighting for celebrities. How does the current activism surrounding same-
sex marriage stack up to this model and the Gay Liberation model? And
could it actually marginalize some of our LGBTQ2 community even more?

