Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization (2022)
Justice Alito delivered the opinion of the Court.
Abortion presents a profound moral issue on which Americans hold sharply conflicting views. Some
believe fervently that a human person comes into being at conception and that abortion ends an innocent
life. Others feel just as strongly that any regulation of abortion invades a woman’s right to control her own
body and prevents women from achieving full equality. Still others in a third group think that abortion
should be allowed under some but not all circumstances, and those within this group hold a variety of
views about the particular restrictions that should be imposed.
For the first 185 years after the adoption of the Constitution, each State was permitted to address this issue
in accordance with the views of its citizens. Then, in 1973, this Court decided Roe v. Wade. Even though
the Constitution makes no mention of abortion, the Court held that it confers a broad right to obtain one.
It did not claim that American law or the common law had ever recognized such a right, and its survey of
history ranged from the constitutionally irrelevant (e.g., its discussion of abortion in antiquity) to the
plainly incorrect (e.g., its assertion that abortion was probably never a crime under the common law).
After cataloging a wealth of other information having no bearing on the meaning of the Constitution, the
opinion concluded with a numbered set of rules much like those that might be found in a statute enacted
by a legislature.
Under this scheme, each trimester of pregnancy was regulated differently, but the most critical line was
drawn at roughly the end of the second trimester, which, at the time, corresponded to the point at which a
fetus was thought to achieve “viability,” i.e., the ability to survive outside the womb. Although the Court
acknowledged that States had a legitimate interest in protecting “potential life,” it found that this interest
could not justify any restriction on pre-viability abortions. The Court did not explain the basis for this line,
and even abortion supporters have found it hard to defend Roe’s reasoning. One prominent constitutional
scholar wrote that he “would vote for a statute very much like the one the Court end[ed] up drafting” if he
were “a legislator,” but his assessment of Roe was memorable and brutal: Roe was “not constitutional
law” at all and gave “almost no sense of an obligation to try to be.”1
At the time of Roe, 30 States still prohibited abortion at all stages. In the years prior to that decision, about
a third of the States had liberalized their laws, but Roe abruptly ended that political process. It imposed
the same highly restrictive regime on the entire Nation, and it effectively struck down the abortion laws
of every single State.2 As Justice Byron White aptly put it in his dissent, the decision represented the
“exercise of raw judicial power,” and it sparked a national controversy that has embittered our political
culture for a half century.3
1 FN2: J. Ely, The Wages of Crying Wolf: A Comment on Roe v. Wade, 82 Yale L. J. 920 (1973).
2 FN3: L. Tribe, Foreword: Toward a Model of Roles in the Due Process of Life and Law, 87 Harv. L. Rev. 1 (1973) (Tribe).
3 FN4: See R. Ginsburg, Speaking in a Judicial Voice, 67 N. Y. U. L. Rev. 1185 (1992) (“Roe . . . halted a political process
that was moving in a reform direction and thereby, I believed, prolonged divisiveness and deferred stable settlement of the
issue”).
1
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
Eventually, in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey (1992), the Court revisited Roe, but the
Members of the Court split three ways. Two Justices expressed no desire to change Roe in any way.
[Justices Blackmun and Stevens] Four others wanted to overrule the decision in its entirety. [Chief Justice
Roberts and Justices White, Scalia, and Thomas.] And the three remaining Justices, who jointly signed
the controlling opinion, took a third position. [Joint opinion of Justices O’Connor, Kennedy, and Souter.]
Their opinion did not endorse Roe’s reasoning, and it even hinted that one or more of its authors might
have “reservations” about whether the Constitution protects a right to abortion. But the opinion concluded
that stare decisis, which calls for prior decisions to be followed in most instances, required adherence to
what it called Roe’s “central holding”—that a State may not constitutionally protect fetal life before
“viability”—even if that holding was wrong. Anything less, the opinion claimed, would undermine respect
for this Court and the rule of law.
Paradoxically, the judgment in Casey did a fair amount of overruling. Several important abortion decisions
were overruled in toto, and Roe itself was overruled in part. Casey threw out Roe’s trimester scheme and
substituted a new rule of uncertain origin under which States were forbidden to adopt any regulation that
imposed an “undue burden” on a woman’s right to have an abortion. The decision provided no clear
guidance about the difference between a “due” and an “undue” burden. But the three Justices who authored
the controlling opinion “call[ed] the contending sides of a national controversy to end their national
division” by treating the Court’s decision as the final settlement of the question of the constitutional right
to abortion.
As has become increasingly apparent in the intervening years, Casey did not achieve that goal. Americans
continue to hold passionate and widely divergent views on abortion, and state legislatures have acted
accordingly. Some have recently enacted laws allowing abortion, with few restrictions, at all stages of
pregnancy. Others have tightly restricted abortion beginning well before viability. And in this case, 26
States have expressly asked this Court to overrule Roe and Casey and allow the States to regulate or
prohibit pre-viability abortions.
Before us now is one such state law. The State of Mississippi asks us to uphold the constitutionality of a
law that generally prohibits an abortion after the 15th week of pregnancy—several weeks before the point
at which a fetus is now regarded as “viable” outside the womb. In defending this law, the State’s primary
argument is that we should reconsider and overrule Roe and Casey and once again allow each State to
regulate abortion as its citizens wish. On the other side, respondents and the Solicitor General ask us to
reaffirm Roe and Casey, and they contend that the Mississippi law cannot stand if we do so. Allowing
Mississippi to prohibit abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy, they argue, “would be no different than
overruling Casey and Roe entirely.” They contend that “no half-measures” are available and that we must
either reaffirm or overrule Roe and Casey.
We hold that Roe and Casey must be overruled. The Constitution makes no reference to abortion, and no
such right is implicitly protected by any constitutional provision, including the one on which the defenders
of Roe and Casey now chiefly rely—the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. That provision
has been held to guarantee some rights that are not mentioned in the Constitution, but any such right must
be “deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition” and “implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.”
Washington v. Glucksberg (1997).
2
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
The right to abortion does not fall within this category. Until the latter part of the 20th century, such a
right was entirely unknown in American law. Indeed, when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, three
quarters of the States made abortion a crime at all stages of pregnancy. The abortion right is also critically
different from any other right that this Court has held to fall within the Fourteenth Amendment’s protection
of “liberty.” Roe’s defenders characterize the abortion right as similar to the rights recognized in past
decisions involving matters such as intimate sexual relations, contraception, and marriage, but abortion is
fundamentally different, as both Roe and Casey acknowledged, because it destroys what those decisions
called “fetal life” and what the law now before us describes as an “unborn human being.”
Stare decisis, the doctrine on which Casey’s controlling opinion was based, does not compel unending
adherence to Roe’s abuse of judicial authority. Roe was egregiously wrong from the start. Its reasoning
was exceptionally weak, and the decision has had damaging consequences. And far from bringing about
a national settlement of the abortion issue, Roe and Casey have enflamed debate and deepened division.
It is time to heed the Constitution and return the issue of abortion to the people’s elected representatives.
“The permissibility of abortion, and the limitations, upon it, are to be resolved like most important
questions in our democracy: by citizens trying to persuade one another and then voting.” Casey (Scalia,
J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). That is what the Constitution and the rule of law
demand.
I
The law at issue in this case, Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act (2018), contains this central provision:
“Except in a medical emergency or in the case of a severe fetal abnormality, a person shall not intentionally
or knowingly perform . . . or induce an abortion of an unborn human being if the probable gestational age
of the unborn human being has been determined to be greater than fifteen (15) weeks.”14
To support this Act, the legislature made a series of factual findings. . . . The legislature then found that
at 5 or 6 weeks’ gestational age an “unborn human being’s heart begins beating”; at 8 weeks the “unborn
human being begins to move about in the womb”; at 9 weeks “all basic physiological functions are
present”; at 10 weeks “vital organs begin to function,” and “[h]air, fingernails, and toenails . . . begin to
form”; at 11 weeks “an unborn human being’s diaphragm is developing,” and he or she may “move about
freely in the womb”; and at 12 weeks the “unborn human being” has “taken on ‘the human form’ in all
relevant respects.” §2(b)(i) (quoting Gonzales v. Carhart (2007)). It found that most abortions after 15
weeks employ “dilation and evacuation procedures which involve the use of surgical instruments to crush
and tear the unborn child,” and it concluded that the “intentional commitment of such acts for
nontherapeutic or elective reasons is a barbaric practice, dangerous for the maternal patient, and
demeaning to the medical profession.”
Respondents are an abortion clinic, Jackson Women’s Health Organization, and one of its doctors. . . .
We granted certiorari, to resolve the question whether “all pre-viability prohibitions on elective abortions
are unconstitutional,” Petitioners’ primary defense of the Mississippi Gestational Age Act is that Roe and
3
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
Casey were wrongly decided and that “the Act is constitutional because it satisfies rational-basis review.”
Respondents answer that allowing Mississippi to ban pre-viability abortions “would be no different than
overruling Casey and Roe entirely.” They tell us that “no half-measures” are available: We must either
reaffirm or overrule Roe and Casey.
II
We begin by considering the critical question whether the Constitution, properly understood, confers a
right to obtain an abortion. Skipping over that question, the controlling opinion in Casey reaffirmed Roe’s
“central holding” based solely on the doctrine of stare decisis, but as we will explain, proper application
of stare decisis required an assessment of the strength of the grounds on which Roe was based.
We therefore turn to the question that the Casey plurality did not consider, and we address that question
in three steps. First, we explain the standard that our cases have used in determining whether the
Fourteenth Amendment’s reference to “liberty” protects a particular right. Second, we examine whether
the right at issue in this case is rooted in our Nation’s history and tradition and whether it is an essential
component of what we have described as “ordered liberty.” Finally, we consider whether a right to obtain
an abortion is part of a broader entrenched right that is supported by other precedents.
A
1
Constitutional analysis must begin with “the language of the instrument,” Gibbons v. Ogden (1824), which
offers a “fixed standard” for ascertaining what our founding document means. The Constitution makes no
express reference to a right to obtain an abortion, and therefore those who claim that it protects such a
right must show that the right is somehow implicit in the constitutional text.
Roe, however, was remarkably loose in its treatment of the constitutional text. It held that the abortion
right, which is not mentioned in the Constitution, is part of a right to privacy, which is also not mentioned.
And that privacy right, Roe observed, had been found to spring from no fewer than five different
constitutional provisions—the First, Fourth, Fifth, Ninth, and Fourteenth Amendments.
The Court’s discussion left open at least three ways in which some combination of these provisions could
protect the abortion right. One possibility was that the right was “founded . . . in the Ninth Amendment’s
reservation of rights to the people.” Another was that the right was rooted in the First, Fourth, or Fifth
Amendment, or in some combination of those provisions, and that this right had been “incorporated” into
the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment just as many other Bill of Rights provisions had by
then been incorporated. And a third path was that the First, Fourth, and Fifth Amendments played no role
and that the right was simply a component of the “liberty” protected by the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due
Process Clause. Roe expressed the “feel[ing]” that the Fourteenth Amendment was the provision that did
the work, but its message seemed to be that the abortion right could be found somewhere in the
4
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
Constitution and that specifying its exact location was not of paramount importance.4 The Casey Court
did not defend this unfocused analysis and instead grounded its decision solely on the theory that the right
to obtain an abortion is part of the “liberty” protected by the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause.
We discuss this theory in depth below, but before doing so, we briefly address one additional constitutional
provision that some of respondents’ amici have now offered as yet another potential home for the abortion
right: the Fourteenth Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause. Neither Roe nor Casey saw fit to invoke this
theory, and it is squarely foreclosed by our precedents, which establish that a State’s regulation of abortion
is not a sex-based classification and is thus not subject to the “heightened scrutiny” that applies to such
classifications. The regulation of a medical procedure that only one sex can undergo does not trigger
heightened constitutional scrutiny unless the regulation is a “mere pretex[t] designed to effect an invidious
discrimination against members of one sex or the other.” Geduldig v. Aiello (1974). And as the Court has
stated, the “goal of preventing abortion” does not constitute “invidiously discriminatory animus” against
women. Bray v. Alexandria Women’s Health Clinic (1993). Accordingly, laws regulating or prohibiting
abortion are not subject to heightened scrutiny. Rather, they are governed by the same standard of review
as other health and safety measures.
With this new theory addressed, we turn to Casey’s bold assertion that the abortion right is an aspect of
the “liberty” protected by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
2
The underlying theory on which this argument rests—that the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process
Clause provides substantive, as well as procedural, protection for “liberty”—has long been controversial.
But our decisions have held that the Due Process Clause protects two categories of substantive rights.
The first consists of rights guaranteed by the first eight Amendments. Those Amendments originally
applied only to the Federal Government, Barron ex rel. Tiernan v. Mayor of Baltimore (1833) (opinion
for the Court by Marshall, C. J.), but this Court has held that the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment “incorporates” the great majority of those rights and thus makes them equally applicable to
the States. See McDonald. The second category—which is the one in question here—comprises a select
list of fundamental rights that are not mentioned anywhere in the Constitution.
In deciding whether a right falls into either of these categories, the Court has long asked whether the right
is “deeply rooted in [our] history and tradition” and whether it is essential to our Nation’s “scheme of
ordered liberty.” Timbs v. Indiana (2019); McDonald; Glucksberg.19 And in conducting this inquiry, we
have engaged in a careful analysis of the history of the right at issue.
Justice Ginsburg’s opinion for the Court in Timbs is a recent example. In concluding that the Eighth
Amendment’s protection against excessive fines is “fundamental to our scheme of ordered liberty” and
4 FN16: The Court’s words were as follows: “This right of privacy, whether it be founded in the Fourteenth Amendment’s
concept of personal liberty and restrictions upon state action, as we feel it is, or, as the District Court determined, in the Ninth
Amendment’s reservation of rights to the people, is broad enough to encompass a woman’s decision whether or not to
terminate her pregnancy.”
5
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
“deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition,” her opinion traced the right back to Magna Carta,
Blackstone’s Commentaries, and 35 of the 37 state constitutions in effect at the ratification of the
Fourteenth Amendment.
A similar inquiry was undertaken in McDonald, which held that the Fourteenth Amendment protects the
right to keep and bear arms. The lead opinion surveyed the origins of the Second Amendment, the debates
in Congress about the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, the state constitutions in effect when that
Amendment was ratified (at least 22 of the 37 States protected the right to keep and bear arms), federal
laws enacted during the same period, and other relevant historical evidence. Only then did the opinion
conclude that “the Framers and ratifiers of the Fourteenth Amendment counted the right to keep and bear
arms among those fundamental rights necessary to our system of ordered liberty.”
Timbs and McDonald concerned the question whether the Fourteenth Amendment protects rights that are
expressly set out in the Bill of Rights, and it would be anomalous if similar historical support were not
required when a putative right is not mentioned anywhere in the Constitution. Thus, in Glucksberg, which
held that the Due Process Clause does not confer a right to assisted suicide, the Court surveyed more than
700 years of “Anglo-American common law tradition,” and made clear that a fundamental right must be
“objectively, deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition.”
Historical inquiries of this nature are essential whenever we are asked to recognize a new component of
the “liberty” protected by the Due Process Clause because the term “liberty” alone provides little guidance.
“Liberty” is a capacious term. As Lincoln once said: “We all declare for Liberty; but in using the same
word we do not all mean the same thing.” In a well-known essay, Isaiah Berlin reported that “[h]istorians
of ideas” had cataloged more than 200 different senses in which the term had been used.
In interpreting what is meant by the Fourteenth Amendment’s reference to “liberty,” we must guard
against the natural human tendency to confuse what that Amendment protects with our own ardent views
about the liberty that Americans should enjoy. That is why the Court has long been “reluctant” to recognize
rights that are not mentioned in the Constitution. Collins v. Harker Heights (1992). “Substantive due
process has at times been a treacherous field for this Court,” Moore v. East Cleveland (1977), and it has
sometimes led the Court to usurp authority that the Constitution entrusts to the people’s elected
representatives. As the Court cautioned in Glucksberg, “[w]e must . . . exercise the utmost care whenever
we are asked to break new ground in this field, lest the liberty protected by the Due Process Clause be
subtly transformed into the policy preferences of the Members of this Court.”
On occasion, when the Court has ignored the “[a]ppropriate limits” imposed by “‘respect for the teachings
of history,’” Moore, it has fallen into the freewheeling judicial policymaking that characterized discredited
decisions such as Lochner v. New York, 198 U. S. 45 (1905). The Court must not fall prey to such an
unprincipled approach. Instead, guided by the history and tradition that map the essential components of
our Nation’s concept of ordered liberty, we must ask what the Fourteenth Amendment means by the term
“liberty.” When we engage in that inquiry in the present case, the clear answer is that the Fourteenth
Amendment does not protect the right to an abortion.5
5 FN22: That is true regardless of whether we look to the Amendment’s Due Process Clause or its Privileges or Immunities
Clause. Some scholars and Justices have maintained that the Privileges or Immunities Clause is the provision of the
6
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
B
1
Until the latter part of the 20th century, there was no support in American law for a constitutional right to
obtain an abortion. No state constitutional provision had recognized such a right. Until a few years before
Roe was handed down, no federal or state court had recognized such a right. Nor had any scholarly treatise
of which we are aware. And although law review articles are not reticent about advocating new rights, the
earliest article proposing a constitutional right to abortion that has come to our attention was published
only a few years before Roe.
Not only was there no support for such a constitutional right until shortly before Roe, but abortion had
long been a crime in every single State. At common law, abortion was criminal in at least some stages of
pregnancy and was regarded as unlawful and could have very serious consequences at all stages. American
law followed the common law until a wave of statutory restrictions in the 1800s expanded criminal liability
for abortions. By the time of the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, three-quarters of the States had
made abortion a crime at any stage of pregnancy, and the remaining States would soon follow.
Roe either ignored or misstated this history, and Casey declined to reconsider Roe’s faulty historical
analysis. It is therefore important to set the record straight.
2
a
We begin with the common law, under which abortion was a crime at least after “quickening”—i.e., the
first felt movement of the fetus in the womb, which usually occurs between the 16th and 18th week of
pregnancy.6
The “eminent common-law authorities (Blackstone, Coke, Hale, and the like),” Kahler v. Kansas (2020),
all describe abortion after quickening as criminal. . . .
Fourteenth Amendment that guarantees substantive rights. See, e.g., McDonald v. Chicago (2010) (Thomas, J., concurring in
part and concurring in judgment); Duncan, (Black, J., concurring); A. Amar, Bill of Rights: Creation and Reconstruction
(1998) (Amar); J. Ely, Democracy and Distrust (1980). But even on that view, such a right would need to be rooted in the
Nation’s history and tradition. See Corfield v. Coryell (CC ED Pa. 1823) [(Washington, J.)] (describing unenumerated rights
under the Privileges and Immunities Clause, Art. IV, §2, as those “fundamental” rights “which have, at all times, been
enjoyed by the citizens of the several states”); Amar 176 (relying on Corfield to interpret the Privileges or Immunities
Clause); cf. McDonald (opinion of Thomas, J.) (reserving the question whether the Privileges or Immunities Clause protects
“any rights besides those enumerated in the Constitution”).
6 FN 24: The exact meaning of “quickening” is subject to some debate. We need not wade into this debate. First, it suffices
for present purposes to show that abortion was criminal by at least the 16th or 18th week of pregnancy. Second, as we will
show, during the relevant period—i.e., the period surrounding the enactment of the Fourteenth Amendment—the quickening
distinction was abandoned as States criminalized abortion at all stages of pregnancy.
7
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
And writing near the time of the adoption of our Constitution, William Blackstone explained that abortion
of a “quick” child was “by the ancient law homicide or manslaughter” (citing Bracton), and at least a very
“heinous misdemeanor” (citing Coke). . . . English cases dating all the way back to the 13th century
corroborate the treatises’ statements that abortion was a crime. . . .
Although a pre-quickening abortion was not itself considered homicide, it does not follow that abortion
was permissible at common law—much less that abortion was a legal right. Quite to the contrary, in the
1732 case mentioned above, the judge said of the charge of abortion (with no mention of quickening) that
he had “never met with a case so barbarous and unnatural.” . . . .
In sum, although common-law authorities differed on the severity of punishment for abortions committed
at different points in pregnancy, none endorsed the practice. Moreover, we are aware of no common-law
case or authority, and the parties have not pointed to any, that remotely suggests a positive right to procure
an abortion at any stage of pregnancy.
b
In this country, the historical record is similar. The “most important early American edition of
Blackstone’s Commentaries,” District of Columbia v. Heller (2008), reported Blackstone’s statement that
abortion of a quick child was at least “a heinous misdemeanor,” 2 St. George Tucker, Blackstone’s
Commentaries (1803) . . . . Manuals for justices of the peace printed in the Colonies in the 18th century
typically restated the common-law rule on abortion . . .
The few cases available from the early colonial period corroborate that abortion was a crime. . . . And by
the 19th century, courts frequently explained that the common law made abortion of a quick child a crime.
c
The original ground for drawing a distinction between pre- and post-quickening abortions is not entirely
clear, but some have attributed the rule to the difficulty of proving that a pre-quickening fetus was alive.
At that time, there were no scientific methods for detecting pregnancy in its early stages, and thus, as one
court put it in 1872: “[U]ntil the period of quickening there is no evidence of life. . . .” Evans v. People. .
. .
At any rate, the original ground for the quickening rule is of little importance for present purposes because
the rule was abandoned in the 19th century. During that period, treatise writers and commentators
criticized the quickening distinction as “neither in accordance with the result of medical experience, nor
with the principles of the common law.” F. Wharton, Criminal Law (1857). In 1803, the British Parliament
made abortion a crime at all stages of pregnancy and authorized the imposition of severe punishment. . . .
In this country during the 19th century, the vast majority of the States enacted statutes criminalizing
abortion at all stages of pregnancy. By 1868, the year when the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified, three-
quarters of the States, 28 out of 37, had enacted statutes making abortion a crime even if it was performed
8
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
before quickening. Of the nine States that had not yet criminalized abortion at all stages, all but one did
so by 1910.
The trend in the Territories that would become the last 13 States was similar: All of them criminalized
abortion at all stages of pregnancy between 1850 (the Kingdom of Hawaii) and 1919 (New Mexico). By
the end of the 1950s, according to the Roe Court’s own count, statutes in all but four States and the District
of Columbia prohibited abortion “however and whenever performed, unless done to save or preserve the
life of the mother.” 410 U. S., at 139.
This overwhelming consensus endured until the day Roe was decided. At that time, also by the Roe Court’s
own count, a substantial majority—30 States—still prohibited abortion at all stages except to save the life
of the mother. And though Roe discerned a “trend toward liberalization” in about “one-third of the States,”
those States still criminalized some abortions and regulated them more stringently than Roe would allow.
In short, the “Court’s opinion in Roe itself convincingly refutes the notion that the abortion liberty is
deeply rooted in the history or tradition of our people.” Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists (1986) (White, J., dissenting).
d
The inescapable conclusion is that a right to abortion is not deeply rooted in the Nation’s history and
traditions. On the contrary, an unbroken tradition of prohibiting abortion on pain of criminal punishment
persisted from the earliest days of the common law until 1973. The Court in Roe could have said of
abortion exactly what Glucksberg said of assisted suicide: “Attitudes toward [abortion] have changed
since Bracton, but our laws have consistently condemned, and continue to prohibit, [that practice].”
3
Respondents and their amici have no persuasive answer to this historical evidence.
Neither respondents nor the Solicitor General disputes the fact that by 1868 the vast majority of States
criminalized abortion at all stages of pregnancy. Instead, respondents are forced to argue that it “does [not]
matter that some States prohibited abortion at the time Roe was decided or when the Fourteenth
Amendment was adopted.” But that argument flies in the face of the standard we have applied in
determining whether an asserted right that is nowhere mentioned in the Constitution is nevertheless
protected by the Fourteenth Amendment.
Not only are respondents and their amici unable to show that a constitutional right to abortion was
established when the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted, but they have found no support for the
existence of an abortion right that predates the latter part of the 20th century—no state constitutional
provision, no statute, no judicial decision, no learned treatise. The earliest sources called to our attention
are a few district court and state court decisions decided shortly before Roe and a small number of law
review articles from the same time period. . . .
9
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
The Solicitor General next suggests that history supports an abortion right because the common law’s
failure to criminalize abortion before quickening means that “at the Founding and for decades thereafter,
women generally could terminate a pregnancy, at least in its early stages.” But the insistence on quickening
was not universal, and regardless, the fact that many States in the late 18th and early 19th century did not
criminalize pre-quickening abortions does not mean that anyone thought the States lacked the authority to
do so. When legislatures began to exercise that authority as the century wore on, no one, as far as we are
aware, argued that the laws they enacted violated a fundamental right. That is not surprising since
common-law authorities had repeatedly condemned abortion and described it as an “unlawful” act without
regard to whether it occurred before or after quickening. . . .7
C
1
Instead of seriously pressing the argument that the abortion right itself has deep roots, supporters of Roe
and Casey contend that the abortion right is an integral part of a broader entrenched right. Roe termed this
a right to privacy, and Casey described it as the freedom to make “intimate and personal choices” that are
“central to personal dignity and autonomy.” Casey elaborated: “At the heart of liberty is the right to define
one’s own concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human life.”
The Court did not claim that this broadly framed right is absolute, and no such claim would be plausible.
While individuals are certainly free to think and to say what they wish about “existence,” “meaning,” the
“universe,” and “the mystery of human life,” they are not always free to act in accordance with those
thoughts. License to act on the basis of such beliefs may correspond to one of the many understandings of
“liberty,” but it is certainly not “ordered liberty.”
Ordered liberty sets limits and defines the boundary between competing interests. Roe and Casey each
struck a particular balance between the interests of a woman who wants an abortion and the interests of
what they termed “potential life.” But the people of the various States may evaluate those interests
differently. In some States, voters may believe that the abortion right should be even more extensive than
the right that Roe and Casey recognized. Voters in other States may wish to impose tight restrictions based
on their belief that abortion destroys an “unborn human being.” Our Nation’s historical understanding of
ordered liberty does not prevent the people’s elected representatives from deciding how abortion should
be regulated.
Nor does the right to obtain an abortion have a sound basis in precedent. Casey relied on cases involving
the right to marry a person of a different race, Loving v. Virginia (1967); the right to marry while in prison,
Turner v. Safley (1987); the right to obtain contraceptives, Griswold v. Connecticut (1965), Eisenstadt v.
Baird (1972); the right to reside with relatives, Moore v. East Cleveland (1977); the right to make
7 FN41: Other amicus briefs present arguments about the motives of proponents of liberal access to abortion. They note that
some such supporters have been motivated by a desire to suppress the size of the African-American population. See also Box
v. Planned Parenthood of Ind. and Ky., Inc. (2019) (Thomas, J., concurring). And it is beyond dispute that Roe has had that
demographic effect. A highly disproportionate percentage of aborted fetuses are Black. For our part, we do not question the
motives of either those who have supported or those who have opposed laws restricting abortions.
10
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
decisions about the education of one’s children, Pierce v. Society of Sisters (1925), Meyer v. Nebraska
(1923); the right not to be sterilized without consent, Skinner v. Oklahoma ex rel. Williamson (1942); and
the right in certain circumstances not to undergo involuntary surgery, forced administration of drugs, or
other substantially similar procedures,. Respondents and the Solicitor General also rely on post-Casey
decisions like Lawrence v. Texas (2003) (right to engage in private, consensual sexual acts), and
Obergefell v. Hodges (2015) (right to marry a person of the same sex).
These attempts to justify abortion through appeals to a broader right to autonomy and to define one’s
“concept of existence” prove too much. Casey. Those criteria, at a high level of generality, could license
fundamental rights to illicit drug use, prostitution, and the like. None of these rights has any claim to being
deeply rooted in history.
What sharply distinguishes the abortion right from the rights recognized in the cases on which Roe and
Casey rely is something that both those decisions acknowledged: Abortion destroys what those decisions
call “potential life” and what the law at issue in this case regards as the life of an “unborn human being.”
None of the other decisions cited by Roe and Casey involved the critical moral question posed by abortion.
They are therefore inapposite. They do not support the right to obtain an abortion, and by the same token,
our conclusion that the Constitution does not confer such a right does not undermine them in any way.
2
In drawing this critical distinction between the abortion right and other rights, it is not necessary to dispute
Casey’s claim (which we accept for the sake of argument) that “the specific practices of States at the time
of the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment” do not “mar[k] the outer limits of the substantive sphere
of liberty which the Fourteenth Amendment protects.” Abortion is nothing new. It has been addressed by
lawmakers for centuries, and the fundamental moral question that it poses is ageless.
Defenders of Roe and Casey do not claim that any new scientific learning calls for a different answer to
the underlying moral question, but they do contend that changes in society require the recognition of a
constitutional right to obtain an abortion. Without the availability of abortion, they maintain, people will
be inhibited from exercising their freedom to choose the types of relationships they desire, and women
will be unable to compete with men in the workplace and in other endeavors.
Americans who believe that abortion should be restricted press countervailing arguments about modern
developments. They note that attitudes about the pregnancy of unmarried women have changed
drastically; that federal and state laws ban discrimination on the basis of pregnancy; that leave for
pregnancy and childbirth are now guaranteed by law in many cases; that the costs of medical care
associated with pregnancy are covered by insurance or government assistance; that States have
increasingly adopted “safe haven” laws, which generally allow women to drop off babies anonymously;
and that a woman who puts her newborn up for adoption today has little reason to fear that the baby will
not find a suitable home. They also claim that many people now have a new appreciation of fetal life and
that when prospective parents who want to have a child view a sonogram, they typically have no doubt
that what they see is their daughter or son.
11
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
Both sides make important policy arguments, but supporters of Roe and Casey must show that this Court
has the authority to weigh those arguments and decide how abortion may be regulated in the States. They
have failed to make that showing, and we thus return the power to weigh those arguments to the people
and their elected representatives.
D
1
The dissent is very candid that it cannot show that a constitutional right to abortion has any foundation,
let alone a “‘deeply rooted’ ” one, “‘in this Nation’s history and tradition.’” Glucksberg, 521 U. S., at 721;
see post (joint opinion of Breyer, Sotomayor, and Kagan, JJ.). The dissent does not identify any pre-Roe
authority that supports such a right—no state constitutional provision or statute, no federal or state judicial
precedent, not even a scholarly treatise. Nor does the dissent dispute the fact that abortion was illegal at
common law at least after quickening; that the 19th century saw a trend toward criminalization of pre-
quickening abortions; that by 1868, a supermajority of States (at least 26 of 37) had enacted statutes
criminalizing abortion at all stages of pregnancy; that by the late 1950s at least 46 States prohibited
abortion “however and whenever performed” except if necessary to save “the life of the mother,” and that
when Roe was decided in 1973 similar statutes were still in effect in 30 States.8
The dissent’s failure to engage with this long tradition is devastating to its position. We have held that the
“established method of substantive-due-process analysis” requires that an unenumerated right be “‘deeply
rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition’” before it can be recognized as a component of the “liberty”
protected in the Due Process Clause. Glucksberg; cf. Timbs. But despite the dissent’s professed fidelity to
stare decisis, it fails to seriously engage with that important precedent—which it cannot possibly satisfy.
The dissent attempts to obscure this failure by misrepresenting our application of Glucksberg. The dissent
suggests that we have focused only on “the legal status of abortion in the 19th century,” but our review of
this Nation’s tradition extends well past that period. As explained, for more than a century after 1868—
including “another half-century” after women gained the constitutional right to vote in 1920, Amdt. 19—
it was firmly established that laws prohibiting abortion like the Texas law at issue in Roe were permissible
exercises of state regulatory authority. And today, another half century later, more than half of the States
have asked us to overrule Roe and Casey. The dissent cannot establish that a right to abortion has ever
been part of this Nation’s tradition.
2
Because the dissent cannot argue that the abortion right is rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition, it
contends that the “constitutional tradition” is “not captured whole at a single moment,” and that its
“meaning gains content from the long sweep of our history and from successive judicial precedents.” This
vague formulation imposes no clear restraints on what Justice White called the “exercise of raw judicial
8 FN 47: By way of contrast, at the time Griswold v. Connecticut (1965),was decided, the Connecticut statute at issue was an
extreme outlier.
12
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
power,” Roe (dissenting opinion), and while the dissent claims that its standard “does not mean anything
goes,” any real restraints are hard to discern.
The largely limitless reach of the dissenters’ standard is illustrated by the way they apply it here. First, if
the “long sweep of history” imposes any restraint on the recognition of unenumerated rights, then Roe was
surely wrong, since abortion was never allowed (except to save the life of the mother) in a majority of
States for over 100 years before that decision was handed down. Second, it is impossible to defend Roe
based on prior precedent because all of the precedents Roe cited, including Griswold and Eisenstadt, were
critically different for a reason that we have explained: None of those cases involved the destruction of
what Roe called “potential life.”
So without support in history or relevant precedent, Roe’s reasoning cannot be defended even under the
dissent’s proposed test, and the dissent is forced to rely solely on the fact that a constitutional right to
abortion was recognized in Roe and later decisions that accepted Roe’s interpretation. Under the doctrine
of stare decisis, those precedents are entitled to careful and respectful consideration, and we engage in
that analysis below. But as the Court has reiterated time and time again, adherence to precedent is not “‘an
inexorable command.’” Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment, LLC 455 (2015). There are occasions when past
decisions should be overruled, and as we will explain, this is one of them.
3
The most striking feature of the dissent is the absence of any serious discussion of the legitimacy of the
States’ interest in protecting fetal life. This is evident in the analogy that the dissent draws between the
abortion right and the rights recognized in Griswold (contraception), Eisenstadt (same), Lawrence (sexual
conduct with member of the same sex), and Obergefell (same-sex marriage). Perhaps this is designed to
stoke unfounded fear that our decision will imperil those other rights, but the dissent’s analogy is
objectionable for a more important reason: what it reveals about the dissent’s views on the protection of
what Roe called “potential life.” The exercise of the rights at issue in Griswold, Eisenstadt, Lawrence, and
Obergefell does not destroy a “potential life,” but an abortion has that effect. So if the rights at issue in
those cases are fundamentally the same as the right recognized in Roe and Casey, the implication is clear:
The Constitution does not permit the States to regard the destruction of a “potential life” as a matter of
any significance.
That view is evident throughout the dissent. The dissent has much to say about the effects of pregnancy
on women, the burdens of motherhood, and the difficulties faced by poor women. These are important
concerns. However, the dissent evinces no similar regard for a State’s interest in protecting prenatal life.
The dissent repeatedly praises the “balance,” that the viability line strikes between a woman’s liberty
interest and the State’s interest in prenatal life. But for reasons we discuss later, and given in the opinion
of The Chief Justice, the viability line makes no sense. It was not adequately justified in Roe, and the
dissent does not even try to defend it today. Nor does it identify any other point in a pregnancy after which
a State is permitted to prohibit the destruction of a fetus.
Our opinion is not based on any view about if and when prenatal life is entitled to any of the rights enjoyed
after birth. The dissent, by contrast, would impose on the people a particular theory about when the rights
13
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
of personhood begin. According to the dissent, the Constitution requires the States to regard a fetus as
lacking even the most basic human right—to live—at least until an arbitrary point in a pregnancy has
passed. Nothing in the Constitution or in our Nation’s legal traditions authorizes the Court to adopt that
“‘theory of life.’”
III
We next consider whether the doctrine of stare decisis counsels continued acceptance of Roe and Casey.
Stare decisis plays an important role in our case law, and we have explained that it serves many valuable
ends. It protects the interests of those who have taken action in reliance on a past decision. See Casey
(joint opinion). It “reduces incentives for challenging settled precedents, saving parties and courts the
expense of endless relitigation.” Kimble. It fosters “evenhanded” decisionmaking by requiring that like
cases be decided in a like manner. Payne. It “contributes to the actual and perceived integrity of the judicial
process.” And it restrains judicial hubris and reminds us to respect the judgment of those who have
grappled with important questions in the past. . . .
We have long recognized, however, that stare decisis is “not an inexorable command,” Pearson v.
Callahan (2009), and it “is at its weakest when we interpret the Constitution,” Agostini v. Felton (1997).
It has been said that it is sometimes more important that an issue “‘be settled than that it be settled right.’”
Kimble (quoting Burnet v. Coronado Oil & Gas Co. (1932) (Brandeis, J., dissenting)). But when it comes
to the interpretation of the Constitution—the “great charter of our liberties,” which was meant “to endure
through a long lapse of ages,” Martin v. Hunter’s Lessee (1816) (Story, J.)—we place a high value on
having the matter “settled right.” In addition, when one of our constitutional decisions goes astray, the
country is usually stuck with the bad decision unless we correct our own mistake. An erroneous
constitutional decision can be fixed by amending the Constitution, but our Constitution is notoriously hard
to amend. See Art. V. Therefore, in appropriate circumstances we must be willing to reconsider and, if
necessary, overrule constitutional decisions.
Some of our most important constitutional decisions have overruled prior precedents. We mention three.
In Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the Court repudiated the “separate but equal” doctrine, which had
allowed States to maintain racially segregated schools and other facilities. In so doing, the Court overruled
the infamous decision in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), along with six other Supreme Court precedents that
had applied the separate-but-equal rule.
In West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish (1937), the Court overruled Adkins v. Children’s Hospital of D. C.
(1923), which had held that a law setting minimum wages for women violated the “liberty” protected by
the Fifth Amendment’s Due Process Clause. West Coast Hotel signaled the demise of an entire line of
important precedents that had protected an individual liberty right against state and federal health and
welfare legislation. See Lochner v. New York (1905) (holding invalid a law setting maximum working
hours).
Finally, in West Virginia Bd. of Ed. v. Barnette (1943), after the lapse of only three years, the Court
overruled Minersville School Dist. v. Gobitis (1940), and held that public school students could not be
compelled to salute the flag in violation of their sincere beliefs. Barnette stands out because nothing had
14
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
changed during the intervening period other than the Court’s belated recognition that its earlier decision
had been seriously wrong.
On many other occasions, this Court has overruled important constitutional decisions. (We include a
partial list in the footnote that follows.9) Without these decisions, American constitutional law as we know
it would be unrecognizable, and this would be a different country.
No Justice of this Court has ever argued that the Court should never overrule a constitutional decision, but
overruling a precedent is a serious matter. It is not a step that should be taken lightly. Our cases have
attempted to provide a framework for deciding when a precedent should be overruled, and they have
identified factors that should be considered in making such a decision. Janus v. State, County, and
Municipal Employees (2018); Ramos v. Louisiana (2020) (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in part).
In this case, five factors weigh strongly in favor of overruling Roe and Casey: the nature of their error, the
quality of their reasoning, the “workability” of the rules they imposed on the country, their disruptive
effect on other areas of the law, and the absence of concrete reliance.
A
The nature of the Court’s error. An erroneous interpretation of the Constitution is always important, but
some are more damaging than others.
The infamous decision in Plessy v. Ferguson, was one such decision. It betrayed our commitment to
“equality before the law.” It was “egregiously wrong” on the day it was decided, see Ramos (Kavanaugh,
9 FN48: See, e.g., Obergefell v. Hodges (2015) (right to same-sex marriage), overruling Baker v. Nelson, (1972); Citizens
United v. Federal Election Comm’n, (2010) (right to engage in campaign-related speech), partially overruling McConnell v.
Federal Election Comm’n, (2003); Crawford v. Washington, (2004) (Sixth Amendment right to confront witnesses),
overruling Ohio v. Roberts (1980); Lawrence v. Texas (2003) (right to engage in consensual, same-sex intimacy in one’s
home), overruling Bowers v. Hardwick (1986); Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida (1996) (lack of congressional power under
the Indian Commerce Clause to abrogate States’ Eleventh Amendment immunity), overruling Pennsylvania v. Union Gas Co.
(1989); Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority (1985) (rejecting the principle that the Commerce Clause does
not empower Congress to enforce requirements, such as minimum wage laws, against the States “‘in areas of traditional
governmental functions’”), overruling National League of Cities v. Usery, (1976); Craig v. Boren (1976) (gender-based
classifications are subject to intermediate scrutiny under the Equal Protection Clause), overruling Goesaert v. Cleary (1948);
Brandenburg v. Ohio (1969) (per curiam) (the mere advocacy of violence is protected under the First Amendment unless it is
directed to incite or produce imminent lawless action), overruling Whitney v. California (1927); Katz v. United States (1967)
(Fourth Amendment “protects people, not places,” and extends to what a person “seeks to preserve as private”), overruling
Olmstead v. United States (1928); Miranda v. Arizona (1966) (procedural safeguards to protect the Fifth Amendment
privilege against self-incrimination), overruling Crooker v. California (1958); Gideon v. Wainwright (1963) (right to counsel
for indigent defendant in a criminal prosecution in state court under the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments), overruling Betts
v. Brady (1942); Baker v. Carr (1962) (federal courts have jurisdiction to consider constitutional challenges to state
redistricting plans), effectively overruling in part Colegrove; Mapp v. Ohio (1961) (the exclusionary rule regarding the
inadmissibility of evidence obtained in violation of the Fourth Amendment applies to the States), overruling Wolf v.
Colorado (1949); United States v. Darby (1941) (congressional power to regulate employment conditions under the
Commerce Clause), overruling Hammer v. Dagenhart (1918); Erie R. Co. v. Tompkins (1938) (Congress does not have the
power to declare substantive rules of common law; a federal court sitting in diversity jurisdiction must apply the substantive
state law), overruling Swift v. Tyson (1842).
15
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
J.) (slip op., at 7), and as the Solicitor General agreed at oral argument, it should have been overruled at
the earliest opportunity.
Roe was also egregiously wrong and deeply damaging. For reasons already explained, Roe’s constitutional
analysis was far outside the bounds of any reasonable interpretation of the various constitutional
provisions to which it vaguely pointed.
Roe was on a collision course with the Constitution from the day it was decided, Casey perpetuated its
errors, and those errors do not concern some arcane corner of the law of little importance to the American
people. Rather, wielding nothing but “raw judicial power,” Roe (White, J., dissenting), the Court usurped
the power to address a question of profound moral and social importance that the Constitution
unequivocally leaves for the people. Casey described itself as calling both sides of the national controversy
to resolve their debate, but in doing so, Casey necessarily declared a winning side. Those on the losing
side—those who sought to advance the State’s interest in fetal life—could no longer seek to persuade their
elected representatives to adopt policies consistent with their views. The Court short-circuited the
democratic process by closing it to the large number of Americans who dissented in any respect from Roe.
“Roe fanned into life an issue that has inflamed our national politics in general, and has obscured with its
smoke the selection of Justices to this Court in particular, ever since.” Casey (Scalia, J.). Together, Roe
and Casey represent an error that cannot be allowed to stand.
As the Court’s landmark decision in West Coast Hotel illustrates, the Court has previously overruled
decisions that wrongly removed an issue from the people and the democratic process. . . .
B
The quality of the reasoning. Under our precedents, the quality of the reasoning in a prior case has an
important bearing on whether it should be reconsidered. In Part II, supra, we explained why Roe was
incorrectly decided, but that decision was more than just wrong. It stood on exceptionally weak grounds.
Roe found that the Constitution implicitly conferred a right to obtain an abortion, but it failed to ground
its decision in text, history, or precedent. It relied on an erroneous historical narrative; it devoted great
attention to and presumably relied on matters that have no bearing on the meaning of the Constitution; it
disregarded the fundamental difference between the precedents on which it relied and the question before
the Court; it concocted an elaborate set of rules, with different restrictions for each trimester of pregnancy,
but it did not explain how this veritable code could be teased out of anything in the Constitution, the
history of abortion laws, prior precedent, or any other cited source; and its most important rule (that States
cannot protect fetal life prior to “viability”) was never raised by any party and has never been plausibly
explained. Roe’s reasoning quickly drew scathing scholarly criticism, even from supporters of broad
access to abortion.
The Casey plurality, while reaffirming Roe’s central holding, pointedly refrained from endorsing most of
its reasoning. It revised the textual basis for the abortion right, silently abandoned Roe’s erroneous
historical narrative, and jettisoned the trimester framework. But it replaced that scheme with an arbitrary
16
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
“undue burden” test and relied on an exceptional version of stare decisis that, as explained below, this
Court had never before applied and has never invoked since.
1
a
The weaknesses in Roe’s reasoning are well-known. Without any grounding in the constitutional text,
history, or precedent, it imposed on the entire country a detailed set of rules much like those that one might
expect to find in a statute or regulation. Dividing pregnancy into three trimesters, the Court imposed
special rules for each. . . .
This elaborate scheme was the Court’s own brainchild. Neither party advocated the trimester framework;
nor did either party or any amicus argue that “viability” should mark the point at which the scope of the
abortion right and a State’s regulatory authority should be substantially transformed.
b
Not only did this scheme resemble the work of a legislature, but the Court made little effort to explain
how these rules could be deduced from any of the sources on which constitutional decisions are usually
based. . . .
When it came to the most important historical fact—how the States regulated abortion when the
Fourteenth Amendment was adopted—the Court said almost nothing. It allowed that States had tightened
their abortion laws “in the middle and late 19th century,” but it implied that these laws might have been
enacted not to protect fetal life but to further “a Victorian social concern” about “illicit sexual conduct.”
Roe’s failure even to note the overwhelming consensus of state laws in effect in 1868 is striking, and what
it said about the common law was simply wrong. Relying on two discredited articles by an abortion
advocate, the Court erroneously suggested—contrary to Bracton, Coke, Hale, Blackstone, and a wealth of
other authority—that the common law had probably never really treated post-quickening abortion as a
crime. This erroneous understanding appears to have played an important part in the Court’s thinking
because the opinion cited “the lenity of the common law” as one of the four factors that informed its
decision.
After surveying history, the opinion spent many paragraphs conducting the sort of fact-finding that might
be undertaken by a legislative committee. . . . The Court did not explain why these sources shed light on
the meaning of the Constitution, and not one of them adopted or advocated anything like the scheme that
Roe imposed on the country.
Finally, after all this, the Court turned to precedent. Citing a broad array of cases, the Court found support
for a constitutional “right of personal privacy,” but it conflated two very different meanings of the term:
the right to shield information from disclosure and the right to make and implement important personal
17
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
decisions without governmental interference. Only the cases involving this second sense of the term could
have any possible relevance to the abortion issue, and some of the cases in that category involved personal
decisions that were obviously very, very far afield. See Pierce (right to send children to religious school);
Meyer (right to have children receive German language instruction).
What remained was a handful of cases having something to do with marriage, Loving (right to marry a
person of a different race), or procreation, Skinner (right not to be sterilized); Griswold (right of married
persons to obtain contraceptives); Eisenstadt (same, for unmarried persons). But none of these decisions
involved what is distinctive about abortion: its effect on what Roe termed “potential life.”
. . . The scheme Roe produced looked like legislation, and the Court provided the sort of explanation that
might be expected from a legislative body.
c
What Roe did not provide was any cogent justification for the lines it drew. Why, for example, does a
State have no authority to regulate first trimester abortions for the purpose of protecting a woman’s health?
The Court’s only explanation was that mortality rates for abortion at that stage were lower than the
mortality rates for childbirth. But the Court did not explain why mortality rates were the only factor that
a State could legitimately consider. Many health and safety regulations aim to avoid adverse health
consequences short of death. And the Court did not explain why it departed from the normal rule that
courts defer to the judgments of legislatures “in areas fraught with medical and scientific uncertainties.”
Marshall v. United State, (1974).
An even more glaring deficiency was Roe’s failure to justify the critical distinction it drew between pre-
and post-viability abortions. Here is the Court’s entire explanation: “With respect to the State’s important
and legitimate interest in potential life, the ‘compelling’ point is at viability. This is so because the fetus
then presumably has the capability of meaningful life outside the womb.”
As Professor Laurence Tribe has written, “[c]learly, this mistakes ‘a definition for a syllogism.’” The
definition of a “viable” fetus is one that is capable of surviving outside the womb, but why is this the point
at which the State’s interest becomes compelling? If, as Roe held, a State’s interest in protecting prenatal
life is compelling “after viability,” why isn’t that interest “equally compelling before viability”? Webster
v. Reproductive Health Services (1989) (plurality opinion). Roe did not say, and no explanation is
apparent.
This arbitrary line has not found much support among philosophers and ethicists who have attempted to
justify a right to abortion. . . But even if one takes the view that “personhood” begins when a certain
attribute or combination of attributes is acquired, it is very hard to see why viability should mark the point
where “personhood” begins.
The most obvious problem with any such argument is that viability is heavily dependent on factors that
have nothing to do with the characteristics of a fetus. One is the state of neonatal care at a particular point
18
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
in time. Due to the development of new equipment and improved practices, the viability line has changed
over the years. . . . In addition, as the Court once explained, viability is not really a hard-and-fast line. . . .
The viability line, which Casey termed Roe’s central rule, makes no sense, and it is telling that other
countries almost uniformly eschew such a line. The Court thus asserted raw judicial power to impose, as
a matter of constitutional law, a uniform viability rule that allowed the States less freedom to regulate
abortion than the majority of western democracies enjoy.
d
All in all, Roe’s reasoning was exceedingly weak, and academic commentators, including those who
agreed with the decision as a matter of policy, were unsparing in their criticism. John Hart Ely famously
wrote that Roe was “not constitutional law and g[ave] almost no sense of an obligation to try to be.”
Archibald Cox, who served as Solicitor General under President Kennedy, commented that Roe “read[s]
like a set of hospital rules and regulations” that “[n]either historian, layman, nor lawyer will be persuaded
. . . are part of . . . the Constitution.” Laurence Tribe wrote that “even if there is a need to divide pregnancy
into several segments with lines that clearly identify the limits of governmental power, ‘interest-balancing’
of the form the Court pursues fails to justify any of the lines actually drawn.” Mark Tushnet termed Roe
a “totally unreasoned judicial opinion.”
Despite Roe’s weaknesses, its reach was steadily extended in the years that followed. . . .
2
When Casey revisited Roe almost 20 years later, very little of Roe’s reasoning was defended or preserved.
The Court abandoned any reliance on a privacy right and instead grounded the abortion right entirely on
the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause. . . .
The Court also made no real effort to remedy one of the greatest weaknesses in Roe’s analysis: its much-
criticized discussion of viability. The Court retained what it called Roe’s “central holding”—that a State
may not regulate pre-viability abortions for the purpose of protecting fetal life—but it provided no
principled defense of the viability line. Instead, it merely rephrased what Roe had said, stating that viability
marked the point at which “the independent existence of a second life can in reason and fairness be the
object of state protection that now overrides the rights of the woman.” . . .
The controlling opinion criticized and rejected Roe’s trimester scheme, and substituted a new “undue
burden” test, but the basis for this test was obscure. And as we will explain, the test is full of ambiguities
and is difficult to apply.
Casey, in short, either refused to reaffirm or rejected important aspects of Roe’s analysis, failed to remedy
glaring deficiencies in Roe’s reasoning, endorsed what it termed Roe’s central holding while suggesting
that a majority might not have thought it was correct, provided no new support for the abortion right other
than Roe’s status as precedent, and imposed a new and problematic test with no firm grounding in
constitutional text, history, or precedent.
19
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
As discussed below, Casey also deployed a novel version of the doctrine of stare decisis. This new
doctrine did not account for the profound wrongness of the decision in Roe, and placed great weight on
an intangible form of reliance with little if any basis in prior case law. Stare decisis does not command
the preservation of such a decision.
C
Workability. Our precedents counsel that another important consideration in deciding whether a precedent
should be overruled is whether the rule it imposes is workable—that is, whether it can be understood and
applied in a consistent and predictable manner. Casey’s “undue burden” test has scored poorly on the
workability scale.
1
Problems begin with the very concept of an “undue burden.” As Justice Scalia noted in his Casey partial
dissent, determining whether a burden is “due” or “undue” is “inherently standardless.”
The Casey plurality tried to put meaning into the “undue burden” test by setting out three subsidiary rules,
but these rules created their own problems. The first rule is that “a provision of law is invalid, if its purpose
or effect is to place a substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion before the fetus
attains viability.” But whether a particular obstacle qualifies as “substantial” is often open to reasonable
debate. . . .
This ambiguity is a problem, and the second rule, which applies at all stages of a pregnancy, muddies
things further. It states that measures designed “to ensure that the woman’s choice is informed” are
constitutional so long as they do not impose “an undue burden on the right.” To the extent that this rule
applies to pre-viability abortions, it overlaps with the first rule and appears to impose a different standard.
. . .
The third rule complicates the picture even more. Under that rule, “[u]nnecessary health regulations that
have the purpose or effect of presenting a substantial obstacle to a woman seeking an abortion impose an
undue burden on the right.” Casey, 505 U. S., at 878 (emphasis added). This rule contains no fewer than
three vague terms. It includes the two already discussed—“undue burden” and “substantial obstacle”—
even though they are inconsistent. And it adds a third ambiguous term when it refers to “unnecessary
health regulations.” The term “necessary” has a range of meanings—from “essential” to merely “useful.”
Casey did not explain the sense in which the term is used in this rule. . . .
2
The difficulty of applying Casey’s new rules surfaced in that very case. The controlling opinion found
that Pennsylvania’s 24-hour waiting period requirement and its informed-consent provision did not
impose “undue burden[s],” but Justice Stevens, applying the same test, reached the opposite result. That
did not bode well, and then-Chief Justice Rehnquist aptly observed that “the undue burden standard
presents nothing more workable than the trimester framework.” . . .
20
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
The ambiguity of the “undue burden” test also produced disagreement in later cases [including Whole
Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt]. . . . This Court’s experience applying Casey has confirmed Chief Justice
Rehnquist’s prescient diagnosis that the undue-burden standard was “not built to last.”
3
The experience of the Courts of Appeals provides further evidence that Casey’s “line between”
permissible and unconstitutional restrictions “has proved to be impossible to draw with precision.” Janus.
Casey has generated a long list of Circuit conflicts. . . . Continued adherence to that standard would
undermine, not advance, the “evenhanded, predictable, and consistent development of legal principles.”
Payne.
D
Effect on other areas of law. Roe and Casey have led to the distortion of many important but unrelated
legal doctrines, and that effect provides further support for overruling those decisions.
Members of this Court have repeatedly lamented that “no legal rule or doctrine is safe from ad hoc
nullification by this Court when an occasion for its application arises in a case involving state regulation
of abortion.” Thornburgh (O’Connor, J., dissenting).
The Court’s abortion cases have diluted the strict standard for facial constitutional challenges. They have
ignored the Court’s third-party standing doctrine. They have disregarded standard res judicata principles.
They have flouted the ordinary rules on the severability of unconstitutional provisions, as well as the rule
that statutes should be read where possible to avoid unconstitutionality. And they have distorted First
Amendment doctrines. . . .
E
Reliance interests. We last consider whether overruling Roe and Casey will upend substantial reliance
interests.
1
Traditional reliance interests arise “where advance planning of great precision is most obviously a
necessity.” Casey. In Casey, the controlling opinion conceded that those traditional reliance interests were
not implicated because getting an abortion is generally “unplanned activity,” and “reproductive planning
could take virtually immediate account of any sudden restoration of state authority to ban abortions.” For
these reasons, we agree with the Casey plurality that conventional, concrete reliance interests are not
present here.
2
21
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
Unable to find reliance in the conventional sense, the controlling opinion in Casey perceived a more
intangible form of reliance. It wrote that “people [had] organized intimate relationships and made choices
that define their views of themselves and their places in society . . . in reliance on the availability of
abortion in the event that contraception should fail” and that “[t]he ability of women to participate equally
in the economic and social life of the Nation has been facilitated by their ability to control their
reproductive lives.” But this Court is ill-equipped to assess “generalized assertions about the national
psyche.” Id. (Rehnquist, C. J.). Casey’s notion of reliance thus finds little support in our cases, which
instead emphasize very concrete reliance interests, like those that develop in “cases involving property
and contract rights.”
When a concrete reliance interest is asserted, courts are equipped to evaluate the claim, but assessing the
novel and intangible form of reliance endorsed by the Casey plurality is another matter. That form of
reliance depends on an empirical question that is hard for anyone—and in particular, for a court—to assess,
namely, the effect of the abortion right on society and in particular on the lives of women. The contending
sides in this case make impassioned and conflicting arguments about the effects of the abortion right on
the lives of women. The contending sides also make conflicting arguments about the status of the fetus.
This Court has neither the authority nor the expertise to adjudicate those disputes, and the Casey plurality’s
speculations and weighing of the relative importance of the fetus and mother represent a departure from
the “original constitutional proposition” that “courts do not substitute their social and economic beliefs
for the judgment of legislative bodies.” Ferguson v. Skrupa (1963).
Our decision returns the issue of abortion to those legislative bodies, and it allows women on both sides
of the abortion issue to seek to affect the legislative process by influencing public opinion, lobbying
legislators, voting, and running for office. . . .
3
Unable to show concrete reliance on Roe and Casey themselves, the Solicitor General suggests that
overruling those decisions would “threaten the Court’s precedents holding that the Due Process Clause
protects other rights.” Brief for United States (citing Obergefell; Lawrence; Griswold). That is not correct
for reasons we have already discussed. As even the Casey plurality recognized, “[a]bortion is a unique
act” because it terminates “life or potential life.” And to ensure that our decision is not misunderstood or
mischaracterized, we emphasize that our decision concerns the constitutional right to abortion and no other
right. Nothing in this opinion should be understood to cast doubt on precedents that do not concern
abortion.
IV
Having shown that traditional stare decisis factors do not weigh in favor of retaining Roe or Casey, we
must address one final argument that featured prominently in the Casey plurality opinion.
The argument was cast in different terms, but stated simply, it was essentially as follows. The American
people’s belief in the rule of law would be shaken if they lost respect for this Court as an institution that
22
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
decides important cases based on principle, not “social and political pressures.” There is a special danger
that the public will perceive a decision as having been made for unprincipled reasons when the Court
overrules a controversial “watershed” decision, such as Roe. A decision overruling Roe would be
perceived as having been made “under fire” and as a “surrender to political pressure,” and therefore the
preservation of public approval of the Court weighs heavily in favor of retaining Roe.
This analysis starts out on the right foot but ultimately veers off course. The Casey plurality was certainly
right that it is important for the public to perceive that our decisions are based on principle, and we should
make every effort to achieve that objective by issuing opinions that carefully show how a proper
understanding of the law leads to the results we reach. But we cannot exceed the scope of our authority
under the Constitution, and we cannot allow our decisions to be affected by any extraneous influences
such as concern about the public’s reaction to our work. Cf. Texas v. Johnson (1989); Brown. That is true
both when we initially decide a constitutional issue and when we consider whether to overrule a prior
decision. As Chief Justice Rehnquist explained, “The Judicial Branch derives its legitimacy, not from
following public opinion, but from deciding by its best lights whether legislative enactments of the popular
branches of Government comport with the Constitution. The doctrine of stare decisis is an adjunct of this
duty, and should be no more subject to the vagaries of public opinion than is the basic judicial task.”
Casey. In suggesting otherwise, the Casey plurality went beyond this Court’s role in our constitutional
system.
The Casey plurality “call[ed] the contending sides of a national controversy to end their national division,”
and claimed the authority to impose a permanent settlement of the issue of a constitutional abortion right
simply by saying that the matter was closed. That unprecedented claim exceeded the power vested in us
by the Constitution. As Alexander Hamilton famously put it, the Constitution gives the judiciary “neither
Force nor Will.” The Federalist No. 78. Our sole authority is to exercise “judgment”—which is to say, the
authority to judge what the law means and how it should apply to the case at hand. The Court has no
authority to decree that an erroneous precedent is permanently exempt from evaluation under traditional
stare decisis principles. A precedent of this Court is subject to the usual principles of stare decisis under
which adherence to precedent is the norm but not an inexorable command. If the rule were otherwise,
erroneous decisions like Plessy and Lochner would still be the law. That is not how stare decisis operates.
The Casey plurality also misjudged the practical limits of this Court’s influence. Roe certainly did not
succeed in ending division on the issue of abortion. On the contrary, Roe “inflamed” a national issue that
has remained bitterly divisive for the past half century. Casey, (opinion of Scalia, J.); see also R. Ginsburg,
Speaking in a Judicial Voice, 67 N. Y. U. L. Rev. 1185 (1992) (Roe may have “halted a political process,”
“prolonged divisiveness,” and “deferred stable settlement of the issue”). And for the past 30 years, Casey
has done the same.
Neither decision has ended debate over the issue of a constitutional right to obtain an abortion. Indeed, in
this case, 26 States expressly ask us to overrule Roe and Casey and to return the issue of abortion to the
people and their elected representatives. This Court’s inability to end debate on the issue should not have
been surprising. This Court cannot bring about the permanent resolution of a rancorous national
controversy simply by dictating a settlement and telling the people to move on. Whatever influence the
23
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
Court may have on public attitudes must stem from the strength of our opinions, not an attempt to exercise
“raw judicial power.” Roe (White, J., dissenting).
We do not pretend to know how our political system or society will respond to today’s decision overruling
Roe and Casey. And even if we could foresee what will happen, we would have no authority to let that
knowledge influence our decision. We can only do our job, which is to interpret the law, apply
longstanding principles of stare decisis, and decide this case accordingly.
We therefore hold that the Constitution does not confer a right to abortion. Roe and Casey must be
overruled, and the authority to regulate abortion must be returned to the people and their elected
representatives.
V
A
1
The dissent argues that we have “abandon[ed]” stare decisis, but we have done no such thing, and it is the
dissent’s understanding of stare decisis that breaks with tradition. The dissent’s foundational contention
is that the Court should never (or perhaps almost never) overrule an egregiously wrong constitutional
precedent unless the Court can “poin[t] to major legal or factual changes undermining [the] decision’s
original basis.” To support this contention, the dissent claims that Brown v. Board of Education, and other
landmark cases overruling prior precedents “responded to changed law and to changed facts and attitudes
that had taken hold throughout society.” The unmistakable implication of this argument is that only the
passage of time and new developments justified those decisions. Recognition that the cases they overruled
were egregiously wrong on the day they were handed down was not enough.
The Court has never adopted this strange new version of stare decisis—and with good reason. Does the
dissent really maintain that overruling Plessy was not justified until the country had experienced more
than a half-century of state-sanctioned segregation and generations of Black school children had suffered
all its effects?
Here is another example. On the dissent’s view, it must have been wrong for West Virginia Bd. of Ed. v.
Barnette, to overrule Minersville School Dist. v. Gobitis, a bare three years after it was handed down. In
both cases, children who were Jehovah’s Witnesses refused on religious grounds to salute the flag or recite
the pledge of allegiance. The Barnette Court did not claim that its reexamination of the issue was prompted
by any intervening legal or factual developments, so if the Court had followed the dissent’s new version
of stare decisis, it would have been compelled to adhere to Gobitis and countenance continued First
Amendment violations for some unspecified period.
Precedents should be respected, but sometimes the Court errs, and occasionally the Court issues an
important decision that is egregiously wrong. When that happens, stare decisis is not a straitjacket. And
24
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
indeed, the dissent eventually admits that a decision could “be overruled just because it is terribly wrong,”
though the dissent does not explain when that would be so.
2
Even if the dissent were correct in arguing that an egregiously wrong decision should (almost) never be
overruled unless its mistake is later highlighted by “major legal or factual changes,” reexamination of Roe
and Casey would be amply justified. We have already mentioned a number of post-Casey developments,
but the most profound change may be the failure of the Casey plurality’s call for “the contending sides”
in the controversy about abortion “to end their national division.” That has not happened, and there is no
reason to think that another decision sticking with Roe would achieve what Casey could not.
The dissent, however, is undeterred. It contends that the “very controversy surrounding Roe and Casey”
is an important stare decisis consideration that requires upholding those precedents. The dissent
characterizes Casey as a “precedent about precedent” that is permanently shielded from further evaluation
under traditional stare decisis principles. But as we have explained, Casey broke new ground when it
treated the national controversy provoked by Roe as a ground for refusing to reconsider that decision, and
no subsequent case has relied on that factor. Our decision today simply applies longstanding stare decisis
factors instead of applying a version of the doctrine that seems to apply only in abortion cases.
3
Finally, the dissent suggests that our decision calls into question Griswold, Eisenstadt, Lawrence, and
Obergefell. But we have stated unequivocally that “[n]othing in this opinion should be understood to cast
doubt on precedents that do not concern abortion.” We have also explained why that is so: rights regarding
contraception and same-sex relationships are inherently different from the right to abortion because the
latter (as we have stressed) uniquely involves what Roe and Casey termed “potential life.” Therefore, a
right to abortion cannot be justified by a purported analogy to the rights recognized in those other cases
or by “appeals to a broader right to autonomy.” It is hard to see how we could be clearer. Moreover, even
putting aside that these cases are distinguishable, there is a further point that the dissent ignores: Each
precedent is subject to its own stare decisis analysis, and the factors that our doctrine instructs us to
consider like reliance and workability are different for these cases than for our abortion jurisprudence.
B
1
We now turn to the concurrence in the judgment, which reproves us for deciding whether Roe and Casey
should be retained or overruled. That opinion (which for convenience we will call simply “the
concurrence”) recommends a “more measured course,” which it defends based on what it claims is “a
straightforward stare decisis analysis.” The concurrence would “leave for another day whether to reject
any right to an abortion at all,” and would hold only that if the Constitution protects any such right, the
right ends once women have had “a reasonable opportunity” to obtain an abortion. The concurrence does
25
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
not specify what period of time is sufficient to provide such an opportunity, but it would hold that 15
weeks, the period allowed under Mississippi’s law, is enough—at least “absent rare circumstances.”
There are serious problems with this approach, and it is revealing that nothing like it was recommended
by either party. As we have recounted, both parties and the Solicitor General have urged us either to
reaffirm or overrule Roe and Casey. And when the specific approach advanced by the concurrence was
broached at oral argument, both respondents and the Solicitor General emphatically rejected it. . . . The
concurrence would do exactly what it criticizes Roe for doing: pulling “out of thin air” a test that “[n]o
party or amicus asked the Court to adopt.”
2
The concurrence’s most fundamental defect is its failure to offer any principled basis for its approach. The
concurrence would “discar[d]” “the rule from Roe and Casey that a woman’s right to terminate her
pregnancy extends up to the point that the fetus is regarded as ‘viable’ outside the womb.” But this rule
was a critical component of the holdings in Roe and Casey, and stare decisis is “a doctrine of preservation,
not transformation,” Citizens United v. Federal Election Comm’n (2010) (Roberts, C. J., concurring).
Therefore, a new rule that discards the viability rule cannot be defended on stare decisis grounds. . . .
Roe’s trimester rule was expressly tied to viability, and viability played a critical role in later abortion
decisions. . . . Not only is the new rule proposed by the concurrence inconsistent with Casey’s
unambiguous “language,” it is also contrary to the judgment in that case and later abortion cases. . . .
For all these reasons, stare decisis cannot justify the new “reasonable opportunity” rule propounded by
the concurrence. If that rule is to become the law of the land, it must stand on its own, but the concurrence
makes no attempt to show that this rule represents a correct interpretation of the Constitution. The
concurrence does not claim that the right to a reasonable opportunity to obtain an abortion is “‘deeply
rooted in this Nation’s history and tradition’” and “‘implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.’”
Glucksberg. Nor does it propound any other theory that could show that the Constitution supports its new
rule. And if the Constitution protects a woman’s right to obtain an abortion, the opinion does not explain
why that right should end after the point at which all “reasonable” women will have decided whether to
seek an abortion. While the concurrence is moved by a desire for judicial minimalism, “we cannot embrace
a narrow ground of decision simply because it is narrow; it must also be right.” Citizens United (Roberts,
C. J., concurring). For the reasons that we have explained, the concurrence’s approach is not.
3
The concurrence would “leave for another day whether to reject any right to an abortion at all,” but
“another day” would not be long in coming. Some States have set deadlines for obtaining an abortion that
are shorter than Mississippi’s. If we held only that Mississippi’s 15-week rule is constitutional, we would
soon be called upon to pass on the constitutionality of a panoply of laws with shorter deadlines or no
deadline at all. The “measured course” charted by the concurrence would be fraught with turmoil until the
Court answered the question that the concurrence seeks to defer. . . .
26
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
In sum, the concurrence’s quest for a middle way would only put off the day when we would be forced to
confront the question we now decide. The turmoil wrought by Roe and Casey would be prolonged. It is
far better—for this Court and the country—to face up to the real issue without further delay.
VI
We must now decide what standard will govern if state abortion regulations undergo constitutional
challenge and whether the law before us satisfies the appropriate standard.
A
Under our precedents, rational-basis review is the appropriate standard for such challenges. As we have
explained, procuring an abortion is not a fundamental constitutional right because such a right has no basis
in the Constitution’s text or in our Nation’s history.
It follows that the States may regulate abortion for legitimate reasons, and when such regulations are
challenged under the Constitution, courts cannot “substitute their social and economic beliefs for the
judgment of legislative bodies.” Ferguson; United States v. Carolene Products Co. (1938). That respect
for a legislature’s judgment applies even when the laws at issue concern matters of great social
significance and moral substance.
A law regulating abortion, like other health and welfare laws, is entitled to a “strong presumption of
validity.” Heller v. Doe (1993). It must be sustained if there is a rational basis on which the legislature
could have thought that it would serve legitimate state interests. Id., at 320; Williamson v. Lee Optical of
Okla., Inc. (1955). These legitimate interests include respect for and preservation of prenatal life at all
stages of development; the protection of maternal health and safety; the elimination of particularly
gruesome or barbaric medical procedures; the preservation of the integrity of the medical profession; the
mitigation of fetal pain; and the prevention of discrimination on the basis of race, sex, or disability.
B
These legitimate interests justify Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act. Except “in a medical emergency or
in the case of a severe fetal abnormality,” the statute prohibits abortion “if the probable gestational age of
the unborn human being has been determined to be greater than fifteen (15) weeks.” The Mississippi
Legislature’s findings recount the stages of “human prenatal development” and assert the State’s interest
in “protecting the life of the unborn.” . . . These legitimate interests provide a rational basis for the
Gestational Age Act, and it follows that respondents’ constitutional challenge must fail.
VII
We end this opinion where we began. Abortion presents a profound moral question. The Constitution does
not prohibit the citizens of each State from regulating or prohibiting abortion. Roe and Casey arrogated
27
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
that authority. We now overrule those decisions and return that authority to the people and their elected
representatives.
Justice Thomas, concurring.
I join the opinion of the Court because it correctly holds that there is no constitutional right to abortion. .
. .
I write separately to emphasize a second, more fundamental reason why there is no abortion guarantee
lurking in the Due Process Clause. Considerable historical evidence indicates that “due process of law”
merely required executive and judicial actors to comply with legislative enactments and the common law
when depriving a person of life, liberty, or property. . . . [T]he Due Process Clause at most guarantees
process. It does not, as the Court’s substantive due process cases suppose, “forbi[d] the government to
infringe certain ‘fundamental’ liberty interests at all, no matter what process is provided.” Reno v. Flores
(1993).
As I have previously explained, “substantive due process” is an oxymoron that “lack[s] any basis in the
Constitution.” Johnson (Thomas, J.). . . . The resolution of this case is thus straightforward. Because the
Due Process Clause does not secure any substantive rights, it does not secure a right to abortion.
The Court today declines to disturb substantive due process jurisprudence generally or the doctrine’s
application in other, specific contexts. Cases like Griswold v. Connecticut (1965) (right of married persons
to obtain contraceptives)10; Lawrence v. Texas (2003) (right to engage in private, consensual sexual acts);
and Obergefell v. Hodges (2015) (right to same-sex marriage), are not at issue. The Court’s abortion cases
are unique, and no party has asked us to decide “whether our entire Fourteenth Amendment jurisprudence
must be preserved or revised,” McDonald (opinion of Thomas, J.). Thus, I agree that “[n]othing in [the
Court’s] opinion should be understood to cast doubt on precedents that do not concern abortion.”
For that reason, in future cases, we should reconsider all of this Court’s substantive due process
precedents, including Griswold, Lawrence, and Obergefell. Because any substantive due process decision
is “demonstrably erroneous,” Ramos v. Louisiana (2020) (Thomas, J., concurring in judgment), we have
a duty to “correct the error” established in those precedents, Gamble v. United States (2019) (Thomas, J.,
concurring). After overruling these demonstrably erroneous decisions, the question would remain whether
other constitutional provisions guarantee the myriad rights that our substantive due process cases have
generated. For example, we could consider whether any of the rights announced in this Court’s substantive
due process cases are “privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States” protected by the
Fourteenth Amendment. Amdt. 14, §1; see McDonald (Thomas, J.). To answer that question, we would
need to decide important antecedent questions, including whether the Privileges or Immunities Clause
protects any rights that are not enumerated in the Constitution and, if so, how to identify those rights. That
10 *Note: Griswold v. Connecticut purported not to rely on the Due Process Clause, but rather reasoned “that specific
guarantees in the Bill of Rights”—including rights enumerated in the First, Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Ninth Amendments—
“have penumbras, formed by emanations,” that create “zones of privacy.” Since Griswold, the Court, perhaps recognizing the
facial absurdity of Griswold’s penumbral argument, has characterized the decision as one rooted in substantive due process.
28
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
said, even if the Clause does protect unenumerated rights, the Court conclusively demonstrates that
abortion is not one of them under any plausible interpretive approach.
Moreover, apart from being a demonstrably incorrect reading of the Due Process Clause, the “legal
fiction” of substantive due process is “particularly dangerous.” McDonald (Thomas, J.); accord,
Obergefell (Thomas, J., dissenting). At least three dangers favor jettisoning the doctrine entirely.
First, “substantive due process exalts judges at the expense of the People from whom they derive their
authority.” . . . Nowhere is this exaltation of judicial policymaking clearer than this Court’s abortion
jurisprudence. In Roe v. Wade, the Court divined a right to abortion because it “fe[lt]” that “the Fourteenth
Amendment’s concept of personal liberty” included a “right of privacy” that “is broad enough to
encompass a woman’s decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy.” In Planned Parenthood of
Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, the Court likewise identified an abortion guarantee in “the liberty protected by
the Fourteenth Amendment,” but, rather than a “right of privacy,” it invoked an ethereal “right to define
one’s own concept of existence, of meaning, of the universe, and of the mystery of human life.” As the
Court’s preferred manifestation of “liberty” changed, so, too, did the test used to protect it, as Roe’s author
lamented. . . . That 50 years have passed since Roe and abortion advocates still cannot coherently articulate
the right (or rights) at stake proves the obvious: The right to abortion is ultimately a policy goal in
desperate search of a constitutional justification.
Second, substantive due process distorts other areas of constitutional law. For example, once this Court
identifies a “fundamental” right for one class of individuals, it invokes the Equal Protection Clause to
demand exacting scrutiny of statutes that deny the right to others. Statutory classifications implicating
certain “nonfundamental” rights, meanwhile, receive only cursory review. Similarly, this Court deems
unconstitutionally “vague” or “overbroad” those laws that impinge on its preferred rights, while letting
slide those laws that implicate supposedly lesser values. Therefore, regardless of the doctrinal context, the
Court often “demand[s] extra justifications for encroachments” on “preferred rights” while “relax[ing]
purportedly higher standards of review for less- preferred rights.” Whole Woman’s Health v. Hellerstedt
(2016) (Thomas, J., dissenting). Substantive due process is the core inspiration for many of the Court’s
constitutionally unmoored policy judgments.
Third, substantive due process is often wielded to “disastrous ends.” Gamble (Thomas, J., concurring).
For instance, in Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857), the Court invoked a species of substantive due process to
announce that Congress was powerless to emancipate slaves brought into the federal territories. . . . Now
today, the Court rightly overrules Roe and Casey—two of this Court’s “most notoriously incorrect”
substantive due process decisions—after more than 63 million abortions have been performed. The harm
caused by this Court’s forays into substantive due process remains immeasurable.
***
Because the Court properly applies our substantive due process precedents to reject the fabrication of a
constitutional right to abortion, and because this case does not present the opportunity to reject substantive
due process entirely, I join the Court’s opinion. But, in future cases, we should “follow the text of the
Constitution, which sets forth certain substantive rights that cannot be taken away, and adds, beyond that,
29
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
a right to due process when life, liberty, or property is to be taken away.” Carlton (Scalia, J.). Substantive
due process conflicts with that textual command and has harmed our country in many ways. Accordingly,
we should eliminate it from our jurisprudence at the earliest opportunity.
Justice Kavanaugh, concurring.
I write separately to explain my additional views about why Roe was wrongly decided, why Roe should
be overruled at this time, and the future implications of today’s decision.
I
. . . The issue before this Court, however, is not the policy or morality of abortion. The issue before this
Court is what the Constitution says about abortion. The Constitution does not take sides on the issue of
abortion. The text of the Constitution does not refer to or encompass abortion. To be sure, this Court has
held that the Constitution protects unenumerated rights that are deeply rooted in this Nation’s history and
tradition, and implicit in the concept of ordered liberty. But a right to abortion is not deeply rooted in
American history and tradition, as the Court today thoroughly explains. `
On the question of abortion, the Constitution is therefore neither pro-life nor pro-choice. The Constitution
is neutral and leaves the issue for the people and their elected representatives to resolve through the
democratic process in the States or Congress—like the numerous other difficult questions of American
social and economic policy that the Constitution does not address. . . .11
. . . This Court therefore does not possess the authority either to declare a constitutional right to abortion
or to declare a constitutional prohibition of abortion. . . .
II
The more difficult question in this case is stare decisis—that is, whether to overrule the Roe decision. . . .
Under the Court’s longstanding stare decisis principles, Roe should be overruled.12
I have deep and unyielding respect for the Justices who wrote the Casey plurality opinion. And I respect
the Casey plurality’s good-faith effort to locate some middle ground or compromise that could resolve
11 FN2: In his dissent in Roe, Justice Rehnquist indicated that an exception to a State’s restriction on abortion would be
constitutionally required when an abortion is necessary to save the life of the mother. See Roe v. Wade (1973). Abortion
statutes traditionally and currently provide for an exception when an abortion is necessary to protect the life of the mother.
Some statutes also provide other exceptions.
12 FN3: I also agree with the Court’s conclusion today with respect to reliance. Broad notions of societal reliance have been
invoked in support of Roe, but the Court has not analyzed reliance in that way in the past. For example, American businesses
and workers relied on Lochner v. New York (1905), and Adkins v. Children’s Hospital of D. C. (1923), to construct a laissez-
faire economy that was free of substantial regulation. In West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish (1937), the Court nonetheless
overruled Adkins and in effect Lochner. An entire region of the country relied on Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), to enforce a
system of racial segregation. In Brown v. Board of Education (1954),the Court overruled Plessy. Much of American society
was built around the traditional view of marriage that was upheld in Baker v. Nelson (1972), and that was reflected in laws
ranging from tax laws to estate laws to family laws. In Obergefell v. Hodges (2015), the Court nonetheless overruled Baker.
30
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
this controversy for America. But as has become increasingly evident over time, Casey’s well-intentioned
effort did not resolve the abortion debate. . . .
In short, Casey’s stare decisis analysis rested in part on a predictive judgment about the future
development of state laws and of the people’s views on the abortion issue. But that predictive judgment
has not borne out. As the Court today explains, the experience over the last 30 years conflicts with Casey’s
predictive judgment and therefore undermines Casey’s precedential force.13 . . . .
III
After today’s decision, the nine Members of this Court will no longer decide the basic legality of pre-
viability abortion for all 330 million Americans. That issue will be resolved by the people and their
representatives in the democratic process in the States or Congress. But the parties’ arguments have raised
other related questions, and I address some of them here.
First is the question of how this decision will affect other precedents involving issues such as
contraception and marriage—in particular, the decisions in Griswold v. Connecticut (1965); Eisenstadt v.
Baird, (1972); Loving v. Virginia (1967); and Obergefell v. Hodges (2015). I emphasize what the Court
today states: Overruling Roe does not mean the overruling of those precedents, and does not threaten or
cast doubt on those precedents.
Second, as I see it, some of the other abortion-related legal questions raised by today’s decision are not
especially difficult as a constitutional matter. For example, may a State bar a resident of that State from
traveling to another State to obtain an abortion? In my view, the answer is no based on the constitutional
right to interstate travel. May a State retroactively impose liability or punishment for an abortion that
occurred before today’s decision takes effect? In my view, the answer is no based on the Due Process
Clause or the Ex Post Facto Clause.
***
. . . Since 1973, more than 20 Justices of this Court have now grappled with the divisive issue of abortion.
I greatly respect all of the Justices, past and present, who have done so. Amidst extraordinary controversy
and challenges, all of them have addressed the abortion issue in good faith after careful deliberation, and
based on their sincere understandings of the Constitution and of precedent. I have endeavored to do the
same.
In my judgment, on the issue of abortion, the Constitution is neither pro-life nor pro-choice. The
Constitution is neutral, and this Court likewise must be scrupulously neutral. The Court today properly
13 FN5: To be clear, public opposition to a prior decision is not a basis for overruling (or reaffirming) that decision. Rather,
the question of whether to overrule a precedent must be analyzed under this Court’s traditional stare decisis factors. The only
point here is that Casey adopted a special stare decisis principle with respect to Roe based on the idea of resolving the
national controversy and ending the national division over abortion. The continued and significant opposition to Roe, as
reflected in the laws and positions of numerous States, is relevant to assessing Casey on its own terms.
31
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
heeds the constitutional principle of judicial neutrality and returns the issue of abortion to the people and
their elected representatives in the democratic process.
Chief Justice Roberts, concurring in the judgment.
We granted certiorari to decide one question: “Whether all pre-viability prohibitions on elective abortions
are unconstitutional.” That question is directly implicated here: Mississippi’s Gestational Age Act
generally prohibits abortion after the fifteenth week of pregnancy—several weeks before a fetus is
regarded as “viable” outside the womb. In urging our review, Mississippi stated that its case was “an ideal
vehicle” to “reconsider the bright-line viability rule,” and that a judgment in its favor would “not require
the Court to overturn” Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey
Today, the Court nonetheless rules for Mississippi by doing just that. I would take a more measured course.
I agree with the Court that the viability line established by Roe and Casey should be discarded under a
straightforward stare decisis analysis. That line never made any sense. Our abortion precedents describe
the right at issue as a woman’s right to choose to terminate her pregnancy. That right should therefore
extend far enough to ensure a reasonable opportunity to choose, but need not extend any further—certainly
not all the way to viability. Mississippi’s law allows a woman three months to obtain an abortion, well
beyond the point at which it is considered “late” to discover a pregnancy. See A. Ayoola, Late Recognition
of Unintended Pregnancies, 32 Pub. Health Nursing 462 (2015) (pregnancy is discoverable and ordinarily
discovered by six weeks of gestation). I see no sound basis for questioning the adequacy of that
opportunity.
But that is all I would say, out of adherence to a simple yet fundamental principle of judicial restraint: If
it is not necessary to decide more to dispose of a case, then it is necessary not to decide more. Perhaps we
are not always perfect in following that command, and certainly there are cases that warrant an exception.
But this is not one of them. Surely we should adhere closely to principles of judicial restraint here, where
the broader path the Court chooses entails repudiating a constitutional right we have not only previously
recognized, but also expressly reaffirmed applying the doctrine of stare decisis. The Court’s opinion is
thoughtful and thorough, but those virtues cannot compensate for the fact that its dramatic and
consequential ruling is unnecessary to decide the case before us. . . .
II
None of this, however, requires that we also take the dramatic step of altogether eliminating the abortion
right first recognized in Roe. Mississippi itself previously argued as much to this Court in this litigation.
When the State petitioned for our review, its basic request was straightforward: “clarify whether abortion
prohibitions before viability are always unconstitutional.” . . .
After we granted certiorari, however, Mississippi changed course. In its principal brief, the State bluntly
announced that the Court should overrule Roe and Casey. The Constitution does not protect a right to an
abortion, it argued, and a State should be able to prohibit elective abortions if a rational basis supports
doing so.
32
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
The Court now rewards that gambit, noting three times that the parties presented “no half-measures” and
argued that “we must either reaffirm or overrule Roe and Casey.” Given those two options, the majority
picks the latter. . . .
There is no rule that parties can confine this Court to disposing of their case on a particular ground—let
alone when review was sought and granted on a different one. Our established practice is instead not to
“formulate a rule of constitutional law broader than is required by the precise facts to which it is to be
applied.” Washington State Grange v. Washington State Republican Party (2008) (quoting Ashwander v.
TVA (1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring)).
Following that “fundamental principle of judicial restraint,” Washington State Grange, we should begin
with the narrowest basis for disposition, proceeding to consider a broader one only if necessary to resolve
the case at hand. It is only where there is no valid narrower ground of decision that we should go on to
address a broader issue, such as whether a constitutional decision should be overturned.
Here, there is a clear path to deciding this case correctly without overruling Roe all the way down to the
studs: recognize that the viability line must be discarded, as the majority rightly does, and leave for another
day whether to reject any right to an abortion at all.
Of course, such an approach would not be available if the rationale of Roe and Casey was inextricably
entangled with and dependent upon the viability standard. It is not. Our precedents in this area ground the
abortion right in a woman’s “right to choose.” If that is the basis for Roe, Roe’s viability line should be
scrutinized from the same perspective. And there is nothing inherent in the right to choose that requires it
to extend to viability or any other point, so long as a real choice is provided.
To be sure, in reaffirming the right to an abortion, Casey termed the viability rule Roe’s “central holding.”
Other cases of ours have repeated that language. But simply declaring it does not make it so. The question
in Roe was whether there was any right to abortion in the Constitution.. How far the right extended was a
concern that was separate and subsidiary, and—not surprisingly—entirely unbriefed. . . .
The Court in Roe just chose to address both issues in one opinion: It first recognized a right to “choose to
terminate [a] pregnancy” under the Constitution, and then, having done so, explained that a line should be
drawn at viability such that a State could not proscribe abortion before that period. The viability line is a
separate rule fleshing out the metes and bounds of Roe’s core holding. Applying principles of stare decisis,
I would excise that additional rule—and only that rule—from our jurisprudence.
The majority lists a number of cases that have stressed the importance of the viability rule to our abortion
precedents. I agree that—whether it was originally holding or dictum—the viability line is clearly part of
our “past precedent,” and the Court has applied it as such in several cases since Roe. My point is that Roe
adopted two distinct rules of constitutional law: one, that a woman has the right to choose to terminate a
pregnancy; two, that such right may be overridden by the State’s legitimate interests when the fetus is
viable outside the womb. The latter is obviously distinct from the former. I would abandon that timing
rule, but see no need in this case to consider the basic right. . . .
33
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
Overruling the subsidiary rule is sufficient to resolve this case in Mississippi’s favor. The law at issue
allows abortions up through fifteen weeks, providing an adequate opportunity to exercise the right Roe
protects. By the time a pregnant woman has reached that point, her pregnancy is well into the second
trimester. Pregnancy tests are now inexpensive and accurate, and a woman ordinarily discovers she is
pregnant by six weeks of gestation. Almost all know by the end of the first trimester. Safe and effective
abortifacients, moreover, are now readily available, particularly during those early stages. Given all this,
it is no surprise that the vast majority of abortions happen in the first trimester. Presumably most of the
remainder would also take place earlier if later abortions were not a legal option. Ample evidence thus
suggests that a 15-week ban provides sufficient time, absent rare circumstances, for a woman “to decide
for herself ” whether to terminate her pregnancy. Webster.14
III
. . . In my respectful view, the sound exercise of that discretion should have led the Court to resolve the
case on the narrower grounds set forth above, rather than overruling Roe and Casey entirely. The Court
says there is no “principled basis” for this approach, but in fact it is firmly grounded in basic principles of
stare decisis and judicial restraint.
The Court’s decision to overrule Roe and Casey is a serious jolt to the legal system—regardless of how
you view those cases. A narrower decision rejecting the misguided viability line would be markedly less
unsettling, and nothing more is needed to decide this case.
Our cases say that the effect of overruling a precedent on reliance interests is a factor to consider in
deciding whether to take such a step, and respondents argue that generations of women have relied on the
right to an abortion in organizing their relationships and planning their futures. The Court questions
whether these concerns are pertinent under our precedents, but the issue would not even arise with a
decision rejecting only the viability line: It cannot reasonably be argued that women have shaped their
lives in part on the assumption that they would be able to abort up to viability, as opposed to fifteen weeks.
In support of its holding, the Court cites three seminal constitutional decisions that involved overruling
prior precedents: Brown v. Board of Education (1954), West Virginia Bd. of Ed. v. Barnette, (1943), and
West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish (1937). The opinion in Brown was unanimous and eleven pages long;
this one is neither. Barnette was decided only three years after the decision it overruled, three Justices
having had second thoughts. And West Coast Hotel was issued against a backdrop of unprecedented
economic despair that focused attention on the fundamental flaws of existing precedent. It also was part
of a sea change in this Court’s interpretation of the Constitution, “signal[ing] the demise of an entire line
of important precedents”—a feature the Court expressly disclaims in today’s decision. None of these
leading cases, in short, provides a template for what the Court does today.
The Court says we should consider whether to overrule Roe and Casey now, because if we delay we would
be forced to consider the issue again in short order. There would be “turmoil” until we did so, according
to the Court, because of existing state laws with “shorter deadlines or no deadline at all.” But under the
14 FN1: The majority contends that “nothing like [my approach] was recommended by either party.” But as explained,
Mississippi in fact pressed a similar argument in its filings before this Court.
34
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
narrower approach proposed here, state laws outlawing abortion altogether would still violate binding
precedent. And to the extent States have laws that set the cutoff date earlier than fifteen weeks, any
litigation over that timeframe would proceed free of the distorting effect that the viability rule has had on
our constitutional debate. The same could be true, for that matter, with respect to legislative consideration
in the States. We would then be free to exercise our discretion in deciding whether and when to take up
the issue, from a more informed perspective.
***
Both the Court’s opinion and the dissent display a relentless freedom from doubt on the legal issue that I
cannot share. I am not sure, for example, that a ban on terminating a pregnancy from the moment of
conception must be treated the same under the Constitution as a ban after fifteen weeks. A thoughtful
Member of this Court once counseled that the difficulty of a question “admonishes us to observe the wise
limitations on our function and to confine ourselves to deciding only what is necessary to the disposition
of the immediate case.” Whitehouse v. Illinois Central R. Co. (1955) (Frankfurter, J.). I would decide the
question we granted review to answer—whether the previously recognized abortion right bars all abortion
restrictions prior to viability, such that a ban on abortions after fifteen weeks of pregnancy is necessarily
unlawful. The answer to that question is no, and there is no need to go further to decide this case.
I therefore concur only in the judgment.
Justice Breyer, Justice Sotomayor, and Justice Kagan, dissenting.
For half a century, Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey have protected the
liberty and equality of women. Roe held, and Casey reaffirmed, that the Constitution safeguards a
woman’s right to decide for herself whether to bear a child. Roe held, and Casey reaffirmed, that in the
first stages of pregnancy, the government could not make that choice for women. The government could
not control a woman’s body or the course of a woman’s life: It could not determine what the woman’s
future would be. Respecting a woman as an autonomous being, and granting her full equality, meant giving
her substantial choice over this most personal and most consequential of all life decisions.
Roe and Casey well understood the difficulty and divisiveness of the abortion issue. The Court knew that
Americans hold profoundly different views about the “moral[ity]” of “terminating a pregnancy, even in
its earliest stage.” And the Court recognized that “the State has legitimate interests from the outset of the
pregnancy in protecting” the “life of the fetus that may become a child.” So the Court struck a balance, as
it often does when values and goals compete. It held that the State could prohibit abortions after fetal
viability, so long as the ban contained exceptions to safeguard a woman’s life or health. It held that even
before viability, the State could regulate the abortion procedure in multiple and meaningful ways. But
until the viability line was crossed, the Court held, a State could not impose a “substantial obstacle” on a
woman’s “right to elect the procedure” as she (not the government) thought proper, in light of all the
circumstances and complexities of her own life.
Today, the Court discards that balance. It says that from the very moment of fertilization, a woman has no
rights to speak of. A State can force her to bring a pregnancy to term, even at the steepest personal and
35
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
familial costs. An abortion restriction, the majority holds, is permissible whenever rational, the lowest
level of scrutiny known to the law. And because, as the Court has often stated, protecting fetal life is
rational, States will feel free to enact all manner of restrictions. The Mississippi law at issue here bars
abortions after the 15th week of pregnancy. Under the majority’s ruling, though, another State’s law could
do so after ten weeks, or five or three or one—or, again, from the moment of fertilization. States have
already passed such laws, in anticipation of today’s ruling. More will follow. Some States have enacted
laws extending to all forms of abortion procedure, including taking medication in one’s own home. They
have passed laws without any exceptions for when the woman is the victim of rape or incest. Under those
laws, a woman will have to bear her rapist’s child or a young girl her father’s—no matter if doing so will
destroy her life. So too, after today’s ruling, some States may compel women to carry to term a fetus with
severe physical anomalies—for example, one afflicted with Tay-Sachs disease, sure to die within a few
years of birth. States may even argue that a prohibition on abortion need make no provision for protecting
a woman from risk of death or physical harm. Across a vast array of circumstances, a State will be able to
impose its moral choice on a woman and coerce her to give birth to a child.
Enforcement of all these draconian restrictions will also be left largely to the States’ devices. A State can
of course impose criminal penalties on abortion providers, including lengthy prison sentences. But some
States will not stop there. Perhaps, in the wake of today’s decision, a state law will criminalize the
woman’s conduct too, incarcerating or fining her for daring to seek or obtain an abortion. And as Texas
has recently shown, a State can turn neighbor against neighbor, enlisting fellow citizens in the effort to
root out anyone who tries to get an abortion, or to assist another in doing so.
The majority tries to hide the geographically expansive effects of its holding. Today’s decision, the
majority says, permits “each State” to address abortion as it pleases. That is cold comfort, of course, for
the poor woman who cannot get the money to fly to a distant State for a procedure. Above all others,
women lacking financial resources will suffer from today’s decision. In any event, interstate restrictions
will also soon be in the offing. After this decision, some States may block women from traveling out of
State to obtain abortions, or even from receiving abortion medications from out of State. Some may
criminalize efforts, including the provision of information or funding, to help women gain access to other
States’ abortion services. Most threatening of all, no language in today’s decision stops the Federal
Government from prohibiting abortions nationwide, once again from the moment of conception and
without exceptions for rape or incest. If that happens, “the views of [an individual State’s] citizens” will
not matter..The challenge for a woman will be to finance a trip not to “New York [or] California” but to
Toronto. Ante (Kavanaugh, J., concurring).
Whatever the exact scope of the coming laws, one result of today’s decision is certain: the curtailment of
women’s rights, and of their status as free and equal citizens. Yesterday, the Constitution guaranteed that
a woman confronted with an unplanned pregnancy could (within reasonable limits) make her own decision
about whether to bear a child, with all the life-transforming consequences that act involves. And in thus
safeguarding each woman’s reproductive freedom, the Constitution also protected “[t]he ability of women
to participate equally in [this Nation’s] economic and social life.” Casey. But no longer. As of today, this
Court holds, a State can always force a woman to give birth, prohibiting even the earliest abortions. A
State can thus transform what, when freely undertaken, is a wonder into what, when forced, may be a
nightmare. Some women, especially women of means, will find ways around the State’s assertion of
36
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
power. Others—those without money or childcare or the ability to take time off from work—will not be
so fortunate. Maybe they will try an unsafe method of abortion, and come to physical harm, or even die.
Maybe they will undergo pregnancy and have a child, but at significant personal or familial cost. At the
least, they will incur the cost of losing control of their lives. The Constitution will, today’s majority holds,
provide no shield, despite its guarantees of liberty and equality for all.
And no one should be confident that this majority is done with its work. The right Roe and Casey
recognized does not stand alone. To the contrary, the Court has linked it for decades to other settled
freedoms involving bodily integrity, familial relationships, and procreation. Most obviously, the right to
terminate a pregnancy arose straight out of the right to purchase and use contraception. See Griswold v.
Connecticut (1965). In turn, those rights led, more recently, to rights of same-sex intimacy and marriage.
See Lawrence v. Texas (2003); Obergefell v. Hodges (2015). They are all part of the same constitutional
fabric, protecting autonomous decisionmaking over the most personal of life decisions. The majority (or
to be more accurate, most of it) is eager to tell us today that nothing it does “cast[s] doubt on precedents
that do not concern abortion.” Ante; cf. ante (Thomas, J., concurring) (advocating the overruling of
Griswold, Lawrence, and Obergefell). But how could that be? The lone rationale for what the majority
does today is that the right to elect an abortion is not “deeply rooted in history”: Not until Roe, the majority
argues, did people think abortion fell within the Constitution’s guarantee of liberty. The same could be
said, though, of most of the rights the majority claims it is not tampering with. The majority could write
just as long an opinion showing, for example, that until the mid-20th century, “there was no support in
American law for a constitutional right to obtain [contraceptives].” So one of two things must be true.
Either the majority does not really believe in its own reasoning. Or if it does, all rights that have no history
stretching back to the mid-19th century are insecure. Either the mass of the majority’s opinion is
hypocrisy, or additional constitutional rights are under threat. It is one or the other.
One piece of evidence on that score seems especially salient: The majority’s cavalier approach to
overturning this Court’s precedents. Stare decisis is the Latin phrase for a foundation stone of the rule of
law: that things decided should stay decided unless there is a very good reason for change. It is a doctrine
of judicial modesty and humility. Those qualities are not evident in today’s opinion. The majority has no
good reason for the upheaval in law and society it sets off. Roe and Casey have been the law of the land
for decades, shaping women’s expectations of their choices when an unplanned pregnancy occurs. Women
have relied on the availability of abortion both in structuring their relationships and in planning their lives.
The legal framework Roe and Casey developed to balance the competing interests in this sphere has proved
workable in courts across the country. No recent developments, in either law or fact, have eroded or cast
doubt on those precedents. Nothing, in short, has changed. Indeed, the Court in Casey already found all
of that to be true. Casey is a precedent about precedent. It reviewed the same arguments made here in
support of overruling Roe, and it found that doing so was not warranted. The Court reverses course today
for one reason and one reason only: because the composition of this Court has changed. Stare decisis, this
Court has often said, “contributes to the actual and perceived integrity of the judicial process” by ensuring
that decisions are “founded in the law rather than in the proclivities of individuals.” Payne v. Tennessee
(1991). Today, the proclivities of individuals rule. The Court departs from its obligation to faithfully and
impartially apply the law. We dissent.
I
37
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
We start with Roe and Casey, and with their deep connections to a broad swath of this Court’s precedents.
To hear the majority tell the tale, Roe and Casey are aberrations: They came from nowhere, went
nowhere—and so are easy to excise from this Nation’s constitutional law. That is not true. After describing
the decisions themselves, we explain how they are rooted in—and themselves led to—other rights giving
individuals control over their bodies and their most personal and intimate associations. The majority does
not wish to talk about these matters for obvious reasons; to do so would both ground Roe and Casey in
this Court’s precedents and reveal the broad implications of today’s decision. But the facts will not so
handily disappear. Roe and Casey were from the beginning, and are even more now, embedded in core
constitutional concepts of individual freedom, and of the equal rights of citizens to decide on the shape of
their lives. Those legal concepts, one might even say, have gone far toward defining what it means to be
an American. For in this Nation, we do not believe that a government controlling all private choices is
compatible with a free people. So we do not (as the majority insists today) place everything within “the
reach of majorities and [government] officials.” West Virginia Bd. of Ed. v. Barnette (1943). We believe
in a Constitution that puts some issues off limits to majority rule. Even in the face of public opposition,
we uphold the right of individuals—yes, including women—to make their own choices and chart their
own futures. Or at least, we did once.
A
Some half-century ago, Roe struck down a state law making it a crime to perform an abortion unless its
purpose was to save a woman’s life. . . . The Court therefore struck a balance, turning on the stage of the
pregnancy at which the abortion would occur. . . . In the 20 years between Roe and Casey, the Court
expressly reaffirmed Roe on two occasions, and applied it on many more. . . . Then, in Casey, the Court
considered the matter anew, and again upheld Roe’s core precepts. Casey is in significant measure a
precedent about the doctrine of precedent—until today, one of the Court’s most important. But we leave
for later that aspect of the Court’s decision. The key thing now is the substantive aspect of the Court’s
considered conclusion that “the essential holding of Roe v. Wade should be retained and once again
reaffirmed.”
Central to that conclusion was a full-throated restatement of a woman’s right to choose. Like Roe, Casey
grounded that right in the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of “liberty.” That guarantee encompasses
realms of conduct not specifically referenced in the Constitution. . . .
So Casey again struck a balance, differing from Roe’s in only incremental ways. It retained Roe’s “central
holding” that the State could bar abortion only after viability. The viability line, Casey thought, was “more
workable” than any other in marking the place where the woman’s liberty interest gave way to a State’s
efforts to preserve potential life. At that point, a “second life” was capable of “independent existence.” . .
. At the same time, Casey decided, based on two decades of experience, that the Roe framework did not
give States sufficient ability to regulate abortion prior to viability. In that period, Casey now made clear,
the State could regulate not only to protect the woman’s health but also to “promot[e] prenatal life.” . . .
But the State still could not place an “undue burden”—or “substantial obstacle”—“in the path of a woman
seeking an abortion.” Prior to viability, the woman, consistent with the constitutional “meaning of liberty,”
must “retain the ultimate control over her destiny and her body.”
38
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
We make one initial point about this analysis in light of the majority’s insistence that Roe and Casey, and
we in defending them, are dismissive of a “State’s interest in protecting prenatal life.” Nothing could get
those decisions more wrong. As just described, Roe and Casey invoked powerful state interests in that
protection, operative at every stage of the pregnancy and overriding the woman’s liberty after viability.
The strength of those state interests is exactly why the Court allowed greater restrictions on the abortion
right than on other rights deriving from the Fourteenth Amendment.15 But what Roe and Casey also
recognized—which today’s majority does not—is that a woman’s freedom and equality are likewise
involved. That fact—the presence of countervailing interests—is what made the abortion question hard,
and what necessitated balancing. The majority scoffs at that idea, castigating us for “repeatedly prais[ing]
the ‘balance’” the two cases arrived at (with the word “balance” in scare quotes). To the majority “balance”
is a dirty word, as moderation is a foreign concept. The majority would allow States to ban abortion from
conception onward because it does not think forced childbirth at all implicates a woman’s rights to equality
and freedom. Today’s Court, that is, does not think there is anything of constitutional significance attached
to a woman’s control of her body and the path of her life. Roe and Casey thought that one-sided view
misguided. In some sense, that is the difference in a nutshell between our precedents and the majority
opinion. The constitutional regime we have lived in for the last 50 years recognized competing interests,
and sought a balance between them. The constitutional regime we enter today erases the woman’s interest
and recognizes only the State’s (or the Federal Government’s).
B
The majority makes this change based on a single question: Did the reproductive right recognized in Roe
and Casey exist in “1868, the year when the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified”? The majority says (and
with this much we agree) that the answer to this question is no: In 1868, there was no nationwide right to
end a pregnancy, and no thought that the Fourteenth Amendment provided one.
Of course, the majority opinion refers as well to some later and earlier history. On the one side of 1868, it
goes back as far as the 13th (the 13th!) century. But that turns out to be wheel-spinning. First, it is not
clear what relevance such early history should have, even to the majority. See New York State Rifle &
Pistol Assn., Inc. v. Bruen (2022) (“Historical evidence that long predates [ratification] may not illuminate
the scope of the right”). If the early history obviously supported abortion rights, the majority would no
doubt say that only the views of the Fourteenth Amendment’s ratifiers are germane. See ibid. (It is “better
not to go too far back into antiquity,” except if olden “law survived to become our Founders’ law”).
Second—and embarrassingly for the majority—early law in fact does provide some support for abortion
rights. Common-law authorities did not treat abortion as a crime before “quickening”—the point when
15 FN1: For this reason, we do not understand the majority’s view that our analogy between the right to an abortion and the
rights to contraception and same-sex marriage shows that we think “[t]he Constitution does not permit the States to regard the
destruction of a ‘potential life’ as a matter of any significance.” To the contrary. The liberty interests underlying those rights
are, as we will describe, quite similar. But only in the sphere of abortion is the state interest in protecting potential life
involved. So only in that sphere, as both Roe and Casey recognized, may a State impinge so far on the liberty interest (barring
abortion after viability and discouraging it before). The majority’s failure to understand this fairly obvious point stems from
its rejection of the idea of balancing interests in this (or maybe in any) constitutional context. Cf. New York State Rifle &
Pistol Assn., Inc. v. Bruen (2022).The majority thinks that a woman has no liberty or equality interest in the decision to bear a
child, so a State’s interest in protecting fetal life necessarily prevails.
39
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
the fetus moved in the womb. And early American law followed the common-law rule. So the criminal
law of that early time might be taken as roughly consonant with Roe’s and Casey’s different treatment of
early and late abortions. Better, then, to move forward in time. On the other side of 1868, the majority
occasionally notes that many States barred abortion up to the time of Roe. That is convenient for the
majority, but it is window dressing. As the same majority (plus one) just informed us, “post-ratification
adoption or acceptance of laws that are inconsistent with the original meaning of the constitutional text
obviously cannot overcome or alter that text.” New York State Rifle & Pistol Assn., Inc. Had the pre-Roe
liberalization of abortion laws occurred more quickly and more widely in the 20th century, the majority
would say (once again) that only the ratifiers’ views are germane.
The majority’s core legal postulate, then, is that we in the 21st century must read the Fourteenth
Amendment just as its ratifiers did. And that is indeed what the majority emphasizes over and over again.
If the ratifiers did not understand something as central to freedom, then neither can we. Or said more
particularly: If those people did not understand reproductive rights as part of the guarantee of liberty
conferred in the Fourteenth Amendment, then those rights do not exist.
As an initial matter, note a mistake in the just preceding sentence. We referred there to the “people” who
ratified the Fourteenth Amendment: What rights did those “people” have in their heads at the time? But,
of course, “people” did not ratify the Fourteenth Amendment. Men did. So it is perhaps not so surprising
that the ratifiers were not perfectly attuned to the importance of reproductive rights for women’s liberty,
or for their capacity to participate as equal members of our Nation. Indeed, the ratifiers—both in 1868 and
when the original Constitution was approved in 1788—did not understand women as full members of the
community embraced by the phrase “We the People.” In 1868, the first wave of American feminists were
explicitly told—of course by men—that it was not their time to seek constitutional protections. (Women
would not get even the vote for another half-century.) To be sure, most women in 1868 also had a
foreshortened view of their rights: If most men could not then imagine giving women control over their
bodies, most women could not imagine having that kind of autonomy. But that takes away nothing from
the core point. Those responsible for the original Constitution, including the Fourteenth Amendment, did
not perceive women as equals, and did not recognize women’s rights. When the majority says that we
must read our foundational charter as viewed at the time of ratification (except that we may also check it
against the Dark Ages), it consigns women to second-class citizenship.
Casey itself understood this point, as will become clear. . . A woman’s place in society had changed, and
constitutional law had changed along with it. The relegation of women to inferior status in either the public
sphere or the family was “no longer consistent with our understanding” of the Constitution. . . .
So how is it that, as Casey said, our Constitution, read now, grants rights to women, though it did not in
1868? . . . The answer is that this Court has rejected the majority’s pinched view of how to read our
Constitution. “The Founders,” we recently wrote, “knew they were writing a document designed to apply
to ever-changing circumstances over centuries.” NLRB v. Noel Canning (2014). Or in the words of the
great Chief Justice John Marshall, our Constitution is “intended to endure for ages to come,” and must
adapt itself to a future “seen dimly,” if at all. McCulloch v. Maryland (1819). That is indeed why our
Constitution is written as it is. The Framers (both in 1788 and 1868) understood that the world changes.
So they did not define rights by reference to the specific practices existing at the time. Instead, the Framers
40
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
defined rights in general terms, to permit future evolution in their scope and meaning. And over the course
of our history, this Court has taken up the Framers’ invitation. It has kept true to the Framers’ principles
by applying them in new ways, responsive to new societal understandings and conditions.
Nowhere has that approach been more prevalent than in construing the majestic but open-ended words of
the Fourteenth Amendment—the guarantees of “liberty” and “equality” for all. And nowhere has that
approach produced prouder moments, for this country and the Court. Consider an example Obergefell
used a few years ago. The Court there confronted a claim, based on Washington v. Glucksberg (1997),
that the Fourteenth Amendment “must be defined in a most circumscribed manner, with central reference
to specific historical practices”—exactly the view today’s majority follows. Obergefell. And the Court
specifically rejected that view.16 In doing so, the Court reflected on what the proposed, historically
circumscribed approach would have meant for interracial marriage. The Fourteenth Amendment’s ratifiers
did not think it gave black and white people a right to marry each other. To the contrary, contemporaneous
practice deemed that act quite as unprotected as abortion. Yet the Court in Loving v. Virginia (1967), read
the Fourteenth Amendment to embrace the Lovings’ union. If, Obergefell explained, “rights were defined
by who exercised them in the past, then received practices could serve as their own continued
justification”—even when they conflict with “liberty” and “equality” as later and more broadly
understood. The Constitution does not freeze for all time the original view of what those rights guarantee,
or how they apply.
That does not mean anything goes. The majority wishes people to think there are but two alternatives: (1)
accept the original applications of the Fourteenth Amendment and no others, or (2) surrender to judges’
“own ardent views,” ungrounded in law, about the “liberty that Americans should enjoy.” At least, that
idea is what the majority sometimes tries to convey. At other times, the majority (or, rather, most of it)
tries to assure the public that it has no designs on rights (for example, to contraception) that arose only in
the back half of the 20th century—in other words, that it is happy to pick and choose, in accord with
individual preferences. But that is a matter we discuss later. For now, our point is different: It is that
applications of liberty and equality can evolve while remaining grounded in constitutional principles,
constitutional history, and constitutional precedents. The second Justice Harlan discussed how to strike
the right balance when he explained why he would have invalidated a State’s ban on contraceptive use.
Judges, he said, are not “free to roam where unguided speculation might take them.” Poe v. Ullman (1961)
(dissenting opinion). Yet they also must recognize that the constitutional “tradition” of this country is not
captured whole at a single moment. Rather, its meaning gains content from the long sweep of our history
and from successive judicial precedents—each looking to the last and each seeking to apply the
Constitution’s most fundamental commitments to new conditions. That is why Americans, to go back to
Obergefell’s example, have a right to marry across racial lines. And it is why, to go back to Justice Harlan’s
case, Americans have a right to use contraceptives so they can choose for themselves whether to have
children.
All that is what Casey understood. Casey explicitly rejected the present majority’s method. “[T]he specific
practices of States at the time of the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment,” Casey stated, do not “mark
16 FN4: The majority ignores that rejection. But it is unequivocal: The Glucksberg test, Obergefell said, “may have been
appropriate” in considering physician-assisted suicide, but “is inconsistent with the approach this Court has used in
discussing other fundamental rights, including marriage and intimacy.”
41
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
] the outer limits of the substantive sphere of liberty which the Fourteenth Amendment protects.”17 To
hold otherwise—as the majority does today—“would be inconsistent with our law.” . . . In reviewing
decades and decades of constitutional law, Casey could draw but one conclusion: Whatever was true in
1868, “[i]t is settled now, as it was when the Court heard arguments in Roe v. Wade, that the Constitution
places limits on a State’s right to interfere with a person’s most basic decisions about family and
parenthood.”. . . .
And that conclusion still held good, until the Court’s intervention here. . . . The Court’s precedents about
bodily autonomy, sexual and familial relations, and procreation are all interwoven—all part of the fabric
of our constitutional law, and because that is so, of our lives. Especially women’s lives, where they
safeguard a right to self-determination.
And eliminating that right, we need to say before further describing our precedents, is not taking a
“neutral” position, as Justice Kavanaugh tries to argue. His idea is that neutrality lies in giving the abortion
issue to the States, where some can go one way and some another. But would he say that the Court is
being “scrupulously neutral” if it allowed New York and California to ban all the guns they want? If the
Court allowed some States to use unanimous juries and others not? If the Court told the States: Decide for
yourselves whether to put restrictions on church attendance? We could go on—and in fact we will.
Suppose Justice Kavanaugh were to say (in line with the majority opinion) that the rights we just listed
are more textually or historically grounded than the right to choose. What, then, of the right to
contraception or same-sex marriage? Would it be “scrupulously neutral” for the Court to eliminate those
rights too? The point of all these examples is that when it comes to rights, the Court does not act “neutrally”
when it leaves everything up to the States. Rather, the Court acts neutrally when it protects the right against
all comers. And to apply that point to the case here: When the Court decimates a right women have held
for 50 years, the Court is not being “scrupulously neutral.” It is instead taking sides: against women who
wish to exercise the right, and for States (like Mississippi) that want to bar them from doing so. Justice
Kavanaugh cannot obscure that point by appropriating the rhetoric of even-handedness. His position just
is what it is: A brook-no-compromise refusal to recognize a woman’s right to choose, from the first day
of a pregnancy. And that position, as we will now show, cannot be squared with this Court’s longstanding
view that women indeed have rights (whatever the state of the world in 1868) to make the most personal
and consequential decisions about their bodies and their lives. . . .
. . . There are few greater incursions on a body than forcing a woman to complete a pregnancy and give
birth. . . . And for some women, as Roe recognized, abortions are medically necessary to prevent harm.
The majority does not say—which is itself ominous—whether a State may prevent a woman from
obtaining an abortion when she and her doctor have determined it is a needed medical treatment. . . .
17 FN5: In a perplexing paragraph in its opinion, the majority declares that it need not say whether that statement from Casey
is true. But how could that be? Has not the majority insisted for the prior 30 or so pages that the “specific practice[]”
respecting abortion at the time of the Fourteenth Amendment precludes its recognition as a constitutional right? It has. And
indeed, it has given no other reason for overruling Roe and Casey. We are not mindreaders, but here is our best guess as to
what the majority means. It says next that “[a]bortion is nothing new.” So apparently, the Fourteenth Amendment might
provide protection for things wholly unknown in the 19th century; maybe one day there could be constitutional protection
for, oh, time travel. But as to anything that was known back then (such as abortion or contraception), no such luck.
42
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
And liberty may require it, this Court has repeatedly said, even when those living in 1868 would not have
recognized the claim—because they would not have seen the person making it as a full-fledged member
of the community. Throughout our history, the sphere of protected liberty has expanded, bringing in
individuals formerly excluded. In that way, the constitutional values of liberty and equality go hand in
hand; they do not inhabit the hermetically sealed containers the majority portrays. . . . But the sentiments
of 1868 alone do not and cannot “rule the present.”
Casey similarly recognized the need to extend the constitutional sphere of liberty to a previously excluded
group. The Court then understood, as the majority today does not, that the men who ratified the Fourteenth
Amendment and wrote the state laws of the time did not view women as full and equal citizens. . . .
Without the ability to decide whether and when to have children, women could not—in the way men took
for granted—determine how they would live their lives, and how they would contribute to the society
around them. . . .
Faced with all these connections between Roe/Casey and judicial decisions recognizing other
constitutional rights, the majority tells everyone not to worry. It can (so it says) neatly extract the right to
choose from the constitutional edifice without affecting any associated rights. (Think of someone telling
you that the Jenga tower simply will not collapse.) Today’s decision, the majority first says, “does not
undermine” the decisions cited by Roe and Casey—the ones involving “marriage, procreation,
contraception, [and] family relationships”—“in any way.” Note that this first assurance does not extend
to rights recognized after Roe and Casey,and partly based on them—in particular, rights to same-sex
intimacy and marriage.18 On its later tries, though, the majority includes those too: “Nothing in this
opinion should be understood to cast doubt on precedents that do not concern abortion.” That right is
unique, the majority asserts, “because [abortion] terminates life or potential life.” So the majority depicts
today’s decision as “a restricted railroad ticket, good for this day and train only.” Smith v. Allwright (1944)
(Roberts, J., dissenting). Should the audience for these too-much-repeated protestations be duly satisfied?
We think not.
The first problem with the majority’s account comes from Justice Thomas’s concurrence—which makes
clear he is not with the program. . . . So at least one Justice is planning to use the ticket of today’s decision
again and again and again.
Even placing the concurrence to the side, the assurance in today’s opinion still does not work. Or at least
that is so if the majority is serious about its sole reason for overturning Roe and Casey: the legal status of
abortion in the 19th century. . . . The majority’s departure from Roe and Casey rests instead—and only—
on whether a woman’s decision to end a pregnancy involves any Fourteenth Amendment liberty interest
(against which Roe and Casey balanced the state interest in preserving fetal life).19 According to the
18 FN6: And note, too, that the author of the majority opinion recently joined a statement, written by another member of the
majority, lamenting that Obergefell deprived States of the ability “to resolve th[e] question [of same-sex marriage] through
legislation.” Davis v. Ermold (2020) (Thomas, J.). That might sound familiar. Cf. ante (lamenting that Roe “short-circuited
the democratic process”). And those two Justices hardly seemed content to let the matter rest: The Court, they said, had
“created a problem that only it can fix.” Davis.
19 FN7: Indulge a few more words about this point. The majority had a choice of two different ways to overrule Roe and
Casey. It could claim that those cases underrated the State’s interest in fetal life. Or it could claim that they overrated a
woman’s constitutional liberty interest in choosing an abortion. (Or both.) The majority here rejects the first path, and we can
43
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
majority, no liberty interest is present—because (and only because) the law offered no protection to the
woman’s choice in the 19th century. But here is the rub. The law also did not then (and would not for
ages) protect a wealth of other things. . . .20
Nor does it even help just to take the majority at its word. Assume the majority is sincere in saying, for
whatever reason, that it will go so far and no further. Scout’s honor. Still, the future significance of today’s
opinion will be decided in the future. And law often has a way of evolving without regard to original
intentions—a way of actually following where logic leads, rather than tolerating hard-to- explain lines.
Rights can expand in that way. Dissenting in Lawrence, Justice Scalia explained why he took no comfort
in the Court’s statement that a decision recognizing the right to same-sex intimacy did “not involve” same-
sex marriage. That could be true, he wrote, “only if one entertains the belief that principle and logic have
nothing to do with the decisions of this Court.” Score one for the dissent, as a matter of prophecy. And
logic and principle are not one-way ratchets. Rights can contract in the same way and for the same
reason—because whatever today’s majority might say, one thing really does lead to another. We fervently
hope that does not happen because of today’s decision. We hope that we will not join Justice Scalia in the
book of prophets. But we cannot understand how anyone can be confident that today’s opinion will be the
last of its kind. . . . Even before we get to stare decisis, we dissent.
II
Roe, Casey, and more than 20 cases reaffirming or applying the constitutional right to abortion, the
majority abandons stare decisis, a principle central to the rule of law. “Stare decisis” means “to stand by
things decided.” . . .
Stare decisis also “contributes to the integrity of our constitutional system of government” by ensuring
that decisions “are founded in the law rather than in the proclivities of individuals.” Vasquez. As Hamilton
wrote: It “avoid[s] an arbitrary discretion in the courts.” The Federalist No. 78. . . .
That means the Court may not overrule a decision, even a constitutional one, without a “special
justification.” Gamble v. United States (2019). Stare decisis is, of course, not an “inexorable command”;
it is sometimes appropriate to overrule an earlier decision. Pearson v. Callahan (2009). But the Court
must have a good reason to do so over and above the belief “that the precedent was wrongly decided.”
Halliburton Co. v. Erica P. John Fund, Inc. (2014). “[I]t is not alone sufficient that we would decide a
case differently now than we did then.” Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment, LLC (2015).
see why. Taking that route would have prevented the majority from claiming that it means only to leave this issue to the
democratic process—that it does not have a dog in the fight. And indeed, doing so might have suggested a revolutionary
proposition: that the fetus is itself a constitutionally protected “person,” such that an abortion ban is constitutionally
mandated. The majority therefore chooses the second path, arguing that the Fourteenth Amendment does not conceive of the
abortion decision as implicating liberty, because the law in the 19th century gave that choice no protection. The trouble is that
the chosen path—which is, again, the solitary rationale for the Court’s decision—provides no way to distinguish between the
right to choose an abortion and a range of other rights, including contraception.
20 FN8: The majority briefly (very briefly) gestures at the idea that some stare decisis factors might play out differently with
respect to these other constitutional rights. But the majority gives no hint as to why. And the majority’s (mis)treatment of
stare decisis in this case provides little reason to think that the doctrine would stand as a barrier to the majority’s redoing any
other decision it considered egregiously wrong.
44
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
The majority today lists some 30 of our cases as overruling precedent, and argues that they support
overruling Roe and Casey. But none does, as further described below. . . . In some, the Court only partially
modified or clarified a precedent. And in the rest, the Court relied on one or more of the traditional stare
decisis factors in reaching its conclusion. The Court found, for example, (1) a change in legal doctrine that
undermined or made obsolete the earlier decision; (2) a factual change that had the same effect; or (3) an
absence of reliance because the earlier decision was less than a decade old. (The majority is wrong when
it says that we insist on a test of changed law or fact alone, although that is present in most of the cases.)
None of those factors apply here: Nothing—and in particular, no significant legal or factual change—
supports overturning a half-century of settled law giving women control over their reproductive lives.
First, for all the reasons we have given, Roe and Casey were correct. In holding that a State could not
“resolve” the debate about abortion “in such a definitive way that a woman lacks all choice in the matter,”
the Court protected women’s liberty and women’s equality in a way comporting with our Fourteenth
Amendment precedents. Contrary to the majority’s view, the legal status of abortion in the 19th century
does not weaken those decisions. And the majority’s repeated refrain about “usurp[ing]” state legislatures’
“power to address” a publicly contested question does not help it on the key issue here. To repeat: The
point of a right is to shield individual actions and decisions “from the vicissitudes of political controversy,
to place them beyond the reach of majorities and officials and to establish them as legal principles to be
applied by the courts.” Barnette. However divisive, a right is not at the people’s mercy.
In any event “[w]hether or not we . . . agree” with a prior precedent is the beginning, not the end, of our
analysis—and the remaining “principles of stare decisis weigh heavily against overruling” Roe and Casey.
Dickerson v. United States (2000). Casey itself applied those principles, in one of this Court’s most
important precedents about precedent. After assessing the traditional stare decisis factors, Casey reached
the only conclusion possible—that stare decisis operates powerfully here. It still does. The standards Roe
and Casey set out are perfectly workable. No changes in either law or fact have eroded the two decisions.
And tens of millions of American women have relied, and continue to rely, on the right to choose. So
under traditional stare decisis principles, the majority has no special justification for the harm it causes.
And indeed, the majority comes close to conceding that point. The majority barely mentions any legal or
factual changes that have occurred since Roe and Casey. It suggests that the two decisions are hard for
courts to implement, but cannot prove its case. In the end, the majority says, all it must say to override
stare decisis is one thing: that it believes Roe and Casey “egregiously wrong.” That rule could equally
spell the end of any precedent with which a bare majority of the present Court disagrees. So how does that
approach prevent the “scale of justice” from “waver[ing] with every new judge’s opinion”? Blackstone.
It does not. It makes radical change too easy and too fast, based on nothing more than the new views of
new judges. The majority has overruled Roe and Casey for one and only one reason: because it has always
despised them, and now it has the votes to discard them. The majority thereby substitutes a rule by judges
for the rule of law.
A
Contrary to the majority’s view, there is nothing unworkable about Casey’s “undue burden” standard. Its
primary focus on whether a State has placed a “substantial obstacle” on a woman seeking an abortion is
45
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
“the sort of inquiry familiar to judges across a variety of contexts.” June Medical Services L.L.C. v. Russo
(2020) (Roberts, C. J., concurring in judgment). And it has given rise to no more conflict in application
than many standards this Court and others unhesitatingly apply every day.
General standards, like the undue burden standard, are ubiquitous in the law, and particularly in
constitutional adjudication. When called on to give effect to the Constitution’s broad principles, this Court
often crafts flexible standards that can be applied case-by-case to a myriad of unforeseeable circumstances.
. . . Applying general standards to particular cases is, in many contexts, just what it means to do law.
And the undue burden standard has given rise to no unusual difficulties. Of course, it has provoked some
disagreement among judges. Casey knew it would . . . That much is to be expected in the application of
any legal standard. But the majority vastly overstates the divisions among judges applying the standard. .
. .
Anyone concerned about workability should consider the majority’s substitute standard. The majority says
a law regulating or banning abortion “must be sustained if there is a rational basis on which the legislature
could have thought that it would serve legitimate state interests.” And the majority lists interests like
“respect for and preservation of prenatal life,” “protection of maternal health,” elimination of certain
“medical procedures,” “mitigation of fetal pain,” and others. This Court will surely face critical questions
about how that test applies. Must a state law allow abortions when necessary to protect a woman’s life
and health? And if so, exactly when? . . . . And short of death, how much illness or injury can the State
require her to accept, consistent with the Amendment’s protection of liberty and equality? Further, the
Court may face questions about the application of abortion regulations to medical care most people view
as quite different from abortion. What about the morning-after pill? IUDs? In vitro fertilization? And how
about the use of dilation and evacuation or medication for miscarriage management?
Finally, the majority’s ruling today invites a host of questions about interstate conflicts. Can a State bar
women from traveling to another State to obtain an abortion? Can a State prohibit advertising out-of-state
abortions or helping women get to out-of-state providers? Can a State interfere with the mailing of drugs
used for medication abortions? The Constitution protects travel and speech and interstate commerce, so
today’s ruling will give rise to a host of new constitutional questions. Far from removing the Court from
the abortion issue, the majority puts the Court at the center of the coming “interjurisdictional abortion
wars.”
In short, the majority does not save judges from unwieldy tests or extricate them from the sphere of
controversy. To the contrary, it discards a known, workable, and predictable standard in favor of
something novel and probably far more complicated. It forces the Court to wade further into hotly
contested issues, including moral and philosophical ones, that the majority criticizes Roe and Casey for
addressing.
B
When overruling constitutional precedent, the Court has almost always pointed to major legal or factual
changes undermining a decision’s original basis. . . . Certainly, that was so of the main examples the
46
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
majority cites: Brown v. Board of Education (1954), and West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish (1937). But it
is not so today. Although nodding to some arguments others have made about “modern developments,”
the majority does not really rely on them, no doubt seeing their slimness. The majority briefly invokes the
current controversy over abortion. But it has to acknowledge that the same dispute has existed for decades:
Conflict over abortion is not a change but a constant. (And as we will later discuss, the presence of that
continuing division provides more of a reason to stick with, than to jettison, existing precedent.) In the
end, the majority throws longstanding precedent to the winds without showing that anything significant
has changed to justify its radical reshaping of the law.
1
Subsequent legal developments have only reinforced Roe and Casey. The Court has continued to embrace
all the decisions Roe and Casey cited, decisions which recognize a constitutional right for an individual to
make her own choices about “intimate relationships, the family,” and contraception. Roe and Casey have
themselves formed the legal foundation for subsequent decisions protecting these profoundly personal
choices. . . . In sum, Roe and Casey are inextricably interwoven with decades of precedent about the
meaning of the Fourteenth Amendment. . . .
Moreover, no subsequent factual developments have undermined Roe and Casey. Women continue to
experience unplanned pregnancies and unexpected developments in pregnancies. Pregnancies continue to
have enormous physical, social, and economic consequences. . . .
The majority briefly notes the growing prevalence of safe haven laws and demand for adoption, but, to
the degree that these are changes at all, they too are irrelevant. Neither reduces the health risks or financial
costs of going through pregnancy and childbirth. Moreover, the choice to give up parental rights after
giving birth is altogether different from the choice not to carry a pregnancy to term. The reality is that few
women denied an abortion will choose adoption. The vast majority will continue, just as in Roe and
Casey’s time, to shoulder the costs of childrearing. Whether or not they choose to parent, they will
experience the profound loss of autonomy and dignity that coerced pregnancy and birth always impose.21
. . .
In sum, the majority can point to neither legal nor factual developments in support of its decision. Nothing
that has happened in this country or the world in recent decades undermines the core insight of Roe and
Casey. It continues to be true that, within the constraints those decisions established, a woman, not the
government, should choose whether she will bear the burdens of pregnancy, childbirth, and parenting.
2
21 FN18: The majority finally notes the claim that “people now have a new appreciation of fetal life,” partly because of
viewing sonogram images. It is hard to know how anyone would evaluate such a claim and as we have described above, the
majority’s reasoning does not rely on any reevaluation of the interest in protecting fetal life. It is worth noting that sonograms
became widely used in the 1970s, long before Casey. Today, 60 percent of women seeking abortions have at least one child,
and one-third have two or more. These women know, even as they choose to have an abortion, what it is to look at a
sonogram image and to value a fetal life
47
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
In support of its holding, the majority invokes two watershed cases overruling prior constitutional
precedents: West Coast Hotel Co. v. Parrish and Brown v. Board of Education. But those decisions, unlike
today’s, responded to changed law and to changed facts and attitudes that had taken hold throughout
society. As Casey recognized, the two cases are relevant only to show—by stark contrast—how unjustified
overturning the right to choose is.
West Coast Hotel overruled Adkins v. Children’s Hospital of D. C. (1923), and a whole line of cases
beginning with Lochner v. New York (1905). Adkins had found a state minimum-wage law
unconstitutional because, in the Court’s view, the law interfered with a constitutional right to contract.
But then the Great Depression hit, bringing with it unparalleled economic despair. The experience
undermined—in fact, it disproved—Adkins’s assumption that a wholly unregulated market could meet
basic human needs. As Justice Jackson (before becoming a Justice) wrote of that time: “The older world
of laissez faire was recognized everywhere outside the Court to be dead.” In West Coast Hotel, the Court
caught up, recognizing through the lens of experience the flaws of existing legal doctrine. The havoc the
Depression had worked on ordinary Americans, the Court noted, was “common knowledge through the
length and breadth of the land.” The laissez-faire approach had led to “the exploiting of workers at wages
so low as to be insufficient to meet the bare cost of living.” And since Adkins was decided, the law had
also changed. In several decisions, the Court had started to recognize the power of States to implement
economic policies designed to enhance their citizens’ economic well-being. See, e.g., Nebbia v. New York
(1934); O’Gorman & Young, Inc. v. Hartford Fire Ins. Co. (1931). The statements in those decisions,
West Coast Hotel explained, were “impossible to reconcile” with Adkins. There was no escaping the need
for Adkins to go.
Brown v. Board of Education overruled Plessy v. Ferguson (1896), along with its doctrine of “separate
but equal.” By 1954, decades of Jim Crow had made clear what Plessy’s turn of phrase actually meant:
“inherent[] [in]equal[ity].” Brown. Segregation was not, and could not ever be, consistent with the
Reconstruction Amendments, ratified to give the former slaves full citizenship. Whatever might have been
thought in Plessy’s time, the Brown Court explained, both experience and “modern authority” showed the
“detrimental effect[s]” of state-sanctioned segregation: It “affect[ed] [children’s] hearts and minds in a
way unlikely ever to be undone.” By that point, too, the law had begun to reflect that understanding. In a
series of decisions, the Court had held unconstitutional public graduate schools’ exclusion of black
students. See, e.g., Sweatt v. Painter (1950); Sipuel v. Board of Regents of Univ. of Okla. (1948). The
logic of those cases, Brown held, “appl[ied] with added force to children in grade and high schools.”
Changed facts and changed law required Plessy’s end.
The majority says that in recognizing those changes, we are implicitly supporting the half-century
interlude between Plessy and Brown. That is not so. First, if the Brown Court had used the majority’s
method of constitutional construction, it might not ever have overruled Plessy, whether 5 or 50 or 500
years later. Brown thought that whether the ratification-era history supported desegregation was “[a]t best
. . . inconclusive.” But even setting that aside, we are not saying that a decision can never be overruled
just because it is terribly wrong. Take West Virginia Bd. of Ed. v. Barnette, which the majority also relies
on. That overruling took place just three years after the initial decision, before any notable reliance
interests had developed. It happened as well because individual Justices changed their minds, not because
a new majority wanted to undo the decisions of their predecessors. Both Barnette and Brown, moreover,
48
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
share another feature setting them apart from the Court’s ruling today. They protected individual rights
with a strong basis in the Constitution’s most fundamental commitments; they did not, as the majority
does here, take away a right that individuals have held, and relied on, for 50 years. To take that action
based on a new and bare majority’s declaration that two Courts got the result egregiously wrong? And to
justify that action by reference to Barnette? Or to Brown—a case in which the Chief Justice also wrote an
(11-page) opinion in which the entire Court could speak with one voice? These questions answer
themselves. . . .
Roe and Casey continue to reflect, not diverge from, broad trends in American society. It is, of course,
true that many Americans, including many women, opposed those decisions when issued and do so now
as well. Yet the fact remains: Roe and Casey were the product of a profound and ongoing change in
women’s roles in the latter part of the 20th century. . . . Under that charter, Casey understood, women
must take their place as full and equal citizens. And for that to happen, women must have control over
their reproductive decisions. Nothing since Casey—no changed law, no changed fact—has undermined
that promise.
C
The reasons for retaining Roe and Casey gain further strength from the overwhelming reliance interests
those decisions have created. . . . Casey understood that to deny individuals’ reliance on Roe was to “refuse
to face the fact[s].” Today the majority refuses to face the facts. “The most striking feature of the [majority]
is the absence of any serious discussion” of how its ruling will affect women. By characterizing Casey’s
reliance arguments as “generalized assertions about the national psyche,” it reveals how little it knows or
cares about women’s lives or about the suffering its decision will cause. . . . Indeed, all women now of
childbearing age have grown up expecting that they would be able to avail themselves of Roe’sand Casey’s
protections.
The disruption of overturning Roe and Casey will therefore be profound. Abortion is a common medical
procedure and a familiar experience in women’s lives. About 18 percent of pregnancies in this country
end in abortion, and about one quarter of American women will have an abortion before the age of 45. . .
. Taking away the right to abortion, as the majority does today, destroys all those individual plans and
expectations. In so doing, it diminishes women’s opportunities to participate fully and equally in the
Nation’s political, social, and economic life.
The majority’s response to these obvious points exists far from the reality American women actually live.
The majority proclaims that “‘reproductive planning could take virtually immediate account of any sudden
restoration of state authority to ban abortions.’”22 The facts are: 45 percent of pregnancies in the United
States are unplanned. Even the most effective contraceptives fail, and effective contraceptives are not
universally accessible. Not all sexual activity is consensual and not all contraceptive choices are made by
the party who risks pregnancy. The Mississippi law at issue here, for example, has no exception for rape
22 FN23: Astoundingly, the majority casts this statement as a “conce[ssion]” from Casey with which it “agree[s].” In fact,
Casey used this language as part of describing an argument that it rejected. It is only today’s Court that endorses this
profoundly mistaken view.
49
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
or incest, even for underage women. Finally, the majority ignores, as explained above, that some women
decide to have an abortion because their circumstances change during a pregnancy. Human bodies care
little for hopes and plans. Events can occur after conception, from unexpected medical risks to changes in
family circumstances, which profoundly alter what it means to carry a pregnancy to term. In all these
situations, women have expected that they will get to decide, perhaps in consultation with their families
or doctors but free from state interference, whether to continue a pregnancy. For those who will now have
to undergo that pregnancy, the loss of Roe and Casey could be disastrous. . . .
That is especially so for women without money. . . . In States that bar abortion, women of means will still
be able to travel to obtain the services they need.23 It is women who cannot afford to do so who will suffer
most. These are the women most likely to seek abortion care in the first place. . . . After today, in States
where legal abortions are not available, they will lose any ability to obtain safe, legal abortion care. They
will not have the money to make the trip necessary; or to obtain childcare for that time; or to take time off
work. Many will endure the costs and risks of pregnancy and giving birth against their wishes. Others will
turn in desperation to illegal and unsafe abortions. They may lose not just their freedom, but their lives.
Finally, the expectation of reproductive control is integral to many women’s identity and their place in the
Nation That expectation helps define a woman as an “equal citizen[ ],” with all the rights, privileges, and
obligations that status entails. Gonzales (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). . . . Beyond any individual choice about
residence, or education, or career, her whole life reflects the control and authority that the right grants.
Withdrawing a woman’s right to choose whether to continue a pregnancy does not mean that no choice is
being made. It means that a majority of today’s Court has wrenched this choice from women and given it
to the States. . . . Women have relied on Roe and Casey in this way for 50 years. Many have never known
anything else. When Roe and Casey disappear, the loss of power, control, and dignity will be immense.
The Court’s failure to perceive the whole swath of expectations Roe and Casey created reflects an
impoverished view of reliance. According to the majority, a reliance interest must be “very concrete,” like
those involving “property” or “contract.” While many of this Court’s cases addressing reliance have been
in the “commercial context,” none holds that interests must be analogous to commercial ones to warrant
stare decisis protection. This unprecedented assertion is, at bottom, a radical claim to power. By
disclaiming any need to consider broad swaths of individuals’ interests, the Court arrogates to itself the
authority to overrule established legal principles without even acknowledging the costs of its decisions for
the individuals who live under the law, costs that this Court’s stare decisis doctrine instructs us to privilege
when deciding whether to change course.
The majority claims that the reliance interests women have in Roe and Casey are too “intangible” for the
Court to consider, even if it were inclined to do so. This is to ignore as judges what we know as men and
women. The interests women have in Roe and Casey are perfectly, viscerally concrete. Countless women
will now make different decisions about careers, education, relationships, and whether to try to become
23 FN25: This statement of course assumes that States are not successful in preventing interstate travel to obtain an abortion..
Even assuming that is so, increased out-of-state demand will lead to longer wait times and decreased availability of service in
States still providing abortions. This is what happened in Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado, New Mexico, and Nevada last fall
after Texas effectively banned abortions past six weeks of gestation.
50
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
pregnant than they would have when Roe served as a backstop. Other women will carry pregnancies to
term, with all the costs and risk of harm that involves, when they would previously have chosen to obtain
an abortion. For millions of women, Roe and Casey have been critical in giving them control of their
bodies and their lives. Closing our eyes to the suffering today’s decision will impose will not make that
suffering disappear. The majority cannot escape its obligation to “count[] the cost[s]” of its decision by
invoking the “conflicting arguments” of “contending sides.” Stare decisis requires that the Court calculate
the costs of a decision’s repudiation on those who have relied on the decision, not on those who have
disavowed it. . . .
Rescinding an individual right in its entirety and conferring it on the State, an action the Court takes today
for the first time in history, affects all who have relied on our constitutional system of government and its
structure of individual liberties protected from state oversight. Roe and Casey have of course aroused
controversy and provoked disagreement. But the right those decisions conferred and reaffirmed is part of
society’s understanding of constitutional law and of how the Court has defined the liberty and equality
that women are entitled to claim.
After today, young women will come of age with fewer rights than their mothers and grandmothers had.
The majority accomplishes that result without so much as considering how women have relied on the right
to choose or what it means to take that right away. The majority’s refusal even to consider the life-altering
consequences of reversing Roe and Casey is a stunning indictment of its decision.
D
One last consideration counsels against the majority’s ruling: the very controversy surrounding Roe and
Casey. The majority accuses Casey of acting outside the bounds of the law to quell the conflict over
abortion—of imposing an unprincipled “settlement” of the issue in an effort to end “national division.”
But that is not what Casey did. As shown above, Casey applied traditional principles of stare decisis—
which the majority today ignores—in reaffirming Roe. Casey carefully assessed changed circumstances
(none) and reliance interests (profound). It considered every aspect of how Roe’s framework operated. It
adhered to the law in its analysis, and it reached the conclusion that the law required. True enough that
Casey took notice of the “national controversy” about abortion: The Court knew in 1992, as it did in 1973,
that abortion was a “divisive issue.” But Casey’s reason for acknowledging public conflict was the exact
opposite of what the majority insinuates. Casey addressed the national controversy in order to emphasize
how important it was, in that case of all cases, for the Court to stick to the law. Would that today’s majority
had done likewise. . . .
When that contestation takes place—but when there is no legal basis for reversing course—the Court
needs to be steadfast, to stand its ground. That is what the rule of law requires. And that is what respect
for this Court depends on.
“The promise of constancy, once given” in so charged an environment, Casey explained, “binds its maker
for as long as” the “understanding of the issue has not changed so fundamentally as to render the
commitment obsolete.” A breach of that promise is “nothing less than a breach of faith.” “[A]nd no Court
51
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
that broke its faith with the people could sensibly expect credit for principle.” No Court breaking its faith
in that way would deserve credit for principle. As one of Casey’s authors wrote in another case, “Our
legitimacy requires, above all, that we adhere to stare decisis” in “sensitive political contexts” where
“partisan controversy abounds.” Bush v. Vera (1996) (opinion of O’Connor, J.).
Justice Jackson once called a decision he dissented from a “loaded weapon,” ready to hand for improper
uses. Korematsu v. United States (1944). We fear that today’s decision, departing from stare decisis for
no legitimate reason, is its own loaded weapon. Weakening stare decisis threatens to upend bedrock legal
doctrines, far beyond any single decision. Weakening stare decisis creates profound legal instability. And
as Casey recognized, weakening stare decisis in a hotly contested case like this one calls into question
this Court’s commitment to legal principle. It makes the Court appear not restrained but aggressive, not
modest but grasping. In all those ways, today’s decision takes aim, we fear, at the rule of law.
III
“Power, not reason, is the new currency of this Court’s decisionmaking.” Payne (Marshall, J., dissenting).
Roe has stood for fifty years. Casey, a precedent about precedent specifically confirming Roe, has stood
for thirty. And the doctrine of stare decisis—a critical element of the rule of law—stands foursquare
behind their continued existence. The right those decisions established and preserved is embedded in our
constitutional law, both originating in and leading to other rights protecting bodily integrity, personal
autonomy, and family relationships. The abortion right is also embedded in the lives of women—shaping
their expectations, influencing their choices about relationships and work, supporting (as all reproductive
rights do) their social and economic equality. Since the right’s recognition (and affirmation), nothing has
changed to support what the majority does today. Neither law nor facts nor attitudes have provided any
new reasons to reach a different result than Roe and Casey did. All that has changed is this Court.
Mississippi—and other States too—knew exactly what they were doing in ginning up new legal challenges
to Roe and Casey. The 15-week ban at issue here was enacted in 2018. Other States quickly followed:
Between 2019 and 2021, eight States banned abortion procedures after six to eight weeks of pregnancy,
and three States enacted all-out bans. Mississippi itself decided in 2019 that it had not gone far enough:
The year after enacting the law under review, the State passed a 6-week restriction. A state senator who
championed both Mississippi laws said the obvious out loud. “[A] lot of people thought,” he explained,
that “finally, we have” a conservative Court “and so now would be a good time to start testing the limits
of Roe.” In its petition for certiorari, the State had exercised a smidgen of restraint. It had urged the Court
merely to roll back Roe and Casey, specifically assuring the Court that “the questions presented in this
petition do not require the Court to overturn” those precedents. But as Mississippi grew ever more
confident in its prospects, it resolved to go all in. It urged the Court to overrule Roe and Casey. Nothing
but everything would be enough.
Earlier this Term, this Court signaled that Mississippi’s stratagem would succeed. Texas was one of the
fistful of States to have recently banned abortions after six weeks of pregnancy. It added to that “flagrantly
unconstitutional” restriction an unprecedented scheme to “evade judicial scrutiny.” Whole Woman’s
Health v. Jackson (2021) (Sotomayor, J., dissenting). And five Justices acceded to that cynical maneuver.
52
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us

Barnett & Blackman
Constitutional Law: Cases in Context (2022 Supplement)
They let Texas defy this Court’s constitutional rulings, nullifying Roe and Casey ahead of schedule in the
Nation’s second largest State.
And now the other shoe drops, courtesy of that same five-person majority. (We believe that The Chief
Justice’s opinion is wrong too, but no one should think that there is not a large difference between
upholding a 15-week ban on the grounds he does and allowing States to prohibit abortion from the time
of conception.) Now a new and bare majority of this Court—acting at practically the first moment
possible—overrules Roe and Casey. It converts a series of dissenting opinions expressing antipathy toward
Roe and Casey into a decision greenlighting even total abortion bans. It eliminates a 50-year-old
constitutional right that safeguards women’s freedom and equal station. It breaches a core rule-of-law
principle, designed to promote constancy in the law. In doing all of that, it places in jeopardy other rights,
from contraception to same-sex intimacy and marriage. And finally, it undermines the Court’s legitimacy.
Casey itself made the last point in explaining why it would not overrule Roe—though some members of
its majority might not have joined Roe in the first instance. . . . And to overrule for that reason? Quoting
Justice Stewart, Casey explained that to do so—to reverse prior law “upon a ground no firmer than a
change in [the Court’s] membership”—would invite the view that “this institution is little different from
the two political branches of the Government.” No view, Casey thought, could do “more lasting injury to
this Court and to the system of law which it is our abiding mission to serve.” For overruling Roe, Casey
concluded, the Court would pay a “terrible price.”
The Justices who wrote those words—O’Connor, Kennedy, and Souter—they were judges of wisdom.
They would not have won any contests for the kind of ideological purity some court watchers want Justices
to deliver. But if there were awards for Justices who left this Court better than they found it? And who for
that reason left this country better? And the rule of law stronger? Sign those Justices up.
They knew that “the legitimacy of the Court [is] earned over time.” They also would have recognized that
it can be destroyed much more quickly. They worked hard to avert that outcome in Casey. The American
public, they thought, should never conclude that its constitutional protections hung by a thread—that a
new majority, adhering to a new “doctrinal school,” could “by dint of numbers” alone expunge their rights.
It is hard—no, it is impossible—to conclude that anything else has happened here. One of us once said
that “[i]t is not often in the law that so few have so quickly changed so much.” S. Breyer, Breaking the
Promise of Brown: The Resegregation of America’s Schools (2022). For all of us, in our time on this
Court, that has never been more true than today. In overruling Roe and Casey, this Court betrays its guiding
principles.
With sorrow—for this Court, but more, for the many millions of American women who have today lost a
fundamental constitutional protection—we dissent.
53
Introduction to Constitutional Law: 100 Supreme Court Cases Everyone Should Know
Includes access to our video series @ http://ConLaw.us