120
BERNARD E. HARCOURT
[Vol. 90
IL THE RISE OF THE HARM PRINCIPLE
On Liberty. 27
The harm principle traces back to John Stuart Mill's essay
The objeMct iollf sthuics ceisnsacyt liys tsot aastseedrt tohnee pverryin scimippllee ipnr inac nipolew, -afsa emnoti­us
patlsesda gtoe gionv etrnhe a obspoeluntienlyg t hpea dgeeasl ionfgs t hofe s oecsiseatyy :w ith the individual in the
way of compulsion and control ....T hat principle is that the sole end
for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfer­
ing with the liberty of action of any of their number is self-protection.
That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over
27
JOHN STUARSTee, M eILL.g., , ON LIBER1Y 9 (Elizabeth Rapaport ed., 1978) (1859). The
harm principle has its roots in earlier liberal theory, especially in early liberal defini­
tions of liberty. THOMAS HOBBES, LEvIATHAN 145-47 (Richard Tuck ed., Cam­
bridge Univ. Press 1996) (1651) ("Liberty, or Freedome, signifieth (properly) the
absence of Opposition; (by Opposition, I mean externall Impediments of mo­
tion;) ."); JOHN LOCIIB, Two TREATISES OF GOVERNMENT 284 (Peter Laslett ed., Cam­
bridge Univ. Press 1988) (1690) (Freedom of men under government is "[a] Liberty
to follow my own Will in all things, where the Rule prescribes not; and not to be sub­
ject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, Arbitrary Willgener of aanlloyt her Man."). For
Leprgeasel Entn fporucremenposet so,f tMhooruaglhity, , it makes sense to begin the discussion with John Stuart
Mill. For background discussion of the harm principle, see Kent Greenawalt,
85 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 710, 715, 722-25 (1995).

1999] COLLAPSE OF THE HARM PPNCIPLE
any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm
to others.8
Though simple at first blush, the harm principle actually
was far more complicated than it looked, and, over the course
of the essay, it took on many nuances. The argument in fact be-
came more complex with each restatement. In Mill's short es-
say, the harm principle metamorphosed from a simple inquiry
into harm, to a more complex analysis of interests (self-
regarding and other regarding interests),2 and eventually to a
quasi-legal determination of rights. In his final restatement of
the harm principle, Mill ultimately defined the concept of harm
on the basis of recognized or legal rights. Mill wrote:
Though society is not founded on a contract... the fact of living in
society renders it indispensable that each should be bound to observe a
certain line of conduct toward the rest. This conduct consists, first, in
not injuring the interests of one another, or ratherc ertain interests which, ei-
ther by express legal provision or by tacit understanding, ought to be considered as
rights;,a nd secondly, in each person's bearing his share (to be fixed on
some equitable principle) of the labors and sacrifices incurred for de-
fending the society or its members from injury and molestation.30
As Mill explained elsewhere, the notion of rights embodied in
this final restatement rested on a modified utilitarian calculus
grounded on the permanent interests of man as a progressive
being.
In Mill's writings, then, the original, simple harm principle
evolved into a more cumbersome principle. Mill nevertheless
applied the principle and justified, on its basis, a large number
of regulations and prohibitions. The harm principle, in Mill's
own hands, produced a blueprint for a highly regulated society:
a society that regulated the sale of potential instruments of
crime, that taxed the sale of alcohol and regulated the public
2MILL, supra note 27, at 9.
Id. at 78.
Id. at 73 (emphasis added).
"Id. at 10. For a discussion of Mill's emphasis on human self-development, see
generally: FRED R. BERGER, HAPPINESS, JUsTICE, AND FREEDOM: THE MORAL AND
POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY OF JOHN STuART MILL, 229-30 (1984); WENDY DONNER, THE
LIBERAL SELF: JOHN STUART MRL's MORAL AND PoLr cAL PHILOSOPHY 188-97 (1991);
Allen E. Buchanan, Assessing the Communitarian Critique of Liberalism, 99 ETHics 852,
862 (1989); Russell Hittinger, The Hart-Devlin Debate Revisited, 35 AM. J. JURIS. 47, 51-52
(1990).

BERNARD E. HARCOURT [Vol. 90
consumption of alcohol, that regulated education and even
procreation, and that prohibited public intoxication and inde-
cency.32
Beginning at least in the 1950s, liberal theorists, most
prominently Professors H.L.A. Hart andJoel Feinberg, returned
to Mill's original, simple statement of the harm principle. The
context was the debate over the legal enforcement of morality.
In England, this debate was reignited by the recommendation
of the Committee on Homosexual Offences and Prostitution
(the "Wolfenden Report") that private homosexual acts be-
tween consenting adults no longer be criminalized.33 In the
United States, the debate was reignited by the Supreme Court's
struggle over the definition and treatment of obscenity'4 and the
drafting of the Model Penal Code.5 In both countries, the de-
bate was fueled by the perception among liberal theorists that
legal moralist principles were experiencing a rejuvenation and
were threatening to encroach on liberalism. More than anyone
else, Lord Patrick Devlin catalyzed this perceived threat. In his
Maccabaean Lecture, delivered to the British Academy in 1959,
Lord Devlin argued that purportedly immoral activities, like
homosexuality and prostitution, should remain criminal of-
fenses.36 Lord Devlin published his lecture and other essays un-
der the title The Enforcement of Morals, and Devlin soon became
associated with the principle of legal moralism-the principle
that moral offenses should be regulated because they are im-
moral.
The Hart-Devlin exchange structured the debate over the
legal enforcement of morality, and thus there emerged, in the
1960s, a pairing of two familiar arguments-the harm principle
32 MILL, supra note 27, at 96, 97, 99, 100, 104, 107.
"REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HOMOSEXUAL OFFENCES AND PROSTITUTION, 1957,
Cmnd. 247, para. 61, 62. For the history of sodomy laws in England, see generally
Clarice B. Rabinowitz, Proposalsf or Progress:S odomy Laws and the European Convention on
Human Rights, 21 BROOK J. INT'LL. 425, 428-32 (1995).
' See Ronald Dworkin, Lord Devlin and the Enforcement of Morals, 75 YALE L.J. 986,
986-87 (1966).
"THOMAS C. GREY, THE LEGAL ENFORCEMENT OF MORALITY 4 (1983).
-PATRICK DEvuN, Morals and the CriminalL aw, in THE ENFORCEMENT OF MORALS 1
(1965).

1999] COLLAPSE OF THE HARM PR1NCPLE 11233
and legal moralism. All the participants at the time recognized,
naturally, that this structure was a recurrence of a very similar
pairing of arguments that had set the contours of the debate a
hundred years earlier.37 The Hart-Devlin debate replicated, in
many ways, the earlier debate between Mill and another famous
British jurist, LordJames Fitzjames Stephen. In 1873, in a book
entitled Liberty, Equality, Fraternity,- Lord Stephen had published
a scathing attack on Mill's essay and strenuously advocated legal
moralism. Stephen described his argument as "absolutely in-
consistent with and contradictory to Mr. Mill's."39 Stephen's ar-
gument, like Mill's, was best captured in a now-famous passage:
"[T] here are acts of wickedness so gross and outrageous that,
self-protection apart, they must be prevented as far as possible at
any cost to the offender, and punished, if they occur, with ex-
emplary severity.40
Professor Hart immediately underscored the similar struc-
ture of the emerging debate. "Though a century divides these
two legal writers," Hart observed, referring to Lords Stephen
and Devlin, "the similarity in the general tone and sometimes
in the detail of their arguments is very great.,4' In his defense,
Devlin responded that at the time he delivered the Maccabaean
lecture he "did not then know that the same ground had al-
ready been covered by Mr. Justice Stephen .... ,42 Nevertheless,
Devlin conceded that there was "great similarity between [Lord
Stephen's] view and mine on the principles that should affect
the use of the criminal law for the enforcement of morals.43
Devlin also noted the similarity between Hart, Mill, and the
' See, e.g., Louis B. Schwartz, Morals Offenses and the Model Penal Code, 63 COLUM. L.
REv. 669, 670 n.1 (1963) ("The recent controversy traverses much the same ground as
was surveyed in the nineteenth century.") (citing the Mill-Stephen debate).
"JAMES FrTZJAMES STEPHEN, LIBER Y, EQUAirX', FRATERNrIY (R.J. White ed., Cam-
bridge Univ. Press 1967) (1873).
Id. at 162.
40Id, This passage is most frequently excerpted in discussions of Stephen. See, e.g.,
H.L.A. HART, LAW, LIBEPRY AND MORALITY, 60-61 (1963); Feinberg, Moral Enforcement
and the Harm Principle (from SoCIAL PHILOSOPHY (1973)), reprinted in ETMICS AND
PUBLCPoucy 291 (Tom L. Beauchamp ed., 1975).
4, HART, supran ote 40, at 16.
42 DEVUN, THE ENFORCEMENT OF MORALS, supra note 36, at vii.
4Id.

124 BERNARD E. HARCOURT [Vol. 90
Wolfenden Report." Referring to the Wolfenden Report, Dev-
lin observed that "this use of the [harm] principle is, as Profes-
sor Hart observed, 'strikingly similar' to Mill's doctrine."45
A. LORD DEVLIN AND THE FRAGMENTATION OF THE
CONSERVATIVE POSITION
Though the paired structure of arguments was similar, it
was not exactly the same. In contrast to Stephen's straightfor-
ward legal moralist argument, Lord Devlin's argument in The
Enforcement of Morality was ambiguous and susceptible to com-
peting interpretations. Devlin's argument played on the am-
bivalence in the notion of harm-at times courting the idea of
social harm, at other times aligning more closely with the legal
moralism of his predecessor. As a result, the conservative posi-
tion began to fragment and there developed at least two inter-
pretations of Devlin's argument: the first relied on public harm,
the second on legal moralism. Professors Hart and Feinberg la-
beled these two versions, respectively, the moderate thesis and
the extreme thesis.6
In large part, the source of the ambiguity stemmed from the
fact that Devlin defined public morality in terms of harm to society.
In several key passages, Devlin strongly suggested that public
morality necessarily encompassed conduct that affected society
as a whole. Devlin wrote, for instance, that "[t]here is a case for
a collective [moral] judgement . . . only if society is affected.47
"[B] efore a society can put a practice beyond the limits of toler-
ance," Devlin emphasized, "there must be a deliberate judge-
ment that the practice is injurious to society.'"8 In these and
numerous other passages, 49 Devlin made clear that public moral-
" Id. at 105. At other points, though, Devlin also tried to distinguish Hart from
Mill. See e.g, id. at 124-26.
Id. at 105 (footnote omitted).
"HART, supran ote 40, at 48; Feinberg, supran ote 40, at 289-93.
4D
Id
E
.
V
a
L
t
I N
1
,
7
s
(
u
e
p
m
ra
p h
n
a
o
s
t
i
e
s
3
a
6
d
,
d
a
e
t
d
8
) .
(emphasis added).
4 See, e.g., id. at 15 ("Immorality then, for the purpose of the law, is what every
right-minded person is presumed to consider to be immoral. Any immorality is capa-
ble of affecting society injuriously and in effect to a greater or lesser extent it usually
does; this is what gives the law its locus standi."); id. at 17-18 ("It becomes then a ques-
tion of balance, the danger to society in one scale and the extent of the restriction in

1999] COLLAPSE OF THE HARM PRINCIPLE
ity would necessarily involve injury to society, and that the injury
was precisely "what gives the law its locus standi."s° This overlap
of harm and morality significantly exacerbated the ambiguity in
the debate, and the struggle for the meaning of harm.
The overlap fragmented the conservative argument. Under
the moderate interpretation, Devlin appeared to be arguing
that morality should be enforced in order to protect society
from the danger of disintegration-an argument that relied on
harm.51 On this view, the only difference between Hart and
Devlin was that Hart focused on harm to the individual, whereas
Devlin focused on harm to society as a whole. It was precisely
on this ground that Devlin criticized the Wolfenden Report.
Devlin wrote:
The error of jurisprudence in the Wolfenden Report is caused by
the search for some single principle to explain the division between
crime and sin. The Report finds it in the principle that the criminal law
exists for the protection of individualr, on this principle fornication in pri-
vate between consenting adults is outside the law and thus it becomes
logically indefensible to bring homosexuality between consenting adults
in private within it. But the true principle is that the law exists for the pro-
tection of society. It does not discharge its function by protecting the indi-
vidual from injury, annoyance, corruption, and exploitation; the law must
protect also the institutions and the community of ideas, political and moral,
without which people cannot live together. Society cannot ignore the morality
of the individual any more than it can his loyalty; it flourishes on both
and without either it dies.52
One obvious flaw in the moderate interpretation was that
Devlin never defined the causal mechanism of social harm.
the other."); id at 22 ("Adultery of the sort that breaks up marriage seems to me to
be just as harmful to the socialf abrica s homosexuality or bigamy.") (emphasis added).
Id. at 15.
Feinberg similarly suggests that Devlin's moderate thesis "is really an application
of the public harm principle." Feinberg, supra note 40, at 289. In my opinion, Pro-
fessorJeffrie Murphy's reading of Devlin is also consistent with the moderate thesis of
public harm. SeeJeffrie G. Murphy, Legal Moralism and Liberalism, 37 ARIZ. L. REV. 73,
76 (1995) ("Devlin is not a legal moralist. He is rather a utilitarian, democratic cynic
with some controversial empirical views. Utilitarian because he regards social harm-
fulness, in some very extended sense, as the only factor relevant in justifying a crimi-
nal prohibition."). Professor Robert George similarly interprets Devlin as making a
public harm argument. See Robert P. George, Social Cohesion and the Legal Enforcement
of Morals: A Reconsideration of the Hart-Devlin Debate, 35 AM.J. JuRS. 15, 19 (1990). See
also Greenawalt, supra note 27, at 722 (offering a consequentialist interpretation of
Devlin).
2DEVUN, supra note 36, at 22 (emphases added).

BERNARD E. HARCOURT [Vol. 90
Though Devlin repeatedly referred to "social disintegration," he
failed to articulate the pathway of harm. As a result, there de-
veloped, again, a number of competing interpretations of the
causal mechanism-which, in part, replicated the ambiguities in
the conception of harm. Hart, at one point, suggested that Dev-
lin believed that individuals who deviate from sexual morality
are likely to deviate in other ways and thereby to cause society
harm.3 At another point, Hart suggested that the causal
mechanism was simply change: that Devlin equated society with
its morality "so that a change in its morality is tantamount to the
destruction of a society. '54 Feinberg emphasized the metaphor
of morality as a kind of "seamless web" and interpreted the
causal mechanism as the unraveling of that "moral fabric."'5
Professor Jeffrie Murphy offered yet another interpretation:
"one might. . . argue," he suggested, "that open toleration of
the flouting of sexual norms threatens the honorific position
historically accorded the traditional nuclear family and that
such a threat risks undermining the social stability generated by
such family units."56 Devlin never really clarified his position.
"' HART, supra note 40, at 51 ("[Morality] forms a single seamless web, so that those
who deviate from any part are likely or perhaps bound to deviate from the whole.");
see id. ("But there is again no evidence to support, and much to refute, the theory that
those who deviate from conventional sexual morality are in other ways hostile to soci-
ety.").
"' Id. at 51. This led, of course, to Devlin's response, and an entirely fruitless se-
mantic debate over the concept of society. See DEvLrN, supra note 36, at 13 n.1. At
still another point, Hart suggested that the mechanism turned on a Durkheimian
conception of social solidarity: that private immoral acts loosen the moral bonds that
bring men and women together in society and thereby "threaten[] the moral princi-
ples on which society is based." HART, supra note 40, at 53.
1 5 Feinberg, supra note 40, at 289.
16 Murphy, supra note 51, at 77. Other interpretations were offered. See, e.g.,
George, supra note 51, at 30-36 (offering an interpretation of social disintegration in
terms of "the loss of a distinctive form of interpersonal integration in community un-
derstood as something worthwhile for its own sake").
I would suggest that a close reading of Devlin's Morals and the Criminal Law sug-
gests yet another possibility. Devlin repeatedly suggested that, if the structure of law
was not supported by our moral sentiments, then the law "forfeits respect." DELIN,
supra note 36, at 2, 24. In forfeiting respect, the law loses legitimacy. This seems to
capture best the mechanism at work in Devlin's discussion of homosexuality. Male
homosexuality, according to Devlin, engenders a moral reaction of "deeply felt and
not manufactured" "disgust," "a real feeling of reprobation," and "a general abhor-
rence." Id. at 17. When we look at it "calmly and dispassionately, we regard it as a

1999] COLLAPSE OF THE HARM PRTNCLPLE 127
Another major problem with the moderate interpretation
was that Devlin ignored completely the empirical dimension of
the public harm claim.57 "[N] o evidence is produced," Hart ex-
claimed.58 "No reputable historian has maintained this thesis,
and there is indeed much evidence against it. As a proposition
of fact it is entitled to no more respect than the EmperorJustin-
ian's statement that homosexuality was the cause of earth-
quakes."59 Four years later, Professor Ronald Dworkin sounded
the same refrain: "[Lord Devlin] manages this conclusion with-
out offering evidence that homosexuality presents any danger at
all to society's existence .... .60
vice so abominable that its mere presence is an offence." I& If the law does not re-
flect this deep sense of moral offense, then the law will no longer be perceived as le-
gitimate. It will forfeit respect. Legitimization may have been the causal mechanism
at work.
Bill Miller's discussion in The Anatomy of Disgust resonates well with this interpreta-
tion of Devlin. See WILLIAM IAN MILLER, TI ANATOMY OF DISGUST, 179-80
("[W hether we be Puritan or not, we express many of our bread-and-butter moral
judgments in the idiom of disgust. The argument is not whether disgust operates in
the moral domain, but about its proper scope, its proper object, and its reliability in
that domain."). See also id. at 180 ("By being so much in the gut, the idiom of disgust
has certain virtues for voicing moral assertions. It signals seriousness, commitment,
indisputability, presentness, and reality. It drags the moral down from the skies to-
ward which it often tends to float, wrests it from the philosophers and theologians,
and brings it back to us with a vengeance."). It seems that Devlin's writings would be
an excellent illustration of many of Miller's points. There is also a similar ambiva-
lence about disgust in the writings of Miller and Devlin: disgust is at the core of mo-
rality, but it is not its foundation. It reflects moral judgment, but should not ground
moraljudgment. Thus Miller writes that "[d]isgust tends to be a little too zealous in
its moral work. It wants to draw things into the moral domain that we feel in our bet-
ter judgment should be left out." I& at 181. The same ambivalence is reflected in
Devlin. See, e.g., DEVLIN, supra note 36, at 17 ("Those who are dissatisfied with the
present law on homosexuality often say that the opponents of reform are swayed sim-
ply by disgust. If that were so it would be wrong, but I do not think one can ignore
disgust if it is deeply felt and not manufactured.").
', Even Devlin's supporters acknowledge the absence of empirical evidence. See,
e.g., Dworkin, supra note 13, at 931 ("The trouble with many of Devlin's claims is the
same as that faced by the strategic theorist who, when asked about his various 'calcu-
lated risks,' admitted that he had never done the calculations."); Murphy, supra note
51, at 77 ("Devlin on these issues seems to rely more on hunches than on solid evi-
dence.").
' HART, supra note 40, at 50.
59I d.
0 Dworkin, supra note 34, at 992. See also Rolf E. Sartorius, The Enforcement of Mo-
rality, 81 YA.E LJ. 891, 893 (1972) ("[A]s Hart has convincingly argued on a number

BERNARD E. HARCOURT [Vol. 90
The empirical gap in Devlin's harm argument was terribly
damaging, and, as a result, a second, more extreme reading of
Devlin emerged. Under the second interpretation, referred to
as the extreme thesis, Devlin argued that morality should be en-
forced for the sake of morality tout court: morality for morality's
sake. If Devlin's claim (that private acts of immorality present a
danger to society) was not intended to be an empirical claim,
Hart suggested, then Devlin equated morality with society. "On
this view the enforcement of morality is not justified by its valu-
able consequences in securing society from dissolution or de-
cay," Hart argued. "It is justified simply as identical with or
required for the preservation of the society's
morality.,62
Under the more extreme reading, Devlin's argument was
much closer to the earlier statement of legal moralism in Lord
Stephen's book, Liberty, Equality, Fraternity6.3 Certain key pas-
sages in Devlin's writings supported this reading, especially the
concluding sentence of the Maccabaean lecture:
So the law must base itself on Christian morals and to the limit of its
ability enforce them, not simply because they are the morals of most of
us, nor simply because they are the morals which are taught by the estab-
lished Church-on these points the law recognizes the right to dissent-
but for the compelling reason that without the help of Christian teaching the law
will fail.64
These were ominous and somewhat bewildering words.
"Christian morals." "The law will fail." To what extent was this a
prediction of actual social harm or a traditional argument about
legal moralism? Could they even be distinguished anymore?
Was legal moralism, in reality, a harm argument? In which di-
of separate occasions, the empirical assumption that it must legislate sexual morality
in order to avoid disintegration is simply without foundation.") (footnote omitted).
61 HART, supra note 40, at 55.
62 Id. Hart argued, against the extreme thesis, that it rested on a vindictive, de-
nunciatory, and hateful theory of punishment that contravened "the critical princi-
ple, central to all morality, that human misery and the restriction of freedom are
evils." Id. at 82. Joel Feinberg also argued against the extreme thesis. Feinberg em-
phasized the costs of such a policy, in terms of individual privacy and other human
values ("loss of spontaneity, stunting of rational powers, anxiety, [and] hypocrisy").
Feinberg argued that these costs far outweighed any possible benefit: "The price of
securing mere outward conformity to the community's standards (for that is all that
can be achieved by the penal law) is exorbitant." Feinberg, supran ote 40, at 292.
supran ote 38.
'STEPHEN,
" DEvLIN, supra note 36, at 25 (emphasis added).

1999] COLLAPSE OF THE HARM PP7NCPLE
rection was Devlin going? Unsure, Hart and other liberal theo-
rists returned to Mill's essay On Liberty and to the original, sim-
ple statement of the harm principle. Ironically, that rhetorical
move would further ambiguate the conception of harm. The
simplicity of the original harm principle would veil an intense
struggle for the meaning of harm.
B. H.L.A. HART, JOEL FEINBERG, AND THE ORIGINAL SIMPLE HARM
PRINCIPLE
In Law, Liberty, and Morality, a set of lectures delivered at
Stanford University in 1962 in response to Lord Devlin, Hart
rehearsed Mill's harm principle, but carefully pared the argu-
ment down to its original, simple, and succinct statement. Right
after posing the central question of his lectures-"Ought im-
morality as such to be a crime?"-Hart immediately cited Mill in
support of his position. "To this question," Hart responded,
'John Stuart Mill gave an emphatic negative answer in his essay
On Liberty one hundred years ago, and the famous sentence in
which he frames this answer expresses the central doctrine of his essay."
Then Hart repeated the famous sentence: "He said, 'The only
purpose for which power can rightfully be exercised over any
member of a civilised community against his will is to prevent
harm to others."' Hart endorsed the simple harm argument,r
and declared that, "on the narrower issue relevant to the en-
forcement of morality Mill seems to me to be right."67
Similarly, in an early essay in 1973 entitled Moral Enforcement
and the Harm Principle-an essay which would sketch the con-
tours of his later four-volume treatise on The Moral Limits of the
Criminal Law--Professor Joel Feinberg rehearsed Mill's harm
principle and he, too, pared the principle down to its original,
simple formulation.& Feinberg emphasized the importance of
HART, supra note 40, at 4 (emphasis added).
'
Hart qualified his endorsement insofar as he supplemented the harm principle
with an offense principle. It is not clear, however, that Mill would have disagreed
with Hart, since the Millian notion of other-regarding conduct seems to embrace
both the harm principle and the offense principle.
6 HART, supra note 40, at 5.
See generally Feinberg, supran ote 40.

BERNARD E. HARCOURT [Vol. 90
distinguishing between direct and indirect harn, but went no
further, at the time, in developing the harm argument. Fein-
berg endorsed the argument7° and wrote that the distinction, "as
Mill intended it to be understood, does seem at least roughly
serviceable, and unlikely to invite massive social interference in
'
private affairs.'
Eleven years later, Feinberg published the first volume of
The Moral Limits of the Criminal Law, entitled Harm to Others.
Feinberg explored there the contours of the harm principle and
developed fifteen supplementary criteria, or what he called
"mediating maxims," to assist in the application of the harm
principle.72 Throughout the four-volume treatise, Feinberg
maintained that the harm argument, as refined by the mediat-
ing maxims, was one of only two considerations (the other be-
ing the offense principle) that were always a good reason for
prohibiting purportedly immoral activity.
Feinberg's experience with the harm principle mirrored, in
significant ways, Mill's own experience." Like Mill, Feinberg's
confidence in the robustness of the original harm principle
eroded somewhat over the course of his writings. Whereas
Feinberg originally defined liberalism, in his own words,
"boldly,74 relying exclusively on the harm principle (supple-
mented by an offense principle),-' Feinberg concluded the
'9 Id. at 284.
70 Feinberg also supplements the harm principle with an offense principle. See id.
at 297; see also 2 JOEL FEINBERG, THE MORAL LIMrrs OF TBE CRiMINAL LAW: OFFENSE TO
OTHERS 49 (1985).
7' Feinberg, supran ote 40, at 286.
2 1 FEINBERG, supra note 13, at 214-17, 243-45.
" Joel Feinberg himself acknowledges the strong similarity, in terms of the in-
creased complexity of the harm principle, between his work and Mill's. Conversation
with Joel Feinberg (Oct. 14, 1998). In his treatise, Feinberg specifically remarked
that "[a] t first sight, the harm principle seems a straightforward and unproblematic
guide to legislative decision-making." But, he noted, "[t]he analysis proposed in this
and the preceding chapters, however, reveals that harm is a very complex concept
with hidden normative dimensions .... " 1 FEINBERG, supran ote 13, at 214.
74 4 FEINBERG, supra note 13, at 323-24.
7' Feinberg's original definition of liberalism posited that the harm and offense
principles were exclusive. He wrote:
We can define liberalism in respect to the subject matter of this work as the view that the
harm and offense principles, duly clarified and qualified, between them exhaust the class

1999] COLLAPSE OF TIE HARM PRINCIPLE
fourth and last volume of The Moral Limits of the CriminalL aw by
softening his claims about the critical role of the harm princi-
ple. But even under the more cautious version proposed by
Feinberg at the end of his treatise, the qualified harm principle
still played a dominant role. Feinberg concluded his treatise
with the following "cautious" definition of liberalism:
[W]e can define liberalism cautiously as the view that as a class, harm
and offense prevention are far and away the best reasons that can be
produced in support of criminal prohibitions, and the only ones that
frequently outweigh the case for liberty. They are, in short, the only
considerations that are always good reasons for criminalization. The other
principles [moralist or paternalist] state considerations that are at most
sometimes (but rarely) good reasons, depending for example on exactly
what the non-grievance evil is whose prevention is supposed to support
criminalization.
As this passage makes clear, the original harm principle re-
mained, even by the end of Feinberg's treatise, one of the two
main limits on state regulation of moral offenses.
Gradually, over the course of the 1960s, '70s, and '80s, Mill's
famous sentence began to dominate the legal philosophic de-
bate over the enforcement of morality. Harm became the criti-
cal principle used to police the line between law and morality
within Anglo-American philosophy of law. Most prominent
theorists who participated in the debate either relied on the
harm principle or made favorable reference to the argument.
Professor Ronald Dworkin engaged the Hart-Devlin debate in
an article first published in the Yale Law Journali n 1966 entitled
Lord Devlin and the Enforcement of MoralS7. Although Dworkin fo-
cused on the implications for democratic theory-arguing that
legislators must ultimately decide whether the community has
of morally relevant reasons for criminal prohibitions. Paternalistic and moralistic consid-
erations, when introduced as support for penal legislation, have no weight at all.
1 FEINBERG, supra note 13, at 14-15. See also 4 FEINBERG, supran ote 13, at 321.
76 4 FEINBERG, supra note 13, at 323. Feinberg goes on to say:
Indeed there are some extraordinary, and up to now only hypothetical examples of non-
grievance evils (neither harms nor offenses, nor right-violations of any kind) that are so se-
rious that even the liberal (if he is sensitive and honest) will concede that their prevention
would be a good reason for criminalization, and in the most compelling examples of all,
perhaps even a good enough reason, on balance, for criminalization.
Id. at 324.
" The article subsequently became a chapter of RONALD DwoRmN, TAKING RIGHTS
SERIOUSLY (1977).

132 BERNARD E. HARCOURT [Vol. 90
expressed a reasoned moral position about purportedly im-
moral activities78-Dworkin presented the harm principle as a
leading response in the debate.79 Professor Louis Henkin simi-
larly joined the debate, with specific reference to the question
of obscenity. Although Henkin, like Dworkin, took a different
approach to the question-emphasizing the constitutional di-
mensions of laws enforcing claims of morality that have their
roots in religious principles-Henkin also sided with Hart
against Devlin. "By my hypotheses," Henkin noted in conclu-
sion, "the United States would be a polity nearer the heart of
Professor Hart, and ofJohn Stuart Mill."8
Over time, the harm principle essentially prevailed in the
legal philosophic debate over the legal enforcement of morality.
From one end of the spectrum to the other, there arose a con-
sensus that Hart had carried the day. At the liberal end of the
spectrum, Professor Ronald Dworkin reported that Devlin's ar-
gument "was widely attacked" and that his thesis was, ultimately,
"very implausible. On the other end of the spectrum, Profes-
sor Robert George would report that "many ... perhaps even
most [commentators] think that Hart carried the day .... ,,12
Professor Jeffrie Murphy-who is today a skeptic of the harm
principle-captured well the prevailing consensus. "I believed,
along with most of the people with whom I talked about legal
78 Dworkin, supran ote 34, at 1001 ("[The legislator] must sift these arguments and
positions, trying to determine which are prejudices or rationalizations, which presup-
pose general principles or theories vast parts of the population could not be sup-
posed to accept, and so on. It may be that when he has finished this process of
reflection he will find that the claim of a moral consensus has not been made out.").
For a discussion of Dworkin's argument, see Sartorius, supra note 60, at 893-98.
7' Dworkin, supra note 34, at 996. Dworkin sets forth in the second paragraph of
the essay the different positions available in response to Lord Devlin, and highlights
the harm principle:
Must there be some demonstration of present harm to particular persons directly af-
fected by the practice in question? ... [M]ust it also be demonstrated that these social
changes threaten long-term harm of some standard sort, like an increase in crime or a de-
crease in productivity?... If so, does the requirement of harm add much to the bare re-
quirement of public condemnation?
Id. at 986.
" Louis Henkin, Morals and The Constitution: The Sin of Obscenity, 63 COLUM. L. REV.
391, 413 (1963).
8'R onald Dworkin, Liberal Community, 77 CAL. L. REV. 479, 487 (1989).
82 George, supra note 51, at 30.

1999] COLLAPSE OF THE HARM PR7NCIPLE
philosophy," Murphy wrote, "that legal moralism had been
properly killed off, that liberalism had once again been vindi-
cated against the forces of superstition and oppression, and that
legal philosophy could now move on to new and more impor-
83s
tant topics.
This is not to suggest that the controversy simply disap-
peared from philosophic circles.84 There were attempts to re-
habilitate Devlin's position.s There were even attempts to
radicalize Devlin's argument. 6 And still today, Devlin has sup-
porters. In fact, just this year, Professor Gerald Dworkin pub-
lished a provocative essay entitled Devlin Was Right8.7 In the
essay, Dworkin sides with Devlin "in believing that there is no
principled line following the contours of the distinction be-
tween immoral and harmful conduct such that only grounds re-
"Murphy, supran ote 51, at 74-75.
84 Under one reading, the Hart-Devlin debate metamorphosed and resurfaced as
the liberal-communitarian debate, a much larger debate about liberalism and its abil-
ity to accommodate the need for community. This is most evident in Michael J. San-
del's article, Moral Argument and Liberal Toleration: Abortion and Homosexuality, 77 CAL.
L. REV. 521 (1989). In his article, Sandel argues that it is in fact impossible to bracket
controversial moral and religious convictions in debates over abortion and homo-
sexuality, and that the liberal attempt to do so results, at best, in a "thin and fragile
toleration." Id. at 537. But see Toni M. Massaro, Gay Rights, Thick and Thin, 49 STAN.
L. REV. 45 (1996) (arguing that "thinner" approaches to gay rights may be more ef-
fective in protecting gay rights in the constitutional law context). Sandel's discussion
develops many of the themes in the Hart-Devlin debate. Compare Sandel, supra, at
537-38, with Dworkin, supra note 13, at 946 ("I encourage liberals who wish to argue
against, for example, the criminalization of homosexual sex, to engage in the honest
toil of arguing that the reason such conduct ought not be criminalized is that there is
nothing immoral in it."). But Sandel carries the discussion into the larger context of
liberalism and its critics. Since the larger liberal-communitarian debate is beyond the
scope of this Article, I will not pursue here this strand of the Hart-Devlin debate.
" See, e.g., Murphy, supra note 51, at 76-78 (arguing that Devlin was right to chal-
lenge the inconsistency within liberalism between the harm principle and other lib-
eral doctrines like the retributive principle and the principle of fundamental rights
constitutionalism).
"Se e.g., George, supra note 51, at 30-37 (offering a communitarian re-inter-
pretation of Devlin that supposedly survives Hart's criticisms, according to which Dev-
lin's conception of social disintegration referred to interpersonal disintegration in
the community; and arguing, contra Devlin, for the more radical position that the
truth of a moral position is a necessary condition for the legitimacy of its legal en-
forcement). See also ROBERT P. GEORGE, MAKING MEN MORAL: CrVIL LIBERTIES AND
PUBLIC MORALTY (1993).
" Dworkin, supran ote 13.

134 [Vol. 90
BERNARD E. HARCOURT
ferring to the latter may be invoked to justify criminalization."88
Dworkin argues that Devlin was right in criticizing the line be­
tween immoral and harmful conduct, and offers his own justifi­
cation for criminalizing immoral conduct-namely, that the
term "wrongful" connotes conduct that "ought not to be done"
in the very same way that the terms "harmful" or "offensive" do.
Nevertheless, even Gerald Dworkin's provocative essay does not
significantly alter the equation. To a certain extent, Dworkin's
argument in fact reflects the fragmentation on the conservative
side of the debate. In several key passages of his essay, Dworkin
seems to premise his argument on the assumption that harmless
wrongdoing is simply not possible.89 If that is true, of course,
then his argument collapses into the public harm thesis-and
legal moralism is indistinguishable from the harm principle. In
any event, and more importantly for present purposes, Dworkin
is willing to concede in his essay that he is swimming against the
liberal tide. He readily acknowledges that he is practically alone
today in defending Lord Devlin.90 The fact is that, over time, a
consensus emerged that the liberal harm principle prevailed in
the legal philosophic debate over the enforcement of morality.
****
88 Id. 928.
89
at See, e.g., id.
937
Dworkin intimates throughout his discussion of Feinberg's work that harmid.le ss
wrongdoing may not be possible. at ("[The legal moralist is someone]
938
who wants to defend some kind of identification of harm and wrongdoing."); at
("What we need are examples of types of acts which, while wrongful, do not (usu­
ally,90 t Seened i d.to ) s
9
e
2
t
7
b
-2
a
8
c
.
k interests. Whether it is possible for such acts to exist depends
upo9n1 one's views about the nature of morality.").
HERBERTL. PACKER, THEL!MITSOFTHECRIMINALSANCTION296 (1968).
at