Crime and Punishment: An Economic
Approach
Gary S. Becker*
ColumbiaU niversity
I. Introduction
Since the turn of the century, legislation in Western countries has expanded
rapidly to reverse the brief dominance of laissez faire during the nineteenth
century. The state no longer merely protects against violations of person
and property through murder, rape, or burglary but also restricts "dis-
crimination" against certain minorities, collusive business arrangements,
"jaywalking," travel, the materials used in construction, and thousands
of other activities. The activities restricted not only are numerous but also
range widely, affecting persons in very different pursuits and of diverse
social backgrounds, education levels, ages, races, etc. Moreover, the likeli-
hood that an offender will be discovered and convicted and the nature and
extent of punishments differ greatly from person to person and activity to
activity. Yet, in spite of such diversity, some common properties are
shared by practically all legislation, and these properties form the subject
matter of this essay.
In the first place, obedience to law is not taken for granted, and public
and private resources are generally spent in order both to prevent offenses
and to apprehend offenders. In the second place, conviction is not generally
considered sufficient punishment in itself; additional and sometimes severe
punishments are meted out to those convicted. What determines the
amount and type of resources and punishments used to enforce a piece of
legislation? In particular, why does enforcement differ so greatly among
different kinds of legislation?
* I would like to thank the Lilly Endowment for financing a very productive
summer in 1965 at the University of Californiaa t Los Angeles. While there I received
very helpful comments on an earlier draft from, among others, Armen Alchian,
Roland McKean, Harold Demsetz, Jack Hirshliefer, William Meckling, Gordon
Tullock, and Oliver Williamson. I have also benefited from comments received at
seminars at the University of Chicago, Hebrew University, RAND Corporation, and
several times at the Labor Workshop of Columbia; assistance and suggestions from
Isaac Ehrlich and Robert Michael; and suggestions from the editor of this journal.
i69
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

170 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
The main purpose of this essay is to answer normative versions of these
questions, namely, how many resources and how much punishment should
be used to enforce different kinds of legislation? Put equivalently, although
more strangely, how many offenses should be permitted and how many
offenders should go unpunished? The method used formulates a measure
of the social loss from offenses and finds those expenditures of resources
and punishments that minimize this loss. The general criterion of social
loss is shown to incorporate as special cases, valid under special assump-
tions, the criteria of vengeance, deterrence, compensation, and rehabilita-
tion that historically have figured so prominently in practice and
criminological literature.
The optimal amount of enforcement is shown to depend on, among
other things, the cost of catching and convicting offenders, the nature of
punishments-for example, whether they are fines or prison terms-and
the responses of offenders to changes in enforcement. The discussion,
therefore, inevitably enters into issues in penology and theories of criminal
behavior. A second, although because of lack of space subsidiary, aim of
this essay is to see what insights into these questions are provided by our
" economic" approach. It is suggested, for example, that a useful theory of
criminal behavior can dispense with special theories of anomie, psycho-
logical inadequacies, or inheritance of special traits and simply extend the
economist's usual analysis of choice.
II. Basic Analysis
A. The Cost of Crime
Although the word "crime" is used in the title to minimize terminological
innovations, the analysis is intended to be sufficiently general to cover all
violations, not just felonies-like murder, robbery, and assault, which
receive so much newspaper coverage-but also tax evasion, the so-called
white-collar crimes, and traffic and other violations. Looked at this
broadly, "crime" is an economically important activity or "industry,"
notwithstanding the almost total neglect by economists.1 Some relevant
evidence recently put together by the President's Commission on Law
' This neglect probably resultedf rom an attitude that illegal activity is too immoral
to merit any systematic scientific attention. The influence of moral attitudes on a
scientific analysis is seen most clearly in a discussion by Alfred Marshall. After
arguing that even fair gambling is an "economic blunder" because of diminishing
marginal utility, he says, "It is true that this loss of probable happiness need not be
greater than the pleasure derived from the excitement of gambling, and we are then
thrown back upon the induction [sic] that pleasures of gambling are in Bentham's
phrase 'impure'; since experience shows that they are likely to engender a restless,
feverish character,u nsuited for steady work as well as for the higher and more solid
pleasures of life" (Marshall, 1961, Note X, MathematicalA ppendix).
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 171
Enforcement and Administration of Justice (the "Crime Commission") is
reproduced in Table 1. Public expenditures in 1965 at the federal, state, and
local levels on police, criminal courts and counsel, and "corrections"
amounted to over $4 billion, while private outlays on burglar alarms,
guards, counsel, and some other forms of protection were about $2 billion.
Unquestionably, public and especially private expenditures are significantly
understated, since expenditures by many public agencies in the course of
enforcing particular pieces of legislation, such as state fair-employment
laws,2 are not included, and a myriad of private precautions against crime,
ranging from suburban living to taxis, are also excluded.
TABLE 1
ECONOMIC COSTS OF CRIMES
Type Costs (Millions of Dollars)
Crimes against persons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 815
Crimes against property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3,932
Illegal goods and services . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8,075
Some other crimes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2,036
Total .14,858
Public expenditureso n police, prosecution, and courts . 3,178
Corrections .1,034
Some private costs of combatting crime . . . . . . . 1,910
Over-altlo tal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20,980
Source: President's Commission, (1967d, p. 44).
Table 1 also lists the Crime Commission's estimates of the direct costs
of various crimes. The gross income from expenditures on various kinds
of illegal consumption, including narcotics, prostitution, and mainly
gambling, amounted to over $8 billion. The value of crimes against
property, including fraud, vandalism, and theft, amounted to almost $4
billion,3 while about $3 billion worth resulted from the loss of earnings
due to homicide, assault, or other crimes. All the costs listed in the table
total about $21 billion, which is almost 4 per cent of reported national
2 Expendituresb y the thirteen states with such legislation in 1959 totaled almost
$2 million (see Landes, 1966).
3 Superficially,f rauds, thefts, etc., do not involve true social costs but are simply
transfers, with the loss to victims being compensated by equal gains to criminals.
While these are transfers, their market value is, nevertheless, a first approximation
to the direct social cost. If the theft or fraud industryi s "competitive," the sum of the
value of the criminals' time input-including the time of "fences" and prospective
time in prison-plus the value of capital input, compensation for risk, etc., would
approximately equal the market value of the loss to victims. Consequently, aside
from the input of intermediate products, losses can be taken as a measure of the
value of the labor and capital input into these crimes, which are true social costs.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

172 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
income in 1965. If the sizeable omissions were included, the percentage
might be considerably higher.
Crime has probably become more important during the last forty years.
The Crime Commission presents no evidence on trends in costs but does
present evidence suggesting that the number of major felonies per capita
has grown since the early thirties (President's Commission, 1967a, pp. 22-
31). Moreover, with the large growth of tax and other legislation, tax
evasion and other kinds of white-collar crime have presumably grown
much more rapidly than felonies. One piece of indirect evidence on the
growth of crime is the large increase in the amount of currency in circula-
tion since 1929. For sixty years prior to that date, the ratio of currency
either to all money or to consumer expenditures had declined very sub-
stantially. Since then, in spite of further urbanization and income growth
and the spread of credit cards and other kinds of credit,4 both ratios have
increased sizeably.5 This reversal can be explained by an unusual increase
in illegal activity, since currency has obvious advantages over checks in
illegal transactions (the opposite is true for legal transactions) because no
record of a transaction remains.6
B. The Model
It is useful in determining how to combat crime in an optimal fashion to
develop a model to incorporate the behavioral relations behind the costs
listed in Table 1. These can be divided into five categories: the relations
between (1) the number of crimes, called "offenses" in this essay, and the
cost of offenses, (2) the number of offenses and the punishments meted out,
(3) the number of offenses, arrests, and convictions and the public expendi-
tures on police and courts, (4) the number of convictions and the costs of
imprisonments or other kinds of punishments, and (5) the number of
offenses and the private expenditures on protection and apprehension.
The first four are discussed in turn, while the fifth is postponed until a
later section.
1. Damages
Usually a belief that other members of society are harmed is the motivation
behind outlawing or otherwise restricting an activity. The amount of harm
4For an analysis of the secular decline to 1929 that stresses urbanization and the
growth in incomes, see Cagan (1965, chap. iv).
5 In 1965, the ratio of currency outstanding to consumer expenditures was 0.08,
compared to only 0.05 in 1929. In 1965, currency outstanding per family was a
whopping $738.
6 Cagan (1965, chap. iv) attributes much of the increase in currency holdings
between 1929 and 1960 to increased tax evasion resulting from the increase in tax
rates.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIMEA ND PUNISHMENT 173
would tend to increase with the activity level, as in the relation
Hi =Hi(Oi),
with (1)
H dH =d i O->, ?,
where Hi is the harm from the ith activity and Oi is the activity level.7 The
concept of harm and the function relating its amount to the activity level
are familiar to economists from their many discussions of activities causing
external diseconomies. From this perspective, criminal activities are an
important subset of the class of activities that cause diseconomies, with the
level of criminal activities measured by the number of offenses.
The social value of the gain to offenders presumably also tends to
increase with the number of offenses, as in
G= G(O),
with (2)
G' ==ddoG > ?.
The net cost or damage to society is simply the difference between the
harm and gain and can be written as
D(O) = H(O) - G(O). (3)
If, as seems plausible, offenders usually eventually receive diminishing
marginal gains and cause increasing marginal harm from additional
offenses, G" < 0, H" > 0, and
D"1= H" - G" > 0, (4)
which is an important condition used later in the analysis of optimality
positions (see, for example, the Mathematical Appendix). Since both H'
and G' > 0, the sign of D' depends on their relative magnitudes. It follows
from (4), however, that
D'(O) > 0 for all 0 > 6,, if D'(Oa) > 0. (5)
Until Section V the discussion is restricted to the region where D' > O0
the region providing the strongest justification for outlawing an activity.
In that section the general problem of external diseconomies is reconsidered
from our viewpoint, and there D' < 0 is also permitted.
The top part of Table 1 lists costs of various crimes, which have been
interpreted by us as estimates of the value of resources used up in these
7 The ith subscript will be suppressedw heneveri t is to be understood that only one
activity is being discussed.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

174 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
crimes. These values are important components of, but are not identical
to, the net damages to society. For example, the cost of murder is measured
by the loss in earnings of victims and excludes, among other things, the
value placed by society on life itself; the cost of gambling excludes both
the utility to those gambling and the "external" disutility to some clergy
and others; the cost of "transfers" like burglary and embezzlement
excludes social attitudes toward forced wealth redistributions and also the
effects on capital accumulation of the possibility of theft. Consequently,
the $15 billion estimate for the cost of crime in Table 1 may be a significant
understatement of the net damages to society, not only because the costs
of many white-collar crimes are omitted, but also because much of the
damage is omitted even for the crimes covered.
2. The Cost of Apprehension and Conviction
The more that is spent on policemen, court personnel, and specialized
equipment, the easier it is to discover offenses and convict offenders. One
can postulate a relation between the output of police and court "activity"
and various inputs of manpower, materials, and capital, as in A = f(m, r, c),
wheref is a production function summarizing the " state of the arts." Given
f and input prices, increased "activity" would be more costly, as sum-
marized by the relation
C= C(A)
and (6)
C= Co>.
dA
It would be cheaper to achieve any given level of activity the cheaper were
policemen,8 judges, counsel, and juries and the more highly developed the
state of the arts, as determined by technologies like fingerprinting, wire-
tapping, computer control, and lie-detecting.9
One approximation to an empirical measure of " activity" is the number
of offenses cleared by conviction. It can be written as
A PO, (7)
where p, the ratio of offenses cleared by convictions to all offenses, is the
over-all probability that an offense is cleared by conviction. By substituting
8 According to the Crime Commission, 85-90 per cent of all police costs consist
of wages and salaries (President'sC ommission, 1967a, p. 35).
9 A task-force report by the Crime Commission deals with suggestions for greater
and more efficient usage of advanced technologies (President's Commission, 1967e).
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 175
(7) into (6) and differentiating, one has
C(pO)=
0C, > 0
Cp=
and (8)
CO = C'p > 0
if pO # 0. An increase in either the probability of conviction or the
number of offenses would increase total costs. If the marginal cost of
increased "activity" were rising, further implications would be that
GP = C,02 > o,
COO = C"p2 > 0, (9)
and
CPO= Cop= C"pO+ C' >O.
A more sophisticated and realistic approach drops the implication of
(7) that convictions alone measure "activity," or even that p and 0 have
identical elasticities, and introduces the more general relation
A = h(p, 0, a). (10)
The variable a stands for arrests and other determinants of "activity," and
there is no presumption that the elasticity of h with respect to p equals
that with respect to 0. Substitution yields the cost function C = C(p, 0, a).
If, as is extremely likely, hp, ho, and ha are all greater than zero, then
clearly Cp, CO,a nd Caa re all greater than zero.
In order to insure that optimality positions do not lie at "corners," it is
necessary to place some restrictions on the second derivatives of the cost
function. Combined with some other assumptions, it is sufficient that
CP ? 0,
COO, O (11)
and
CPOG
(see the Mathematical Appendix). The first two restrictions are rather
plausible, the third much less so.10
Table 1 indicates that in 1965 public expenditures in the United States
on police and courts totaled more than $3 billion, by no means a minor
11 Differentiatingt he cost function yields Cp, = C"(h,)2 + C'hpp;C oo= C"(h0)2+
C'h,,; Cp, = C"hohp+ C'hpo.I f marginal costs were rising, Cp, or COOc ould be
negative only if hp, or h0ow ere sufficientlyn egative, which is not very likely. However,
Cp,,w ould be approximatelyz ero only if hp, were sufficientlyn egative, which is also
unlikely. Note that if "activity" is measured by convictions alone, h~p= hoo= 0,
and hpo> 0.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

176 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
item. Separate estimates were prepared for each of seven major felonies.11
Expenditures on them averaged about $500 per offense (reported) and
about $2,000 per person arrested, with almost $1,000 being spent per
murder (President's Commission, 1967a, pp. 264-65); $500 is an estimate
of the average cost
AC =C(p,O,a)
0
of these felonies and would presumably be a larger figure if the number of
either arrests or convictions were greater. Marginal costs (Co) would be at
least $500 if condition (11), Coo 2 0, were assumed to hold throughout.
3. The Supply of Offenses
Theories about the determinants of the number of offenses differ greatly,
from emphasis on skull types and biological inheritance to family up-
bringing and disenchantment with society. Practically all the diverse
theories agree, however, that when other variables are held constant, an
increase in a person's probability of conviction or punishment if convicted
would generally decrease, perhaps substantially, perhaps negligibly, the
number of offenses he commits. In addition, a common generalization by
persons with judicial experience is that a change in the probability has a
greater effect on the number of offenses than a change in the punishment,12
although, as far as I can tell, none of the prominent theories shed any light
on this relation.
The approach taken here follows the economists' usual analysis of
choice and assumes that a person commits an offense if the expected
utility to him exceeds the utility he could get by using his time and other
resources at other activities. Some persons become "criminals," therefore,
not because their basic motivation differs from that of other persons, but
because their benefits and costs differ. I cannot pause to discuss the many
general implications of this approach,13 except to remark that criminal
behavior becomes part of a much more general theory and does not
require ad hoc concepts of differential association, anomie, and the like,14
nor does it assume perfect knowledge, lightening-fast calculation, or any
of the other caricatures of economic theory.
11 They are willful homicide, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary,
larceny, and auto theft.
12 For example, Lord Shawness (1965) said, "Some judges preoccupy themselves
with methods of punishment. This is their job. But in preventing crime it is of less
significancet han they like to think. Certaintyo f detection is far more important than
severity of punishment." Also see the discussion of the ideas of C. B. Beccaria, an
insightful eighteenth-centuryI talian economist and criminologist, in Radzinowicz
(1948, I, 282).
See, however, the discussions in Smigel (1965) and Ehrlich (1967).
'3
14 For a discussion of these concepts, see Sutherland( 1960).
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT '77
This approach implies that there is a function relating the number of
offenses by any person to his probability of conviction, to his punishment
if convicted, and to other variables, such as the income available to him in
legal and other illegal activities, the frequency of nuisance arrests, and his
willingness to commit an illegal act. This can be represented as
Oj = O,(pj, f,, u), (12)
where Oj is the number of offenses he would commit during a particular
period, pj his probability of conviction per offense, fj his punishment per
offense, and uj a portmanteau variable representing all these other
influences. 15
Since only convicted offenders are punished, in effect there is "price
discrimination" and uncertainty: if convicted, he pays fj per convicted
offense, while otherwise he does not. An increase in either pj or fj would
reduce the utility expected from an offense and thus would tend to reduce
the number of offenses because either the probability of "paying" the
higher "price " or the "price" itself would increase.16T hat is,
Opt = W3 < 0
and (13)
aDO
Off = < Or
which are the generally accepted restrictions mentioned above. The effect
of changes in some components of uj could also be anticipated. For
example, a rise in the income available in legal activities or an increase in
law-abidingness due, say, to "education" would reduce the incentive to
enter illegal activities and thus would reduce the number of offenses. Or a
shift in the form of the punishment, say, from a fine to imprisonment,
15 Both pj and fj might be considered distributionst hat depend on the judge, jury,
prosecutor, etc., that j happens to receive. Among other things, Uj depends on the p's
andf's meted out for other competing offenses. For evidence indicating that offenders
do substitute among offenses, see Smigel (1965).
16 The utility expected from committing an offense is defined as
EU1 = p1U( Yj -f1) + (1 -p1)U1( Y1),
where Yj is his income, monetary plus psychic, from an offense; U1 is his utility
function; and f1 is to be interpreteda s the monetary equivalent of the punishment.
Then
OEUn = U1(Y1 - f) - U1( Y1) < 0
and
aEUj = -piU(Y K j -fi) < 0
Af1
as long as the marginal utility of income is positive. One could expand the analysis
by incorporatingt he costs and probabilities of arrests, detentions, and trials that do
not result in conviction.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

178 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
would tend to reduce the number of offenses, at least temporarily, because
they cannot be committed while in prison.
This approach also has an interesting interpretation of the presumed
greater response to a change in the probability than in the punishment.
An increase in p, "compensated" by an equal percentage reduction in f1
would not change the expected income from an offense 17 but could change
the expected utility, because the amount of risk would change. It is easily
shown that an increase in p1 would reduce the expected utility, and thus
the number of offenses, more than an equal percentage increase in fi8 if j
has preference for risk; the increase in fj would have the greater effect if
he has aversion to risk; and they would have the same effect if he is risk
neutral."9T he widespread generalization that offenders are more deterred
by the probability of conviction than by the punishment when convicted
turns out to imply in the expected-utility approach that offenders are risk
preferrers, at least in the relevant region of punishments.
The total number of offenses is the sum of all the Oj and would depend
on the set of pj, fj, and up. Although these variables are likely to differ
significantly between persons because of differences in intelligence, age,
education, previous offense history, wealth, family upbringing, etc., for
simplicity I now consider only their average values, p, f, and u,20 and
write the market offense function as
0 = O(p, f, u). (14)
This function is assumed to have the same kinds of properties as the
individual functions, in particular, to be negatively related to p and f and
to be more responsive to the former than the latter if, and only if, offenders
on balance have risk preference. Smigel (1965) and Ehrlich (1967) estimate
17 E Y = pj(Yj - f) + (I - pj)Yj = Yj - ptjf
18 This means that an increase in pj "compensated" by a reduction in f, would
reduce utility and offenses.
19 From n. 16
aE j p- [U,(Y-)- U1(Y-f) > EU) If = pU(Y
as
Uj(YJ)- Ui(YJ fl) ><U(yf)
The term on the left is the average change in utility between Y1- f1 and Y1. It would
>
be greatert han, equal to, or less than U( Yj - f,) as U;' 0. But risk preferencei s
defined by Uj' > 0, neutrality by Uj' = 0, and aversion by U;'< 0.
20 p can be defined as a weighted average of the pj, as
nt alp,
O8p
J=a s dl P = n E
t=1
and similar definitions hold for f and u.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 179
functions like (14) for seven felonies reported by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation using state data as the basic unit of observation. They find
that the relations are quite stable, as evidenced by high correlation coefficients;
that there are significant negative effects on 0 of p andf; and that usually
the effect of p exceeds that off, indicating preference for risk in the region
of observation.
A well-known result states that, in equilibrium, the real incomes of
persons in risky activities are, at the margin, relatively high or low as
persons are generally risk avoiders or preferrers. If offenders were risk
preferrers, this implies that the real income of offenders would be lower,
at the margin, than the incomes they could receive in less risky legal
activities, and conversely if they were risk avoiders. Whether "crime pays"
is then an implication of the attitudes offenders have toward risk and is
not directly related to the efficiency of the police or the amount spent on
combatting crime. If, however, risk were preferred at some values of p and
f and disliked at others, public policy could influence whether "crime
pays" by its choice of p andf. Indeed, it is shown later that the social loss
from illegal activities is usually minimized by selecting p and f in regions
where risk is preferred, that is, in regions where "crime does not pay."
4. Punishments
Mankind has invented a variety of ingenious punishments to inflict on
convicted offenders: death, torture, branding, fines, imprisonment, banish-
ment, restrictions on movement and occupation, and loss of citizenship are
just the more common ones. In the United States, less serious offenses are
punished primarily by fines, supplemented occasionally by probation,
petty restrictions like temporary suspension of one's driver's license, and
imprisonment. The more serious offenses are punished by a combination
of probation, imprisonment, parole, fines, and various restrictions on
choice of occupation. A recent survey estimated for an average day in 1965
the number of persons who were either on probation, parole, or institu-
tionalized in a jail or juvenile home (President's Commission 1967b). The
total number of persons in one of these categories came to about 1,300,000,
which is about 2 per cent of the labor force. About one-half were on pro-
bation, one-third were institutionalized, and the remaining one-sixth were
on parole.
The cost of different punishments to an offender can be made com-
parable by converting them into their monetary equivalent or worth,
which, of course, is directly measured only for fines. For example, the cost
of an imprisonment is the discounted sum of the earnings foregone and the
value placed on the restrictions in consumption and freedom. Since the
earnings foregone and the value placed on prison restrictions vary from
person to person, the cost even of a prison sentence of given duration is
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

i8o JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
not a unique quantity but is generally greater, for example, to offenders
who could earn more outside of prison.21 The cost to each offender would
be greater the longer the prison sentence, since both foregone earnings and
foregone consumption are positively related to the length of sentences.
Punishments affect not only offenders but also other members of society.
Aside from collection costs, fines paid by offenders are received as revenue
by others. Most punishments, however, hurt other members as well as
offenders: for example, imprisonment requires expenditures on guards,
supervisory personnel, buildings, food, etc. Currently about $1 billion is
being spent each year in the United States on probation, parole, and
institutionalization alone, with the daily cost per case varying tremen-
dously from a low of $0.38 for adults on probation to a high of $11.00 for
juveniles in detention institutions (President's Commission, 1967b, pp.
193-94).
The total social cost of punishments is the cost to offenders plus the
cost or minus the gain to others. Fines produce a gain to the latter that
equals the cost to offenders, aside from collection costs, and so the social
cost of fines is about zero, as befits a transfer payment. The social cost of
probation, imprisonment, and other punishments, however, generally
exceeds that to offenders, because others are also hurt. The derivation of
optimality conditions in the next section is made more convenient if social
costs are written in terms of offender costs as
f I bf, (15)
where f ' is the social cost and b is a coefficient that transforms f into f '.
The size of b varies greatly between different kinds of punishments:
b 0 for fines, while b > 1 for torture, probation, parole, imprisonment,
and most other punishments. It is especially large for juveniles in detention
homes or for adults in prisons and is rather close to unity for torture or
for adults on parole.
III. Optimality Conditions
The relevant parameters and behavioral functions have been introduced,
and the stage is set for a discussion of social policy. If the aim simply were
deterrence, the probability of conviction, p, could be raised close to 1, and
punishments, f, could be made to exceed the gain: in this way the number
of offenses, 0, could be reduced almost at will. However, an increase in p
increases the social cost of offenses through its effect on the cost of com-
batting offenses, C, as does an increase inf if b > 0 through the effect on
the cost of punishments, bf. At relatively modest values of p and f, these
effects might outweigh the social gain from increased deterrence. Similarly,
21 In this respect, imprisonmenti s a special case of "waiting time" pricing that is
also exemplifiedb y queuing (see Becker, 1965, esp. pp. 515-16, and Kleinman, 1967).
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIMEA ND PUNISHMENT i8i
if the aim simply were to make "the punishment fit the crime," p could be
set close to 1, and f could be equated to the harm imposed on the rest of
society. Again, however, such a policy ignores the social cost of increases
in p and f.
What is needed is a criterion that goes beyond catchy phrases and gives
due weight to the damages from offenses, the costs of apprehending and
convicting offenders, and the social cost of punishments. The social-
welfare function of modern welfare economics is such a criterion, and one
might assume that society has a function that measures the social loss
from offenses. If
L=L(D,CbfO) (16)
is the function measuring social loss, with presumably
a3L aALL a3L
AL> 0 9 > 0 09->0 (17)
the aim would be to select values off, C, and possibly b that minimize L.
It is more convenient and transparent, however, to develop the dis-
cussion at this point in terms of a less general formulation, namely, to
assume that the loss function is identical with the total social loss in real
income from offenses, convictions, and punishments, as in
L = D(O) + C(p, 0) + bpfO. (18)
The term bpfO is the total social loss from punishments, since bf is the
loss per offense punished and pO is the number of offenses punished (if
there are a fairly large number of independent offenses). The variables
directly subject to social control are the amounts spent in combatting
offenses, C; the punishment per offense for those convicted, f; and the
form of punishments, summarized by b. Once chosen, these variables, via
the D, C, and 0 functions, indirectly determine p, 0, D, and ultimately the
loss L.
Analytical convenience suggests that p rather than C be considered a
decision variable. Also, the coefficient b is assumed in this section to be a
given constant greater than zero. Then p and f are the only decision
variables, and their optimal values are found by differentiating L to find
the two first-order optimality conditions,22
c9
= D'Of + C'Of + bpf0f + bp0 = 0 (19)
and
= D'Op + C'Op + Cp + bpfOp + bfO = 0. (20)
22 The Mathematical Appendix discusses second-order conditions.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

i82 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
If Of and O, are not equal to zero, one can divide through by them, and
recombine terms, to get the more interesting expressions
D' + C' =-bpf( - ) (21)
and
D' + C' + Cp =-bpf~1 - I) (22)
where
f
ef -o Of
and (23)
op.
The term on the left side of each equation gives the marginal cost of
increasing the number of offenses, 0: in equation (21) through a reduction
inf and in (22) through a reduction in p. Since C' > 0 and 0 is assumed
to be in a region where D' > 0, the marginal cost of increasing 0 through
f must be positive. A reduction in p partly reduces the cost of combatting
offenses, and, therefore, the marginal cost of increasing 0 must be less
when p rather than when f is reduced (see Fig. 1); the former could even
be negative if Cp were sufficiently large. Average "revenue," given by
-bpf, is negative, but marginal revenue, given by the right-hand side of
marginal
cost,
marginal
revenue
MCf = D'+C'
=
\Mc D+C+Cp
/ \ =- bp(1 f-
~~~~~~Mr~
ef
~p --bp(fl1 -
)
number Of offenses
FIG. 1
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIMEA ND PUNISHMENT i83
equations (21) and (22), is not necessarily negative and would be positive
if the elasticities ep and ef were less than unity. Since the loss is minimized
when marginal revenue equals marginal cost (see Fig. 1), the optimal
value of ef must be less than unity, and that of ep could only exceed unity
if CP were sufficiently large. This is a reversal of the usual equilibrium
condition for an income-maximizing firm, which is that the elasticity of
demand must exceed unity, because in the usual case average revenue is
assumed to be positive.23
Since the marginal cost of changing 0 through a change in p is less than
that of changing 0 through f, the equilibrium marginal revenue from p
must also be less than that from f. But equations (21) and (22) indicate
that the marginal revenue from p can be less if, and only if, ep > ef. As
pointed out earlier, however, this is precisely the condition indicating that
offenders have preference for risk and thus that "crime does not pay."
Consequently, the loss from offenses is minimized if p and f are selected
from those regions where offenders are, on balance, risk preferrers.
Although only the attitudes offenders have toward risk can directly deter-
mine whether "crime pays," rational public policy indirectly insures that
"crime does not pay" through its choice of p and f.24
I indicated earlier that the actual p's and f 's for major felonies in the
United States generally seem to be in regions where the effect (measured
by elasticity) of p on offenses exceeds that off, that is, where offenders are
risk preferrers and "crime does not pay" (Smigel, 1965; Ehrlich, 1967).
Moreover, both elasticities are generally less than unity. In both respects,
therefore, actual public policy is consistent with the implications of the
optimality analysis.
If the supply of offenses depended only on pf-offenders were risk
neutral-a reduction in p "compensated" by an equal percentage increase
in f would leave unchanged pf, 0, D(O), and bpfO but would reduce the
loss, because the costs of apprehension and conviction would be lowered
by the reduction in p. The loss would be minimized, therefore, by lowering
p arbitrarilyc lose to zero and raisingf sufficiently high so that the product
pf would induce the optimal number of offenses.25 A fortiori, if offenders
23 Thus if b < 0, average revenue would be positive and the optimal value of ef
would be greatert han 1, and that of e, could be less than 1 only if Cpw ere sufficiently
large.
24 If b < 0, the optimality condition is that ep < ef, or that offenders are risk
avoiders. Optimal social policy would then be to select p and f in regions where
"crime does pay."
25 Since ef = ep = e if 0 depends only on pf, and C = 0 if p = 0, the two equilib-
rium conditions given by eqs. (21) and (22) reduce to the single condition
-bpf( I
From this condition and the relation 0 = 0(pf), the equilibrium values of 0 and
pf could be determined.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

i84 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
were risk avoiders, the loss would be minimized by setting p arbitrarily
close to zero, for a " compensated " reduction in p reduces not only C but
also 0 and thus D and bpfO.26
There was a tendency during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries in
Anglo-Saxon countries, and even today in many Communist and under-
developed countries, to punish those convicted of criminal offenses rather
severely, at the same time that the probability of capture and conviction
was set at rather low values.27A promising explanation of this tendency is
that an increased probability of conviction obviously absorbs public and
private resources in the form of more policemen, judges, juries, and so
forth. Consequently, a "compensated" reduction in this probability
obviously reduces expenditures on combatting crime, and, since the
expected punishment is unchanged, there is no "obvious" offsetting
increase in either the amount of damages or the cost of punishments. The
result can easily be continuous political pressure to keep police and other
expenditures relatively low and to compensate by meting out strong
punishments to those convicted.
Of course, if offenders are risk preferrers, the loss in income from
offenses is generally minimized by selecting positive and finite values of
p and f, even though there is no "obvious" offset to a compensated
reduction in p. One possible offset already hinted at in footnote 27 is that
judges or juries may be unwilling to convict offenders if punishments
are set very high. Formally, this means that the cost of apprehension
and conviction, C, would depend not only on p and 0 but also on
If C were more responsive to f than p, at least in some regions,29 the
loss in income could be minimized at finite values of p and f even if
offenders were risk avoiders. For then a compensated reduction in p
could raise, rather than lower, C and thus contribute to an increase in
the loss.
Risk avoidance might also be consistent with optimal behavior if the
loss function were not simply equal to the reduction in income. For
example, suppose that the loss were increased by an increase in the ex post
"price discrimination" between offenses that are not and those that are
cleared by punishment. Then a "compensated" reduction in p would
26 If b < 0, the optimal solution is p about zero and f arbitrarilyh igh if offenders
are either risk neutral or risk preferrers.
27 For a discussion of English criminal law in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries, see Radzinowicz (1948, Vol. I). Punishmentsw ere severe then, even though
the death penalty, while legislated, was seldom implementedf or less serious criminal
offenses.
Recently South Vietnam executed a prominent businessmana llegedly for " specula-
tive" dealings in rice, while in recent years a number of persons in the Soviet Union
have either been executed or given severe prison sentences for economic crimes.
28 J owe the emphasis on this point to Evsey Domar.
29 This is probably more likely for higher values off and lower values of p.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIMEA ND PUNISHMENT i85
increase the "price discrimination," and the increased loss from this could
more than offset the reductions in C, D, and bpfO.30
IV. Shifts in the Behavioral Relations
This section analyzes the effects of shifts in the basic behavioral relations-
the damage, cost, and supply-of-offenses functions-on the optimal values
of p and f. Since rigorous proofs can be found in the Mathematical
Appendix, here the implications are stressed, and only intuitive proofs are
given. The results are used to explain, among other things, why more
damaging offenses are punished more severely and more impulsive
offenders less severely.
An increase in the marginal damages from a given number of offenses,
D', increases the marginal cost of changing offenses by a change in either
p orf (see Fig. 2a and b). The optimal number of offenses would necessarily
decrease, because the optimal values of both p and f would increase. In
this case (and, as shortly seen, in several others), the optimal values of p
andfmove in the same, rather than in opposite, directions.31
An interesting application of these conclusions is to different kinds of
offenses. Although there are few objective measures of the damages done
30 If p is the probability that an offense would be cleared with the punishment f,
then 1 - p is the probability of no punishment. The expected punishment would be
= pf, the variance a2 = p(l - p)f2, and the coefficient of variation
V = - a = , / -p
v increases monotonically from a low of zero when p = 1 to an infinitely high value
when p = 0.
If the loss function equaled
LI = L + 0(v) , 01' > 0,
the optimality conditions would become
DI + C =-bpf(l - (21)
and
Do + C' + Cp I + ' d- =I-bpf (1 - I (22)
Since the term 0'(dv/dp)(1/O0p)i s positive, it could more than offset the negative term
Cp( /00).
31 I stress this primarily because of Bentham's famous and seemingly plausible
dictum that "the more deficient in certainty a punishment is, the severer it should be"
(1931, chap. ii of section entitled "Of Punishment," second rule). The dictum would
be correct if p (or f) were exogenously determined and if L were minimized with
respect to f (or p) alone, for then the optimal value of f (or p) would be inversely
related to the given value of p (or f) (see the Mathematical Appendix). If, however,
L is minimized with respect to both, then frequently they move in the same direction.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

i86 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
~c
Mc, Mc, DI+-'
D/ C ' M
MC, \ / ' ' 'z/ Do'+C'+ C ii.
/ /~~~~~~~~~~~~~Pd
-, ~~~~~~MR
MR
offenses offenses
a. b.
FIG. 2
by most offenses, it does not take much imagination to conclude that
offenses like murder or rape generally do more damage than petty larceny
or auto theft. If the other components of the loss in income were the same,
the optimal probability of apprehension and conviction and the punish-
ment when convicted would be greater for the more serious offenses.
Table 2 presents some evidence on the actual probabilities and punish-
ments in the United States for seven felonies. The punishments are simply
the average prison sentences served, while the probabilities are ratios of
the estimated number of convictions to the estimated number of offenses
and unquestionably contain a large error (see the discussions in Smigel,
1965, and Ehrlich, 1967). If other components of the loss function are
ignored, and if actual and optimal probabilities and punishments are
positively related, one should find that the more serious felonies have
higher probabilities and longer prison terms. And one does: in the table,
which lists the felonies in decreasing order of presumed seriousness, both
the actual probabilities and the prison terms are positively related to
seriousness.
Since an increase in the marginal cost of apprehension and conviction
for a given number of offenses, C', has identical effects as an increase in
marginal damages, it must also reduce the optimal number of offenses and
increase the optimal values of p and f On the other hand, an increase in
the other component of the cost of apprehension and conviction, Cp, has
no direct effect on the marginal cost of changing offenses with f and
reduces the cost of changing offenses with p (see Fig. 3). It therefore
reduces the optimal value of p and only partially compensates with an
increase in f, so that the optimal number of offenses increases. Accord-
ingly, an increase in both C' and C, must increase the optimal f but can
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 187
0
oo0 - o 00 C
0~~~~~~~~~
U) o ~ ~~~-6o- O0~~~~~~ ~~ C C d e1
0 00 r-00 0l 0~~~~~~~~~~~~
CUlC
to~~~~~~~~~~~-
O < C CU
$ U,.4U 0*A- 0 o
0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
Z 0 0 ~ ~~~~~'~IC~' ~~~~~~~~~~~~0 ~~~~~~~~~0
03
1-0~~~~~~~~
z C
1-4 0O'ot 0 - 00
$-o~~~~~~~~~~~~-
Z
0d
U~~~~
0 4)
cd)
U) cd U)C - U
0 C)
o -~~~~~~~~~~b
0 0 -, C 0 C CU
>c~os ~~~ V-*0 ~ ' ) 0C o~ C) C
c' *
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

i88 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
MC, Cp0 '+C'
KD
MR /
An//
/ /~~/\
//
MR
offenses
FIG. 3
either increase or decrease the optimal p and optimal number of offenses,
depending on the relative importance of the changes in C' and C,.
The cost of apprehending and convicting offenders is affected by a
variety of forces. An increase in the salaries of policemen increases both
C' and Cp, while improved police technology in the form of fingerprinting,
ballistic techniques, computer control, and chemical analysis, or police and
court "reform" with an emphasis on professionalism and merit, would
tend to reduce both, not necessarily by the same extent. Our analysis
implies, therefore, that although an improvement in technology and
reform may or may not increase the optimal p and reduce the optimal
number of offenses, it does reduce the optimal f and thus the need to rely
on severe punishments for those convicted. Possibly this explains why the
secular improvement in police technology and reform has gone hand in
hand with a secular decline in punishments.
Cp, and to a lesser extent C', differ significantly between different kinds
of offenses. It is easier, for example, to solve a rape or armed robbery than
a burglary or auto theft, because the evidence of personal identification is
often available in the former and not in the latter offenses.32 This might
tempt one to argue that the p's decline significantly as one moves across
Table 2 (left to right) primarily because the Cr's are significantly lower for
the " personal " felonies listed to the left than for the " impersonal "
felonies listed to the right. But this implies that theft's would increase as
one moved across the table, which is patently false. Consequently, the
positive correlation between p, f, and the severity of offenses observed in
32 "If a suspect is neither known to the victim nor arrested at the scene of the
crime, the chances of ever arresting him are very slim" (President's Commission,
1967e, p. 8). This conclusion is based on a study of crimes in parts of Los Angeles
during January, 1966.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT i89
MC, MC,
MR \
Mc Mc
-bpf (1- -)
-bpf._.- .-*pr (I s
offenses offenses
a. b.
FIG. 4
the table cannot be explained by a negative correlation between C, (or C')
and severity.
If b > 0, a reduction in the elasticity of offenses with respect to f in-
creases the marginal revenue of changing offenses by changing f (see Fig.
4a). The result is an increase in the optimal number of offenses and a
decrease in the optimal f that is partially compensated by an increase in
the optimal p. Similarly, a reduction in the elasticity of offenses with
respect to p also increases the optimal number of offenses (see Fig. 4b),
decreases the optimal p, and partially compensates by an increase inf. An
equal percentage reduction in both elasticities a fortiori increases the
optimal number of offenses and also tends to reduce both p and f.
If b = 0, both marginal revenue functions lie along the horizontal axis,
and changes in these elasticities have no effect on the optimal values of p
andf.
The income of a firm would usually be larger if it could separate, at little
cost, its total market into submarkets that have substantially different
elasticities of demand: higher prices would be charged in the submarkets
having lower elasticities. Similarly, if the total "market" for offenses could
be separated into submarkets that differ significantly in the elasticities of
supply of offenses, the results above imply that if b > 0 the total loss would
be reduced by "charging" lower "prices "-that is, lower p's and f's-in
markets with lower elasticities.
Sometimes it is possible to separate persons committing the same
offense into groups that have different responses to punishments. For
example, unpremeditated murderers or robbers are supposed to act
impulsively and, therefore, to be relatively unresponsive to the size of
punishments; likewise, the insane or the young are probably less affected
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

I90 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
than other offenders by future consequences and, therefore,33p robably less
deterred by increases in the probability of conviction or in the punishment
when convicted. The trend during the twentieth century toward relatively
smaller prison terms and greater use of probation and therapy for such
groups and, more generally, the trend away from the doctrine of "a given
punishment for a given crime" is apparently at least broadly consistent
with the implications of the optimality analysis.
An increase in b increases the marginal revenue from changing the
number of offenses by changing p or f and thereby increases the optimal
number of offenses, reduces the optimal value off, and increases the opti-
mal value of p. Some evidence presented in Section II indicates that b is
especially large for juveniles in detention homes or adults in prison and is
small for fines or adults on parole. The analysis implies, therefore, that
other things the same, the optimal f's would be smaller and the optimal
p's larger if punishment were by one of the former rather than one of the
latter methods.
V. Fines
A. Welfare Theoremsa nd TransferableP ricing
The usual optimality conditions in welfare economics depend only on the
levels and not on the slopes of marginal cost and average revenue func-
tions, as in the well-known condition that marginal costs equal prices. The
social loss from offenses was explicitly introduced as an application of the
approach used in welfare economics, and yet slopes as incorporated into
elasticities of supply do significantly affect the optimality conditions. Why
this difference? The primary explanation would appear to be that it is
almost always implicitly assumed that prices paid by consumers are fully
transferred to firms and governments, so that there is no social loss from
payment.
If there were no social loss from punishments, as with fines, b would
equal zero, and the elasticity of supply would drop out of the optimality
condition given by equation (21).34 If b > 0, as with imprisonment, some
of the payment "by" offenders would not be received by the rest of
society, and a net social loss would result. The elasticity of the supply of
offenses then becomes an important determinant of the optimality condi-
tions, because it determines the change in social costs caused by a change
in punishments.
3 But see Becker (1962) for an analysis indicating that impulsive and other "irra-
tional" persons may be as deterred from purchasing a commodity whose price has
risen as more "rational" persons.
34 It remains in eq. (22), through the slope Op, because ordinarily prices do not
affect marginalc osts, while they do here through the influence of p on C.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 191
Although transferable monetary pricing is the most common kind today,
the other is not unimportant, especially in underdeveloped and Com-
munist countries. Examples in addition to imprisonment and many other
punishments are the draft, payments in kind, and queues and other
waiting-time forms of rationing that result from legal restrictions on
pricing (see Becker, 1965) and from random variations in demand and
supply conditions. It is interesting, and deserves further exploration, that
the optimality conditions are so significantly affected by a change in the
assumptions about the transferability of pricing.
B. Optimality Conditions
If b = 0, say, because punishment was by fine, and if the cost of appre-
hending and convicting offenders were also zero, the two optimality
conditions (21) and (22) would reduce to the same simple condition
D'(O) = 0. (24)
Economists generally conclude that activities causing "external" harm,
such as factories that pollute the air or lumber operations that strip the
land, should be taxed or otherwise restricted in level until the marginal
external harm equalled the marginal private gain, that is, until marginal
net damages equalled zero, which is what equation (24) says. If mar-
ginal harm always exceeded marginal gain, the optimum level would be
presumed to be zero, and that would also be the implication of (24) when
suitable inequality conditions were brought in. In other words, if the costs
of apprehending, convicting, and punishing offenders were nil and if each
offense caused more external harm than private gain, the social loss from
offenses would be minimized by setting punishments high enough to
eliminate all offenses. Minimizing the social loss would become identical
with the criterion of minimizing crime by setting penalties sufficiently
high.35
Equation (24) determines the optimal number of offenses, 6, and the
fine and probability of conviction must be set at levels that induce offenders
to commit just 0 offenses. If the economists' usual theory of choice is
applied to illegal activities (see Sec. II), the marginal value of these
penalties has to equal the marginal private gain:
V = G'(O), (25)
where G'(6) is the marginal private gain at 0 and V is the monetary value
of the marginal penalties. Since by equations (3) and (24), D'(O)=
H'(6) - G'(O) = 0, one has by substitution in (25)
V = H'(6). (26)
35"The evil of the punishment must be made to exceed the advantage of the
offense" (Bentham, 1931, first rule).
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

192 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
The monetary value of the penalties would equal the marginal harm
caused by offenses.
Since the cost of apprehension and conviction is assumed equal to zero,
the probability of apprehension and conviction could be set equal to unity
without cost. The monetary value of penalties would then simply equal the
fines imposed, and equation (26) would become
f =H'(O). (27)
Since fines are paid by offenders to the rest of society, a fine determined by
(27) would exactly compensate the latter for the marginal harm suffered,
and the criterion of minimizing the social loss would be identical, at the
margin, with the criterion of compensating "victims."36 If the harm to
victims always exceeded the gain to offenders, both criteria would reduce
in turn to eliminating all offenses.
If the cost of apprehension and conviction were not zero, the optimality
condition would have to incorporate marginal costs as well as marginal
damages and would become, if the probability of conviction were still
assumed to equal unity,
D'(O) + C'(O, 1) = O. (28)
Since C' > 0, (28) requires that D' < 0 or that the marginal private gain
exceed the marginal external harm, which generally means a smaller
number of offenses than when D' = 0.37 It is easy to show that equation
(28) would be satisfied if the fine equalled the sum of marginal harm and
marginal costs:
f = H'(O) + C'(O, 1).38 (29)
In other words, offenders have to compensate for the cost of catching
them as well as for the harm they directly do, which is a natural generaliza-
tion of the usual externality analysis.
The optimality condition
D'(O) + C'(6, -) + C(O, p) = 0 (30)
would replace equation (28) if the fine rather than the probability of
36 By "victims" is meant the rest of society and not just the persons actually
harmed.
37 This result can also be derived as a special case of the results in the Mathematical
Appendix on the effects of increases in C'.
38 Since equilibrium requires that f = G'(6), and since from (28)
D'(4) = H'(6) - G'(6) = - C'(6, 1),
then (29) follows directly by substitution.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 193
conviction were fixed. Equation (30) would usually imply that D'(0) > 0,39
and thus that the number of offenses would exceed the optimal number
when costs were zero. Whether costs of apprehension and conviction
increase or decrease the optimal number of offenses largely depends,
therefore, on whether penalties are changed by a change in the fine or in
the probability of conviction. Of course, if both are subject to control, the
optimal probability of conviction would be arbitrarilyc lose to zero, unless
the social loss function differed from equation (18) (see the discussion in
Sec. III).
C. The Case for Fines
Just as the probability of conviction and the severity of punishment are
subject to control by society, so too is the form of punishment: legislation
usually specifies whether an offense is punishable by fines, probation,
institutionalization, or some combination. Is it merely an accident, or have
optimality considerations determined that today, in most countries, fines
are the predominant form of punishment, with institutionalization reserved
for the more serious offenses? This section presents several arguments
which imply that social welfare is increased if fines are used whenever
feasible.
In the first place, probation and institutionalization use up social
resources, and fines do not, since the latter are basically just transfer
payments, while the former use resources in the form of guards, super-
visory personnel, probation officers, and the offenders' own time.40 Table 1
indicates that the cost is not minor either: in the United States in 1965,
about $1 billion was spent on "correction," and this estimate excludes, of
course, the value of the loss in offenders' time.41
That is, if, as seems plausible,
dC aO
= C a + Cp > 0,
then
Co + Cp 0<'
and
D'() = C' + CP >ja) o.
4 Several early writers on criminology recognized this advantage of fines. For
example, "Pecuniary punishments are highly economical, since all the evil felt by
him who pays turns into an advantage for him who receives" (Bentham, 1931, chap.
vi), and "Imprisonment would have been regarded in these old times [ca. tenth
century] as a useless punishment; it does not satisfy revenge, it keeps the criminal
idle, and do what we may, it is costly" (Pollock and Maitland, 1952, p. 516; my
italics).
41 On the other hand, some transfer payments in the form of food, clothing, and
shelter are included.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

194 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
Moreover, the determination of the optimal number of offenses and
severity of punishments is somewhat simplified by the use of fines. A wise
use of fines requires knowledge of marginal gains and harm and of
marginal apprehension and conviction costs; admittedly, such knowledge
is not easily acquired. A wise use of imprisonment and other punishments
must know this too, however, and, in addition, must know about the
elasticities of response of offenses to changes in punishments. As the bitter
controversies over the abolition of capital punishment suggest, it has been
difficult to learn about these elasticities.
I suggested earlier that premeditation, sanity, and age can enter into the
determination of punishments as proxies for the elasticities of response.
These characteristics may not have to be considered in levying fines,
because the optimal fines, as determined, say, by equations (27) or (29),
do not depend on elasticities. Perhaps this partly explains why economists
discussing externalities almost never mention motivation or intent, while
sociologists and lawyers discussing criminal behavior invariably do. The
former assume that punishment is by a monetary tax or fine, while the
latter assume that non-monetary punishments are used.
Fines provide compensation to victims, and optimal fines at the margin
fully compensate victims and restore the status quo ante, so that they are
no worse off than if offenses were not committed.42 Not only do other
punishments fail to compensate, but they also require "victims" to spend
additional resources in carrying out the punishment. It is not surprising,
therefore, that the anger and fear felt toward ex-convicts who in fact have
not "paid their debt to society" have resulted in additional punishments,43
including legal restrictions on their political and economic opportunities44
and informal restrictions on their social acceptance. Moreover, the
absence of compensation encourages efforts to change and otherwise
" rehabilitate" offenders through psychiatric counseling, therapy, and
other programs. Since fines do compensate and do not create much addi-
tional cost, anger toward and fear of appropriately fined persons do
not easily develop. As a result, additional punishments are not usually
levied against "ex-finees," nor are strong efforts made to "rehabilitate"
them.
One argument made against fines is that they are immoral because, in
effect, they permit offenses to be bought for a price in the same way that
42 Bentham recognized this and said, "To furnish an indemnity to the injured
party is another useful quality in a punishment. It is a means of accomplishing two
objects at once punishing an offense and repairingi t: removing the evil of the first
order, and putting a stop to alarm. This is a characteristica dvantage of pecuniary
punishments" (1931, chap. vi).
43 In the same way, the guilt felt by society in using the draft, a forced transfer to
society, has led to additional payments to veterans in the form of education benefits,
bonuses, hospitalization rights, etc.
44 See Sutherland( 1960, pp. 267-68) for a list of some of these.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 195
bread or other goods are bought for a price.45A fine can be considered the
price of an offense, but so too can any other form of punishment; for
example, the " price " of stealing a car might be six months in jail. The only
difference is in the units of measurement: fines are prices measured in
monetary units, imprisonments are prices measured in time units, etc. If
anything, monetary units are to be preferred here as they are generally
preferred in pricing and accounting.
Optimal fines determined from equation (29) depend only on the
marginal harm and cost and not at all on the economic positions of
offenders. This has been criticized as unfair, and fines proportional to the
incomes of offenders have been suggested.46I f the goal is to minimize the
social loss in income from offenses, and not to take vengeance or to inflict
harm on offenders, then fines should depend on the total harm done by
offenders, and not directly on their income, race, sex, etc. In the same way,
the monetary value of optimal prison sentences and other punishments
depends on the harm, costs, and elasticities of response, but not directly
on an offender's income. Indeed, if the monetary value of the punishment
by, say, imprisonment were independent of income, the length of the
sentence would be inverselyr elated to income, because the value placed on
a given sentence is positively related to income.
We might detour briefly to point out some interesting implications for
the probability of conviction of the fact that the monetary value of a given
fine is obviously the same for all offenders, while the monetary equivalent
or "value'" of a given prison sentence or probation period is generally
positively related to an offender's income. The discussion in Section II
suggested that actual probabilities of conviction are not fixed to all
offenders but usually vary with their age, sex, race, and, in particular,
income. Offenders with higher earnings have an incentive to spend more
on planning their offenses, on good lawyers, on legal appeals, and even on
bribery to reduce the probability of apprehension and conviction for
offenses punishable by, say, a given prison term, because the cost to them
of conviction is relatively large compared to the cost of these expenditures.
45 The very early English law relied heavily on monetary fines, even for murder,
and it has been said that "every kind of blow or wound given to every kind of person
had its price, and much of the jurisprudenceo f the time must have consisted of a
knowledge of these preappointedp rices" (Pollock and Maitland, 1952, p. 451).
The same idea was put amusinglyi n a recent Mutt andJeff cartoon which showed a
police car carrying a sign that read: "Speed limit 30 M per H-$5 fine every mile
over speed limit-pick out speed you can afford."
46 For example, Bentham said, "A pecuniary punishment, if the sum is fixed, is in
the highest degree unequal. ... Fines have been determined without regard to the
profit of the offense, to its evil, or to the wealth of the offender. .. . Pecuniaryp unish-
ments should always be regulatedb y the fortune of the offender. The relative amount
of the fine should be fixed, not its absolute amount; for such an offense, such a part
of the offender'sf ortune" (1931, chap. ix). Note that optimal fines, as determinedb y
eq. (29), do depend on "the profit of the offense" and on "its evil."
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

i96 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
Similarly, however, poorer offenders have an incentive to use more of their
time in planning their offenses, in court appearances, and the like to reduce
the probability of conviction for offenses punishable by a given fine,
because the cost to them of conviction is relatively large compared to the
value of their time.47 The implication is that the probability of conviction
would be systematically related to the earnings of offenders: negatively for
offenses punishable by imprisonment and positively for those punishable
by fines. Although a negative relation for felonies and other offenses
punishable by imprisonment has been frequently observed and deplored
(see President's Commission, 1967c, pp. 139-53), I do not know of any
studies of the relation for fines or of any recognition that the observed
negative relation may be more a consequence of the nature of the punish-
ment than of the influence of wealth.
Another argument made against fines is that certain crimes, like murder
or rape, are so heinous that no amount of money could compensate for the
harm inflicted. This argument has obvious merit and is a special case of the
more general principle that fines cannot be relied on exclusively whenever
the harm exceeds the resources of offenders. For then victims could not be
fully compensated by offenders, and fines would have to be supplemented
with prison terms or other punishments in order to discourage offenses
optimally. This explains why imprisonments, probation, and parole are
major punishments for the more serious felonies; considerable harm is
inflicted, and felonious offenders lack sufficient resources to compensate.
Since fines are preferable, it also suggests the need for a flexible system of
instalment fines to enable offenders to pay fines more readily and thus
avoid other punishments.
This analysis implies that if some offenders could pay the fine for a given
offense and others could not,48 the former should be punished solely by
fine and the latter partly by other methods. In essence, therefore, these
methods become a vehicle for punishing "debtors" to society. Before the
cry is raised that the system is unfair, especially to poor offenders, consider
the following.
Those punished would be debtors in "transactions" that were never
agreed to by their "creditors," not in voluntary transactions, such as
loans,49 for which suitable precautions could be taken in advance by
creditors. Moreover, punishment in any economic system based on
47 Note that the incentive to use time to reduce the probability of a given prison
sentence is unrelated to earnings, because the punishmenti s fixed in time, not mone-
tary, units; likewise, the incentive to use money to reduce the probability of a given
fine is also unrelated to earnings, because the punishment is fixed in monetary, not
time, units.
48 In one study, about half of those convicted of misdemeanorsc ould not pay the
fines (see President'sC ommission, 1967c, p. 148).
49 The "debtor prisons" of earlier centuries generally housed persons who could
not repay loans.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 197
voluntary market transactions inevitably must distinguish between such
"debtors" and others. If a rich man purchases a car and a poor man steals
one, the former is congratulated, while the latter is often sent to prison
when apprehended. Yet the rich man's purchase is equivalent to a "theft"
subsequently compensated by a "fine" equal to the price of the car, while
the poor man, in effect, goes to prison because he cannot pay this "fine."
Whether a punishment like imprisonment in lieu of a full fine for
offenders lacking sufficient resources is "fair" depends, of course, on the
length of the prison term compared to the fine.50 For example, a prison
term of one week in lieu of a $10,000 fine would, if anything, be "unfair"
to wealthy offenders paying the fine. Since imprisonment is a more costly
punishment to society than fines, the loss from offenses would be reduced
by a policy of leniency toward persons who are imprisoned because they
cannot pay fines. Consequently, optimal prison terms for " debtors " would
not be "unfair" to them in the sense that the monetary equivalent to them
of the prison terms would be less than the value of optimal fines, which in
turn would equal the harm caused or the "debt."'51
It appears, however, that "debtors" are often imprisoned at rates of
exchange with fines that place a low value on time in prison. Although I
have not seen systematic evidence on the different punishments actually
offered convicted offenders, and the choices they made, many statutes in
50 Yet without any discussion of the actual alternatives offered, the statement is
made that "the money judgment assessed the punitive damages defendant hardly
seems comparable in effect to the criminal sanctions of death, imprisonment, and
stigmatization" ("Criminal Safeguards...," 1967).
51 A formal proof is straightforwardi f for simplicity the probability of conviction
is taken as equal to unity. For then the sole optimality condition is
D' + C' =-bf ( -- (1')
Since D' = H' - G', by substitution one has
G = H' + C' + bf(l - (2')
and since equilibriumr equires that G' = ,
f= H' + C' + bf(l - (3')
or
1 - b(1 - l/eI) (4')
If b > 0, ef < 1 (see Sec. III), and hence by eq. (4'),
f < HI + C', (5')
where the term on the right is the full marginal harm. If p as well as fis free to vary,
the analysis becomes more complicated, but the conclusion about the relative mone-
tary values of optimal imprisonmentsa nd fines remains the same (see the Mathemati-
cal Appendix).
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

i98 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
the United States do permit fines and imprisonment that place a low value
on time in prison. For example, in New York State, Class A Misdemeanors
can be punished by a prison term as long as one year or a fine no larger
than $1,000 and Class B Misdemeanors, by a term as long as three months
or a fine no larger than $500 (Laws of New York, 1965, chap. 1030, Arts.
70 and 80).52 According to my analysis, these statutes permit excessive
prison sentences relative to the fines, which may explain why imprisonment
in lieu of fines is considered unfair to poor offenders, who often must
"choose" the prison alternative.
D. Compensationa nd the CriminalL aw
Actual criminal proceedings in the United States appear to seek a mixture
of deterrence, compensation, and vengeance. I have already indicated that
these goals are somewhat contradictory and cannot generally be simul-
taneously achieved; for example, if punishment were by fine, minimizing
the social loss from offenses would be equivalent to compensating
"victims " fully, and deterrence or vengeance could only be partially
pursued. Therefore, if the case for fines were accepted, and punishment
by optimal fines became the norm, the traditional approach to criminal
law would have to be significantly modified.
First and foremost, the primary aim of all legal proceedings would
become the same: not punishment or deterrence, but simply the assessment
of the "harm." done by defendants. Much of traditional criminal law
would become a branch of the law of torts,53 say "social torts," in which
the public would collectively sue for "public" harm. A "criminal" action
would be defined fundamentally not by the nature of the action54 but by
the inability of a person to compensate for the "harm" that he caused.
Thus an action would be "criminal" precisely because it results in uncom-
pensated "harm" to others. Criminal law would cover all such actions,
while tort law would cover all other (civil) actions.
As a practical example of the fundamental changes that would be
wrought, consider the antitrust field. Inspired in part by the economist's
classic demonstration that monopolies distort the allocation of resources
and reduce economic welfare, the United States has outlawed conspiracies
52 "Violations," however, can only be punished by prison terms as long as fifteen
days or fines no larger than $250. Since these are maximum punishments, the actual
ones imposed by the courts can, and often are, considerably less. Note, too, that the
courts can punish by imprisonment, by fine, or by both (Laws of New York, 1965,
chap. 1030, Art. 60).
53 "The cardinal principle of damages in Anglo-American law [of torts] is that of
compensation for the injury caused to plaintiff by defendant's breach of duty"
(Harper and James, 1956, p. 1299).
54 Of course, many traditional criminal actions like murder or rape would still
usually be criminal under this approach too.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 199
and other constraints of trade. In practice, defendants are often simply
required to cease the objectionable activity, although sometimes they are
also fined, become subject to damage suits, or are jailed.
If compensation were stressed, the main purpose of legal proceedings
would be to levy fines equal to 55 the harm inflicted on society by constraints
of trade. There would be no point to cease and desist orders, imprison-
ment, ridicule, or dissolution of companies. If the economist's theory about
monopoly is correct, and if optimal fines were levied, firms would auto-
matically cease any constraints of trade, because the gain to them would be
less than the harm they cause and thus less than the fines expected. On the
other hand, if Schumpeter and other critics are correct, and certain con-
straints of trade raise the level of economic welfare, fines could fully
compensate society for the harm done, and yet some constraints would not
cease, because the gain to participants would exceed the harm to others.56
One unexpected advantage, therefore, from stressing compensation and
fines rather than punishment and deterrence is that the validity of the
classical position need not be judged a priori. If valid, compensating fines
would discourage all constraints of trade and would achieve the classical
aims. If not, such fines would permit the socially desirable constraints to
continue and, at the same time, would compensate society for the harm
done.
Of course, as participants in triple-damage suits are well aware, the
harm done is not easily measured, and serious mistakes would be inevit-
able. However, it is also extremely difficult to measure the harm in many
civil suits,57 yet these continue to function, probably reasonably well on
the whole. Moreover, as experience accumulated, the margin of error
would decline, and rules of thumb would develop. Finally, one must
realize that difficult judgments are also required by the present antitrust
policy, such as deciding that certain industries are " workably " competitive
or that certain mergers reduce competition. An emphasis on fines and
compensation would at least help avoid irrelevant issues by focusing
attention on the information most needed for intelligent social policy.
55 Actually, fines should exceed the harm done if the probability of conviction
were less than unity. The possibility of avoiding conviction is the intellectual justifica-
tion for punitive, such as triple, damages against those convicted.
56 The classical view is that D'(M) always is greater than zero, where M measures
the different constraints of trade and D' measures the marginal damage; the critic's
view is that for some M, D'(M) < 0. It has been shown above that if D' always is
greater than zero, compensating fines would discourage all offenses, in this case
constraints of trade, while if D' sometimes is less than zero, some offenses would
remain (unless C'[M], the marginal cost of detecting and convicting offenders, were
sufficiently large relative to D').
57 Harper and James said, "Sometimes [compensation] can be accomplished with
a fair degree of accuracy. But obviously it cannot be done in anything but a figurative
and essentially speculative way for many of the consequences of personal injury. Yet
it is the aim of the law to attain at least a rough correspondence between the amount
awarded as damages and the extent of the suffering" (1956, p. 1301).
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

200 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
VI. Private Expendituresa gainst Crime
A variety of private as well as public actions also attempt to reduce the
number and incidence of crimes: guards, doormen, and accountants are
employed, locks and alarms installed, insurance coverage extended, parks
and neighborhoods avoided, taxis used in place of walking or subways,
and so on. Table 1 lists close to $2 billion of such expenditures in 1965, and
this undoubtedly is a gross underestimate of the total. The need for private
action is especially great in highly interdependent modern economies,
where frequently a person must trust his resources, including his person,
to the "care" of employees, employers, customers, or sellers.
If each person tries to minimize his expected loss in income from crimes,
optimal private decisions can be easily derived from the previous dis-
cussion of optimal public ones. For each person there is a loss function
similar to that given by equation (18):
Lj = Hj(O,) + Cj(pj, Oj, C, Ck) + bjpjfj.0. (31)
The term Hj represents the harm to j from the Oj offenses committed
againstj, while Cj represents his cost of achieving a probability of convic-
tion of pj for offenses committed against him. Note that Cj not only is
positively related to Oj but also is negatively related to C, public expendi-
tures on crime, and to Ck, the set of private expenditures by other
persons.58
The term bjpjfjOjm easures the expected 59 loss to j from punishment of
offenders committing any of the Oj. Whereas most punishments result in a
net loss to society as a whole, they often produce a gain for the actual
victims. For example, punishment by fines given to the actual victims is
just a transfer payment for society but is a clear gain to victims; simi-
larly, punishment by imprisonment is a net loss to society but is a
negligible loss to victims, since they usually pay a negligible part of im-
prisonment costs. This is why bj is often less than or equal to zero, at the
same time that b, the coefficient of social loss, is greater than or equal to
zero.
Since bj and fj are determined primarily by public policy on punish-
ments, the main decision variable directly controlled by j is pj. If he
chooses a pj that minimizes Lj, the optimality condition analogous to
58 An increase in Ck Of and C held constant-presumably helps solve offenses
against j, because more of those against k would be solved.
59
The expect-Idp rivate loss, unlike the expected social loss, is apt to have con-
siderable variance because of the small number of independent offenses committed
against any single person. If j were not risk neutral, therefore, L would have to be
modified to include a term that depended on the distribution of bjpjf101.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 201
equation (22) is
Hg+ C,' + Cjp,a go~ h-jpjfj I1-) 60P (32)
The elasticity ejp, measures the effect of a change in pj on the number of
offenses committed against. If bj < 0, and if the left-hand side of equation
(32), the marginal cost of changing Oj, were greater than zero, then (32)
implies that ejpj > 1. Since offenders can substitute among victims, ejp, is
probably much larger than ep, the response of the total number of offenses
to a change in the average probability, p. There is no inconsistency, there-
fore, between a requirement from the optimality condition given by (22)
that ep < 1 and a requirement from (32) that ejpj > 1.
VII. Some Applications
A. Optimal Benefits
Our analysis of crime is a generalization of the economist's analysis of
external harm or diseconomies. Analytically, the generalization consists
in introducing costs of apprehension and conviction, which make the
probability of apprehension and conviction an important decision variable,
and in treating punishment by imprisonment and other methods as well as
by monetary payments. A crime is apparently not so different analytically
from any other activity that produces external harm and when crimes are
punishable by fines, the analytical differences virtually vanish.
Discussions of external economies or advantages are usually perfectly
symmetrical to those of diseconomies, yet one searches in vain for ana-
logues to the law of torts and criminality. Generally, compensation cannot
be collected for the external advantages as opposed to harm caused, and
no public officials comparable to policemen and district attorneys appre-
hend and "convict " benefactors rather than offenders. Of course, there is
60 I have assumed that
aC _ .C,
in other words, thatj is too " unimportant" to influenceo ther expenditures.A lthough
usually reasonable,t his does suggest a modificationt o the optimality conditions given
by eqs. (21) and (22). Since the effects of public expendituresd epend on the level of
private ones, and since the public is sufficiently "important" to influence private
actions, eq. (22) has to be modified to
D'/ + C' + CP 9 0 + E_~ d~t 90 _bpf (1 + )(22')
and similarlyf or eq. (21). "The" probabilityp is, of course, a weighted average of the
pj. Eq. (22') incorporates the presumption that an increase in public expenditures
would be partially thwarted by an induced decrease in private ones.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

202 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
public interest in benefactors: medals, prizes, titles, and other privileges
have been awarded to military heroes, government officials, scientists,
scholars, artists, and businessmen by public and private bodies. Among
the most famous are Nobel Prizes, Lenin Prizes, the Congressional Medal
of Honor, knighthood, and patent rights. But these are piecemeal efforts
that touch a tiny fraction of the population and lack the guidance of any
body of law that codifies and analyzes different kinds of advantages.
Possibly the explanation for this lacuna is that criminal and tort law
developed at the time when external harm was more common than
advantages, or possibly the latter have been difficult to measure and thus
considered too prone to favoritism. In any case, it is clear that the asym-
metry in the law does not result from any analytical asymmetry, for a
formal analysis of advantages, benefits, and benefactors can be developed
that is quite symmetrical to the analysis of damages, offenses, and offen-
ders. A function A(B), for example, can give the net social advantages from
B benefits in the same way that D(O) gives the net damages from 0
offenses. Likewise, K(B, Pi) can give the cost of apprehending and reward-
ing benefactors, where Pi is the probability of so doing, with K' and
K, > 0; B(pl, a, v) can give the supply of benefits, where a is the award
per benefit and v represents other determinants, with aB/lap and
aB/la > 0; and b1 can be the fraction of a that is a net loss to society.
Instead of a loss function showing the decrease in social income from
offenses, there can be a profit function showing the increase in income
from benefits:
II = A(B) - K(B, pl) - blpaB. (33)
If H is maximized by choosing appropriate values of Pi and a, the
optimality conditions analogous to equations (21) and (22) are
?1)
A' -K' = b, pa (I (34)
( ea)
and
Al - K -Kp aBi = bela I1 + e ) (35)
where
aB a
a Pa B
and
aB PI
p= ap B
are both greater than zero. The implications of these equations are related
to and yet differ in some important respects from those discussed earlier
for (21) and (22).
For example, if b1 > 0, which means that a is not a pure transfer but
costs society resources, clearly (34) and (35) imply that ep > ea, since both
Kp > 0 and ap,/IB > 0. This is analogous to the implication of (21) and
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 203
(22) that ep > Ef, but, while the latter implies that, at the margin, offenders
are risk preferrers, the former implies that, at the margin, benefactors are
risk avoiders.6' Thus, while the optimal values of p and f would be in a
region where "crime does not pay " in the sense that the marginal income
of criminals would be less than that available to them in less risky legal
activities-the optimal values of Pi and a would be where "benefits do
pay" in the same sense that the marginal income of benefactors would
exceed that available to them in less risky activities. In this sense it "pays"
to do " good " and does not " pay " to do " bad."
As an illustration of the analysis, consider the problem of rewarding
inventors for their inventions. The function A(B) gives the total social
value of B inventions, and A' gives the marginal value of an additional one.
The function K(B, Pi) gives the cost of finding and rewarding inventors;
if a patent system is used, it measures the cost of a patent office, of pre-
paring applications, and of the lawyers, judges, and others involved in
patent litigation.62 The elasticities ep and ea measure the response of
inventors to changes in the probability and magnitude of awards, while b1
measures the social cost of the method used to award inventors. With a
patent system, the cost consists in a less extensive use of an invention than
would otherwise occur, and in any monopoly power so created.
Equations (34) and (35) imply that with any system having b1 > 0, the
smaller the elasticities of response of inventors, the smaller should be the
probability and magnitude of awards. (The value of a patent can be
changed, for example, by changing its life.) This shows the relevance of the
controversy between those who maintain that most inventions stem from
a basic desire "to know" and those who maintain that most stem from the
prospects of financial awards, especially today with the emphasis on
systematic investment in research and development. The former quite
consistently usually advocate a weak patent system, while the latter
equally consistently advocate its strengthening.
61 The relation e, > ea holds if, and only if,
c9EUp, > EU a (1)
where
EU = piU(Y + a) + (1 - p)U(Y) (2')
(see the discussion on pp. 177-78). By differentiatinge q. (2'), one can write (1') as
pl[U(Y + a)- U(Y)] > plaU'(Y + a), (3')
or
U(Y + a)- U(Y) > U'(Y + a). (4')
a
But (4') holds if everywhere U" < 0 and does not hold if everywhere U" > 0 which
was to be proved.
62 These costs are not entirely trivial: for example, in 1966 the U.S. Patent Office
alone spent $34 million (see Bureau of the Budget, 1967), and much more was
probably spent in preparinga pplications and in litigation.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

204 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
Even if A', the marginal value of an invention, were "sizeable," the
optimal decision would be to abolish property rights in an invention, that
is, to set Pi = 0, if b1 and K63 were sufficiently large and/or the elasticities
ep and ea sufficiently small. Indeed, practically all arguments to eliminate
or greatly alter the patent system have been based either on its alleged
costliness, large K or b1, or lack of effectiveness, low ep or ea (see, for
example, Plant, 1934, or Arrow, 1962).
If a patent system were replaced by a system of cash prizes, the elasticities
of response would become irrelevant for the determination of optimal
policies, because b, would then be approximately zero.64 A system of
prizes would, moreover, have many of the same other advantages that
fines have in punishing offenders (see the discussion in Sec. V). One
significant advantage of a patent system, however, is that it automatically
"meters" A', that is, provides an award that is automatically positively
related to A', while a system of prizes (or of fines and imprisonment) has
to estimate A' (or D') independently and often somewhat arbitrarily.
B. The Effectiveness of Public Policy
The anticipation of conviction and punishment reduces the loss from
offenses and thus increases social welfare by discouraging some offenders.
What determines the increase in welfare, that is "effectiveness," of public
efforts to discourage offenses? The model developed in Section III can be
used to answer this question if social welfare is measured by income and if
"effectiveness" is defined as a ratio of the maximum feasible increase in
income to the increase if all offenses causing net damages were abolished
by fiat. The maximum feasible increase is achieved by choosing optimal
values of the probability of apprehension and conviction, p, and the size
of punishments, f (assuming that the coefficient of social loss from punish-
ment, b, is given).65
63 Presumably one reason patents are not permitted on basic research is the
difficulty( that is, cost) of discovering the ownership of new concepts and theorems.
64 The right side of both (34) and (35) would vanish, and the optimality conditions
would be
A'-K' = O (34')
and
aP
A' -K'- Kp = (35')
Since these equations are not satisfied by any finite values of Pi and a, there is a
difficultyi n allocating the incentives between Pi and a (see the similar discussion for
fines in Sec. V).
65 In symbols, effectivenessi s defined as
E D(01) - [D(0) + C(, 6) + bW6O]
D(01) - D(02)
where f, , and 6 are optimal values, 01 offenses would occur if p = f = 0, and 02
is the value of 0 that minimizes D.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 205
Effectiveness so defined can vary between zero and unity and depends
essentially on two behavioral relations: the costs of apprehension and
conviction and the elasticities of response of offenses to changes in p and
f. The smaller these costs or the greater these elasticities, the smaller the
cost of achieving any given reduction in offenses and thus the greater the
effectiveness. The elasticities may well differ considerably among different
kinds of offenses. For example, crimes of passion, like murder or rape, or
crimes of youth, like auto theft, are often said to be less responsive to
changes in p and f than are more calculating crimes by adults, like em-
bezzlement, antitrust violation, or bank robbery. The elasticities estimated
by Smigel (1965) and Ehrlich (1967) for seven major felonies do differ
considerably but are not clearly smaller for murder, rape, auto theft, and
assault than for robbery, burglary, and larceny.66
Probably effectiveness differs among offenses more because of differences
in the costs of apprehension and conviction than in the elasticities of
response. An important determinant of these costs, and one that varies
greatly, is the time between commission and detection of an offense.67 For
the earlier an offense is detected, the earlier the police can be brought in
and the more likely that the victim is able personally to identify the
offender. This suggests that effectiveness is greater for robbery than for a
related felony like burglary, or for minimum-wage and fair-employment
legislation than for other white-collar legislation like antitrust and public-
utility regulation.68
C. A Theory of Collusion
The theory developed in this essay can be applied to any effort to preclude
certain kinds of behavior, regardless of whether the behavior is "unlaw-
ful." As an example, consider efforts by competing firms to collude in
order to obtain monopoly profits. Economists lack a satisfactory theory
of the determinants of price and output policies by firms in an industry, a
theory that could predict under what conditions perfectly competitive,
monopolistic, or various intermediate kinds of behavior would emerge.
One by-product of our approach to crime and punishment is a theory of
collusion that appears to fill a good part of this lacuna.69
66 A theoretical argumentt hat also casts doubt on the assertion that less " calculat-
ing" offendersa re less responsivet o changes inp andfcan be found in Becker( 1962).
67 A study of crimes in parts of Los Angeles during January, 1966, found that
"more than half the arrests were made within 8 hours of the crime, and almost
two-thirdsw ere made within the first week" (President'sC ommission 1967e, p. 8).
68 Evidence relatingt o the effectivenesso f actual, which are not necessarilyo ptimal,
penalties for these white-collar crimes can be found in Stigler (1962, 1966), Landes
(1966), and Johnson (1967).
69 Jacob Mincer first suggested this application to me.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

206 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
The gain to firms from colluding is positively related to the elasticity of
their marginal cost curves and is inversely related to the elasticity of their
collective demand curve. A firm that violates a collusive arrangement by
pricing below or producing more than is specified can be said to commit
an "offense" against the collusion. The resulting harm to the collusion
would depend on the number of violations and on the elasticities of de-
mand and marginal cost curves, since the gain from colluding depends on
these elasticities.
If violations could be eliminated without cost, the optimal solution
would obviously be to eliminate all of them and to engage in pure monop-
oly pricing. In general, however, as with other kinds of offenses, there are
two costs of eliminating violations. There is first of all the cost of dis-
covering violations and of "apprehending" violators. This cost is greater
the greater the desired probability of detection and the greater the number
of violations. Other things the same, the latter is usually positively related
to the number of firms in an industry, which partly explains why econo-
mists typically relate monopoly power to concentration. The cost of
achieving a given probability of detection also depends on the number of
firms, on the number of customers, on the stability of customer buying
patterns, and on government policies toward collusive arrangements (see
Stigler, 1964).
Second, there is the cost to the collusion of punishing violators. The
most favorable situation is one in which fines could be levied against
violators and collected by the collusion. If fines and other legal recourse
are ruled out, methods like predatory price-cutting or violence have to be
used, and they hurt the collusion as well as violators.
Firms in a collusion are assumed to choose probabilities of detection,
punishments to violators, and prices and outputs that minimize their loss
from violations, which would at the same time maximize their gain from
colluding. Optimal prices and outputs would be closer to the competitive
position the more elastic demand curves were, the greater the number of
sellers and buyers, the less transferable punishments were, and the more
hostile to collusion governments were. Note that misallocation of resources
could not be measured simply by the deviation of actual from competitive
outputs but would depend also on the cost of enforcing collusions. Note
further, and more importantly, that this theory, unlike most theories of
pricing, provides for continuous variation, from purely competitive
through intermediate situations to purely monopolistic pricing. These
situations differ primarily because of differences in the " op-;mal " number
of violations, which in turn are related to differences in the elasticities.
concentrations, legislation, etc., already mentioned.
These ideas appear to be helpful in undci standing the relative success
of collusions in illegal industries themselves! Just as firms in legal indus-
tries have an incentive to collude to raise prices and profits, so too do
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 207
firms producing illegal products, such as narcotics, gambling, prostitution,
and abortion. The "syndicate" is an example of a presumably highly
successful collusion that covers several illegal products.70 In a country like
the United States that prohibits collusions, those in illegal industries would
seem to have an advantage, because force and other illegal methods could
be used against violators without the latter having much legal recourse.
On the other hand, in countries like prewar Germany that legalized
collusions, those in legal industries would have an advantage, because
violators could often be legally prosecuted. One would predict, therefore,
from this consideration alone, relatively more successful collusions in
illegal industries in the United States, and in legal ones in prewar
Germany.
VIII. Summary and ConcludingR emarks
This essay uses economic analysis to develop optimal public and private
policies to combat illegal behavior. The public's decision variables are its
expenditures on police, courts, etc., which help determine the probability
(p) that an offense is discovered and the offender apprehended and con-
victed, the size of the punishment for those convicted (f), and the form of
the punishment: imprisonment, probation, fine, etc. Optimal values of
these variables can be chosen subject to, among other things, the con-
straints imposed by three behavioral relations. One shows the damages
caused by a given number of illegal actions, called offenses (0), another
the cost of achieving a given p, and the third the effect of changes in p and
f on 0.
"Optimal" decisions are interpreted to mean decisions that minimize
the social loss in income from offenses. This loss is the sum of damages,
costs of apprehension and conviction, and costs of carrying out the punish-
ments imposed, and can be minimized simultaneously with respect to p, f,
and the form of f unless one or more of these variables is constrained
by "outside" considerations. The optimality conditions derived from the
minimization have numerous interesting implications that can be illus-
trated by a few examples.
If carrying out the punishment were costly, as it is with probation,
imprisonment, or parole, the elasticity of response of offenses with respect
to a change in p would generally, in equilibrium, have to exceed its
response to a change inf. This implies, if entry into illegal activities can be
explained by the same model of choice that economists use to explain
entry into legal activities, that offenders are (at the margin) "risk pre-
ferrers." Consequently, illegal activities "would not pay" (at the margin)
70 An interpretation of the syndicate along these lines is also found in Schilling
(1967).
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

208 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
in the sense that the real income received would be less than what could
be received in less risky legal activities. The conclusion that "crime would
not pay" is an optimality condition and not an implication about the
efficiency of the police or courts; indeed, it holds for any level of efficiency,
as long as optimal values of p and f appropriate to each level are chosen.
If costs were the same, the optimal values of both p and f would be
greater, the greater the damage caused by an offense. Therefore, offenses
like murder and rape should be solved more frequently and punished more
severely than milder offenses like auto theft and petty larceny. Evidence on
actual probabilities and punishments in the United States is strongly
consistent with this implication of the optimality analysis.
Fines have several advantages over other punishments: for example,
they conserve resources, compensate society as well as punish offenders,
and simplify the determination of optimal p's and f's. Not surprisingly,
fines are the most common punishment and have grown in importance
over time. Offenders who cannot pay fines have to be punished in other
ways, but the optimality analysis implies that the monetary value to them
of these punishments should generally be less than the fines.
Vengeance, deterrence, safety, rehabilitation, and compensation are
perhaps the most important of the many desiderata proposed throughout
history. Next to these, minimizing the social loss in income may seem
narrow, bland, and even quaint. Unquestionably, the income criterion can
be usefully generalized in several directions, and a few have already been
suggested in the essay. Yet one should not lose sight of the fact that it is
more general and powerful than it may seem and actually includes more
dramatic desiderata as special cases. For example, if punishment were by
an optimal fine, minimizing the loss in income would be equivalent to
compensating "victims" fully and would eliminate the "alarm" that so
worried Bentham; or it would be equivalent to deterring all offenses
causing great damage if the cost of apprehending, convicting, and punish-
ing these offenders were relatively small. Since the same could also be
demonstrated for vengeance or rehabilitation, the moral should be clear:
minimizing the loss in income is actually very general and thus is more
usefili than these catchy and dramatic but inflexible desiderata.
This essay concentrates almost entirely on determining optimal policies
to combat illegal behavior and pays little attention to actual policies. The
small amount of evidence on actual policies that I have examined certainly
suggests a positive correspondence with optimal policies. For example, it is
found for seven major felonies in the United States that more damaging
ones are penalized more severely, that the elasticity of response of offenses
to changes in p exceeds the response to f/ and that both are usually less
than unity, all as predicted by the optimality analysis. There are, however,
some discrepancies too: for example, the actual tradeoff between im-
prisonment and fines in different statutes is frequently less, rather than the
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 209
predicted more, favorable to those imprisoned. Although many more
studies of actual policies are needed, they are seriously hampered on the
empirical side by grave limitations in the quantity and quality of data on
offenses, convictions, costs, etc., and on the analytical side by the absence
of a reliable theory of political decision-making.
Reasonable men will often differ on the amount of damages or benefits
caused by different activities. To some, any wage rates set by competitive
labor markets are permissible, while to others, rates below a certain
minimum are violations of basic rights; to some, gambling, prostitution,
and even abortion should be freely available to anyone willing to pay the
market price, while to others, gambling is sinful and abortion is murder.
These differences are basic to the development and implementation of
public policy but have been excluded from my inquiry. I assume consensus
on damages and benefits and simply try to work out rules for an optimal
implementation of this consensus.
The main contribution of this essay, as I see it, is to demonstrate that
optimal policies to combat illegal behavior are part of an optimal allocation
of resources. Since economics has been developed to handle resource
allocation, an "economic" framework becomes applicable to, and helps
enrich, the analysis of illegal behavior. At the same time, certain unique
aspects of the latter enrich economic analysis: some punishments, such as
imprisonments, are necessarily non-monetary and are a cost to society as
well as to offenders; the degree of uncertainty is a decision variable that
enters both the revenue and cost functions; etc.
Lest the reader be repelled by the apparent novelty of an "economic"
framework for illegal behavior, let him recall that two important contrib-
utors to criminology during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
Beccaria and Bentham, explicitly applied an economic calculus. Unfor-
tunately, such an approach has lost favor during the last hundred years,
and my efforts can be viewed as a resurrection, modernization, and thereby
I hope improvement on these much earlier pioneering studies.
MathematicalA ppendix
This Appendix derives the effects of changes in various parameters on the
optimal values of p and f. It is assumed throughout that b > 0 and that
equilibriumo ccurs where
AD + + ACP = D' + C' + o > 0;
the analysis could easily be extended to cover negative values of b and of this
marginalc ost term. The conclusion in the text (Sec. II) that D" + C" > 0 is
relied on here. I take it to be a reasonablef irst approximationt hat the elastici-
ties of 0 with respect to p or f are constant. At several places a sufficient
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

210 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
condition for the conclusions reached is that
CP= Co= e32C ea2C
is "small" relative to some other terms. This condition is utilized in the form
of a strong assumption that Cpo = 0, although I cannot claim any supporting
intuitive or other evidence.
The social loss in income from offenses has been defined as
L = D(O) + C(O, p) + bpfO. (Al)
If b andp were fixed, the value off that minimized L would be found from the
necessary condition
OL 0O
of 0= = (D' + C') af + bpf(I - E,) it '(A2)
or
O= D' + C' + bpf(l -Ef), (A3)
if
:
,o= of 0,
where
-f 0
-
The sufficient condition would be that C2L/f2 > 0; using aL/Of = 0 and Ef is
constant, this condition becomes
L (D" + C")02 + bp(l - Ef)Of > 0 (A4)
or
A D" + C" + bp(1 - Ef) I > 0. (A5)
Of
Since D' + C' > 0, and b is not less than zero, equation (A3) implies that
Ef > 1. Therefore A would be greater than zero, since we are assuming that
D" + C" > 0; and!; the value of f satisfying (A3), would minimize (locally)
the loss L.
Suppose that D' is positively related to an exogenous variable a. The effect
of a change in a on f can be found by differentiating equation (A3):
Da + (D" + C")Of + bp(l -E,) 0f
or
df -D'(1/0f) (A6)
da A
Since A > 0, Of < 0, and by assumption D, > 0, then
d +
- > 0. (A7)
du +
In a similar way it can be shown that, if C' is positively related to an
exogenous variable f,
df -C(1/Of) = + > 0 (A8)
dg A +
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIMEA ND PUNISHMENT 211
If b is positively related to y, then
(D" + C")0, d + bp(l - dE + pf(I -Ef)by = 0,
'~dy F) +
or
df -bypf(l -E)(l/10) (A9)
dy A
Since 1 - Ef < 0, and by assumption by > 0,
d= =_<O. (AI0)
dy +
Note that since l/Ef < 1,
d(pfO) < 0. (All)
dy
If Ef is positively related to 8, then
df Ef6bpf(1/0f) -
0.
7W A -=T~~~< (A12)
Since the elasticity of 0 with respect to f equals
Ef Ef 0- f 1 i 0 = E E
by (A12), a reduction in Ef would reduce f.
Suppose that p is related to the exogeneous variable r. Then the effect of a
shift in r on f can be found from
(D" + C)Of 'f + (D" + C")Opr + CGOPr
+ bp(l -Ef) Tr + bf(I - Ef)pr = 0,
or
df -(D" + C)Op(1/Of)Pr - bf(l - Ef)pr(l/Of) (A13)
dr AX
since by assumption Cpo = 0. Since Op < 0, and (D" + C") > 0,
dl (-)+(-) = + < O. (A14)
dr + +
If f rather than p were fixed, the value of p that minimizes L, fi, could be
found from
L [D' + C' + C 1 + bpf(l -=E) ?0, (A15)
lap O~p-
as long as
I
a2 = [(D- + C-)Op + Cp' + Cpp + CP0 + Cp aope A6
L+ afal (A1 6 )
+ bf(l - Ep)]OP > 0.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

212 JOURNAL OF POLITICALE CONOMY
Since Cp = Cpo = 0, (A16) would hold if
AD-- at+ C" + Cppo2 + co o +kb f(l - Ep)- > ? (A17)
It is suggested in Section II that Cpp is generally greater than zero. If, as
assumed,
D' + C' + CP > 0? '
op
equation (A15) implies that Ep > 1 and thus that
bf(l -Ep)I >0.
op
If Ep were constant, 02p/lOep would be negative,71 and, therefore,
Cp(l/1p)(a2p/@0,p) would be positive. Hence, none of the terms of (A17) are
negative, and a value of p satisfying equation (A15) would be a local minimum.
The effects of changes in different parameters on fi are similar to those
already derived for f and can be written without comment:
dp = Dl/Op)> 0, (A18)
cia 'A'l o A8
d1 -CA'1/OP) > 0 (A19)
and
df -bypf(l - Ep)(l /Op) < 0 (A20)
dy Al
If Ep is positively related to 5',
dfi Epob pf(l /Op) <0 A1
If Cp were positively related to the parameter s, the effect of a change in s on
fi would equal
ds = -CpA(l /OP) < 0. (A22)
Iff were related to the exogenous parameter t, the effect of a change in t on
fi would be given by
dfi -(D" + C")Opft(l/Op) - bf(l - Ep)ft(l /Op) - Cp(e2p/1)Oef)ft(l/Op)0
dt A'
(A23)
(with Cpo = 0), since all the terms in the numerator are negative.
If both p and f were subject to control, L would be minimized by choosing
optimal values of both variables simultaneously. These would be given by the
71 If E, and Ef are constants, 0 = kp af-b, where a = /4Epa nd b = 1/E.
Then
-p ..pa+lfb,
and
(a+ 1)
AmOpp pafb < 0.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 213
solutions to the two first-orderc onditions, equations (A2) and (A15), assuming
that certain more general second-orderc onditions were satisfied. The effects
of changes in various parameterso n these optimal values can be found by
differentiatingb oth first-orderc onditions and incorporatingt he restrictionso f
the second-orderc onditions.
The values of p and f satisfying (A2) and (Al 5), fi and A,m inimize L if
Lpp > 0, Lff > 0, (A24)
and
LppLff > Lf = L2f. (A25)
But Lpp= OA', and Lff = 02A, and since both A' and A have been shown
to be greatert han zero, (A24) is proved already, and only (A25) remains. By
differentiatingL f with respect to p and utilizing the first-orderc ondition that
Lf = 0, one has
Lfp = OfOp[D" + C" + bf(l - Ef)po] = Of p (A26)
where E equals the term in brackets. ClearlyE > 0.
By substitution,( A25) becomes
AA' > E2 (A27)
and (A27) holds if A and A' are both greatert han E. A > E means that
D" + C" + bp(l - Ef)fo > D" + C" + bf(l - Ef)po, (A28)
or
bfp
( - E)Ef < bo-f (I -Ef)Ep. (A29)
Since 1 - Ef < 0, (A29) implies that
E, > Ep, (A30)
which necessarilyh olds given the assumption that b > 0; prove this by com-
bining the two first-orderc onditions (A2) and (A15). A' > E means that
D11+ C" + CPPP2 + Cppopop + bf(l - Ep)po > D" + C" + bf(l - Ef)po.
(A31)
Since CPPP2 > 0, and po < 0, this necessarilyh olds if
Cpppop + bpf(I - Ep) < bpf(l - Ef). (A32)
By eliminating D' + C' from the first-orderc onditions (A2) and (A15) and
by combining terms, one has
Cppo - bpf(Ep - Ef) = 0. (A33)
By combining (A32) and (A33), one gets the condition
CPppop < Cppo, (A34)
or
=o po > (A35)
It can be shown that
Epop= 1 + > 1, (A36)
and, therefore, (A35) is proven.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

214 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
It has now been proved that the values of p and f that satisfy the first-order
conditions (A2) and (A15) do indeed minimize (locally) L. Changes in different
parameters change these optimal values, and the direction and magnitude can
be found from the two linear equations
OfAA- ? + OPE -fi C,
and (A37)
OEJ-t + OpA'E C2.
By Cramer's rule,
aJ C1OpA - CC2 OE Op(C1 A'- C2Y)
A
=
Z
~
=
0
O
Po
P
f(
A
AA
f
'
A -5_2
Y2)+
+ ' (A38)
ef_ C20fA - ClOfE Of(C2A - C1) (A39)
-Z OPOf (AA' -_ 2) +
and the signs of both derivatives are the same as the signs of the numerators.
Consider the effect of a change in D' resulting from a change in the para-
meter aX.I t is apparent that C1 = C2 =-D', and by substitution
f_ -OpD((A'- ) + > 0 (A40)
Ca s + +
and
ap -0pD~(A- >) _ + 0 (A41)
Ca s + + ,
since Of and Op < 0, D' > 0, and A and A' > E.
Similarly, if C' is changed by a change in A, C1 = C2 =-C:,
Wf =O C(A,-?) + > (A42)
ag ~ + =y0+A2
and
laip- -Of C,(A - Y) + > ? (A43)
ag ~ + +--0 A3
If Ef is changed by a change in 8, C1 = Efbpf, C2 = 0,
f _0pE~bpfA' = _ < (A44)
0
as + +
and
ap -Of EfbPf E = + > O. (A45)
Similarly, if Ep is changed by a change in 8', C1 = 0, C2 = Epbpf,
Af OpEp16bpf2 = + > (A46)
and
i p _ fEp bpfA = < 0. (A47)
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 215
If b is changed by a change in y, C1 =-bypf(I - Ef), C2 =-bypf(l -E),
and
ef -Opbypf[(l - Ef)A' -(1 -Ep)] - 0, (A48)
CY9 + +
since Ef > Ep > 1 and A' > L; also,
lap-- Ofbypf[(l - Ep)A (1 -Ef)Y] + > 0 (A49)
CYy + +
for it can be shown that (1 - Ep)A > (1 - Ef)E.72 Note that when f is held
constant the optimal value of p is decreased, not increased, by an increase in y.
If Cp is changed by a change in s, C2 = -p0Cp, C1 = 0,
Ef _ OrPOCsP - + - + > 0, (A50)
and
lip -O~p0CpsA = _ -< 0. (A51)
72 The term (1 - Ep)A would be greater than (1 - Ef)E if
(D" + C")(l - Ep) + bp(l - Ef)(1 - Ep)fo > (D" + C")(l -Ef) + bf(1 - Ef)2po,
or
(D" + C")(Ef - Ep) >- f (l - Ef)[(l -Ep) -t (1 -E,) ?]
(D" + C")(Ef - Ep) > -f(l - Ef)[(I -Ep)(Ef) -(1 -Ef)Ep],
(D" + C")(Ef - Ep)> -5f (l - Ef)(Ef -Ep).
Since the left-hand side is greatert han zero, and the right-hands ide is less than zero,
the inequality must hold.
References
Arrow, Kenneth J. " Economic Welfare and Allocation of Resources for
Invention," in National Bureau Committee for Economic Research. The
Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity: Economic and Social Factors.
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press (for the Nat. Bureau of Econ. Res.),
1962.
Becker, Gary S. "Irrational Behavior and Economic Theory," J.P.E., Vol.
LXX (February, 1962).
. "A Theory of the Allocation of Time," Econ. J., Vol. LXXV (Sep-
tember, 1965).
Bentham, Jeremy. Theory of Legislation. New York: Harcourt Brace Co.,
1931.
Bureau of the Budget. The Budget of United States Government, 1968, Appendix.
Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

2i6 JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY
Bureau of Prisons. Prisoners Released from State and Federal Institutions.
("National Prisoner Statistics.") Washington: U.S. Dept. of Justice, 1960.
. Characteristics of State Prisoners, 1960. (" National Prisoner Statis-
tics.") U.S. Dept. of Justice, n.d.
. Federal Prisons, 1960. Washington: U.S. Dept. of Justice, 1961.
Cagan, Phillip. Determinants and Effects of Changes in the Stock of Money,
1875-1960. New York: Columbia Univ. Press (for the Nat. Bureau of
Econ. Res.), 1965.
"Criminal Safeguards and the Punitive Damages Defendant," Univ. Chicago
Law Rev., Vol. XXXIV (Winter, 1967).
Ehrlich, Isaac. "The Supply of Illegitimate Activities." Unpublished manu-
script, Columbia Univ., New York, 1967.
Federal Bureau of Investigation. Uniform Crime Reports for the United States.
Washington: U.S. Dept. of Justice, i960.
.Ibid., 1961.
Harper, F. V., and James, F. The Law of Torts, Vol. II. Boston: Little-Brown
& Co., 1956.
Johnson, Thomas. "The Effects of the Minimum Wage Law." Unpublished
Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia Univ., New York, 1967.
Kleinman, E. "The Choice between Two 'Bads '-Some Economic Aspects of
Criminal Sentencing." Unpublished manuscript, Hebrew Univ., Jerusalem,
1967.
Landes, William. "The Effect of State Fair Employment Legislation on the
Economic Position of Nonwhite Males." Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Columbia Univ., New York, 1966.
Laws of New York, Vol. 11 (1965).
Marshall, Alfred. Principles of Economics. 8th ed. New York: Macmillan Co.,
1961.
Plant, A. "The Economic Theory concerning Patents for Inventions,"
Economica, Vol. I (February, 1934).
Pollock, F., and Maitland, F. W. The History of English Law. Vol. II. 2d ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1952.
President's Commission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice.
The Challenge of Crime in a Free Society. Washington: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1967(a).
. Corrections. ("Task Force Reports.") Washington: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1967(b).
. The Courts. ("Task Force Reports.") Washington: U.S. Government
Printing Office, 1967(c).
Crime and Its Impact-an Assessment. (" Task Force Reports.")
Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967(d).
. Science and Technology. ("Task Force Reports.") Washington: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1967(e).
Radzinowicz, L. A History of English Criminal Law and Its Administration
from 1750. Vol. I. London: Stevens & Sons, 1948.
Schilling, T. C. "Economic Analysis of Organized Crime," in President's Com-
mission on Law Enforcement and Administration of Justice. Organized Crime.
(" Task Force Reports.") Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1967.
Shawness, Lord. "Crime Does Pay because We Do Not Back Up the Police,"
New York Times Magazine, June 13. 1965.
Smigel, Arleen. "Crime and Punishment: An Economic Analysis." Unpub-
lished M.A. thesis, Columbia Univ., New York, 1965.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).

CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 217
Stigler, George J. "What Can Regulators Regulate? The Case of Electricity,"
J. Law and Econ., Vol. V (October, 1962).
. "A Theory of Oligopoly," J.P.E., Vol. LXXII (February, 1964).
. "The Economic Effects of the Antitrust Laws," J. Law and Econ.,
Vol. IX (October, 1966).
Sutherland, E. H. Principles of Criminology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: J. B.
Lippincott Co., 1960.
This content downloaded from 128.059.177.088 on March 07, 2019 11:19:19 AM
All use subject to University of Chicago Press Terms and Conditions (http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/t-and-c).