Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
“BECKER AND FOUCAULT ON CRIME AND
PUNISHMENT”
A Conversation with Gary Becker, François Ewald,
and Bernard Harcourt
The Second Session
The University of Chicago – May 15, 2013 1
Bernard Harcourt: Welcome everyone to the second session.
Last year, we met to discuss Gary Becker’s theory of human
capital in conversation with, or in confrontation with, Michel
Foucault’s reading of Becker’s theory and Foucault’s critique
of neoliberalism. That discussion was located primarily in
Foucault’s lecture of March 14, 1979, in his Collège de France
lectures titled The Birth of Biopolitics.2
In this second session, we will focus on Gary Becker’s
1968 theory of crime and punishment3 and Foucault’s discus-
sion of that work in the following lecture, which was delivered
on March 21, 1979.4 We are going to use that exchange to
5

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
explore the relationship between, on the one hand, Foucault’s
writing on punishment (from Discipline and Punish5 in 1975
through The Birth of Biopolitics in 1979) and, on the other
hand, the economic theory of crime and punishment.
We are dealing with two seminal texts in the field of twen-
tieth century thought. Gary Becker’s 1968 article has been
described by Judge Richard Posner, in his tracing of the history
of the law and economics movement, as the origin or the “first
shot”: Posner wrote, in 2001, that “If one year must be picked
for the beginning of the [law and economics movement], it
would be 1968.”6 Why? Because, Posner writes, “in 1968,
Gary Becker published his article on crime, reviving and refin-
ing Bentham,” and thereby demonstrating, in Posner’s words,
“that no field of law could not be placed under the lens of
economics with illuminating results.”7 As for Foucault’s work,
Discipline and Punish, and his Collège de France lectures as
well, those are perhaps the texts on punishment from the twen-
tieth century that have had the greatest influence in the field
and on Western contemporary theory.
To start this exchange, then, I would like to turn first to
François Ewald, who was present at the lectures, who was at the
time Michel Foucault’s assistant at the Collège de France, and
who was one of Foucault’s closest interlocutors.8 I should note,
once again, that Gary Becker has read Foucault’s March 21st,
1979 lecture, and he sent me an email—as he did last time
before the first session—with some thoughts, noting that the
lecture was interesting, and asking whether there is disagree-
ment or not. In his own words, “I read the lecture, and it is
interesting. Does he agree with the approach I take? Not clear,
but he does not obviously disagree.”9
6

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
With that, let me turn first, then, to François Ewald.
François Ewald: Thank you, Bernard. Thank you, Professor
Becker, for your time.
I will make three remarks about Foucault’s views on your
writings on crime and punishment. The first remark will be
about the reason why Foucault was so interested by your work,
especially with respect to penality. My second remark will be
about insights that you, Professor Becker, might find—not so
much in this particular lesson, but more broadly in Discipline
and Punish. And the last one will concern themes that I would
like to develop regarding penal judgment and the economy of
justice.
First remark, then. I think that the first connection
between you and Foucault is a methodological one: Foucault
saw in your work the possibility of a critique of governmental-
ity. I think we have to understand critique here both in a
political sense, but also in a philosophical one—in the sense of
a Kantian critique.
Foucault interprets your kind of critique of governmental-
ity as “cynicist.” Yes, that is what is written – “le cynisme.”10
For Foucault, that is not bad! Because the Cynics, for Foucault,
are the kind of people who define a new type, or a new possibil-
ity of truth-telling.11 For Foucault, your critique of govern-
mentality produces the capacity to be true without or outside
of moral considerations.
The second connection between you and Foucault is that
Foucault, I believe, found your work helpful. Discipline and
Punish offered a very thorough criticism of the modern penal
7

Break up with Margaret Thatcher
system, of the modern art of punishing; but it ultimately pro-
vided no solution. Many people asked Foucault: “Perhaps
penal policy does not work, but what do you think is the solu-
tion?” And you gave, on his view, an alternative to modern
penal policy. And there are two or three elements in this lesson
that specifically contribute to an alternative vision. With you,
we have a model of a penal policy that moves away from homo
criminalis toward a new kind of objectivation of criminal
behavior—the model of homo economicus. Your model conveys
the idea that there is no particular psychology of the criminal,
that the criminal is the man on the street. The only difference
is his relationship to risk. In this respect, you were a liberator
for Foucault, a liberator from past models, with this new objec-
tivation of criminal behavior.
The final connection between you and Foucault is cer-
tainly the idea that the optimal public policy against crime does
not seek to eradicate crime, but rather to make the offer of
crime as unattractive as possible, under specific conditions.
Here, you addressed a very important concern of Foucault:
power and its limits. For Foucault, it was very important that
power have its limits, limits which give people the possibility to
play with the rules, the possibility for “illégalismes” in society.
Gary Becker: Can you restate that? I’m not sure I understand.
François Ewald: Yes. For Foucault there is, in our society, in a
modern liberal society, there is a temptation of power to seek
control of each person, each individual, each agent. This is total
power. Against that, we have to manage, we have to create
limits to power, and thus create a field of tolerance—this was
very important for Foucault—a field of tolerance that is part of
8

Anna Elise Johnson
our rights, in the sense of a “bill of rights.” Thanks to these
limitations, we have the right to be outside, not entirely inside
the domination of power. For me, these are the three connec-
tions: your critique, an alternative, and the idea he shared with
you of tolerance.
My second point is about what you could find helpful for
your work in Discipline and Punish. There is, perhaps, in that
work a way to complete your economic analysis of crime. The
project of Foucault in Discipline and Punish was also an eco-
nomic approach to crime. The idea is of course somewhat
metaphorical, but through it, Foucault tried to describe an
“economy of power.” There is an attempt to develop a new
vision of power in relationship with the idea of an economy.
Economy, for Foucault, is not exactly the same concept as what
you call economy: Foucault’s notion of economy is related to
having a strategy, to making a calculus. But in this sense, they
are both connected.
In this respect, what could be of interest to you is the idea
that prison is a failure, that it is something that does not work,
that the goals of the prison have not been achieved. But that
this failure has a positive aspect: it allows power to control a
certain kind of population, namely the population that ends up
in prison. And with the control of this population, it may be
possible to control a certain form of crime. This could be inter-
esting for you: to take into account not only the cost of crime,
but the benefits and side effects of a failed policy. I’m not sure
what would be the right translation…
Gary Becker: …I understand what you’re saying...
9

François Ewald: … but it is the idea that behind a failure,
there is an advantage. What is the value of this advantage? Well,
it turns out that, as between the failure and costs of prisons and
the benefits of the control of criminality, prison may not be as
expensive, perhaps, as would be a National Security Agency, for
example.
A second aspect of the insight that Discipline and Punish
might provide is that you would have to add, to the calculus of
the costs and benefits of crime, the value provided by the man-
agement of crime and the exercise of power. Through these
kinds of public policies, power finds a way to exercise its dom-
ination. That is important, there is a value in that. From your
perspective, I believe—though I am no expert—that the costs
and benefits are taken to be those typically associated with a
state’s budget. But perhaps we should add some other value to
crime, perhaps we should consider other costs and benefits
than those described in a state’s budget.
Finally, one last remark, but here you will have to be indul-
gent. I said earlier that Foucault saw in your work the possibil-
ity for a new kind of critique; but your work is not merely
critical. It also contains a proposal about the proper character
of penal judgment. As you know, penal judgment is complex:
in imposing a punishment, we make two different kinds of
judgments. First, a judgment of conviction: we have to attri-
bute such fact, such illegality, to this particular person. The
second judgment concerns the person who is convicted: it
determines what kind of penalty should be imposed on him or
her. The difficulty is to understand the relation between these
two kinds of judgment. And you have a view about both.
Regarding the judgment of conviction, you provide arguments
10

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
about, for instance, certainty: for you, the certainty of convic-
tion is important, and so is the rapidity of the conviction. But
you also have a proposal about the second judgment, the impo-
sition of punishment.
It is difficult for me to express this, but I think that the
difficulty for you, with regard to penal judgment, is that you
propose a punishment that is not addressed to the person con-
victed but to other possible cases …
Bernard Harcourt: … not to the particular defendant, but to
other individuals, as in a general theory of deterrence…
François Ewald: … yes. And that is a key question: we have to
ask whether it is just to attribute to a particular defendant the
task of preventing other individuals. In this respect, the form of
your penal judgment is predictive, with all of the uncertainty
linked to this kind of prediction. We do not know what will be
their reaction, what effect this penalty will have on the others.
The consequence is that you have to make a lot of differentia-
tions between kinds of crimes, kinds of criminals, and so on.
And I think it is extremely difficulty to do that in practice. And
at this point, you are in conflict with the logic of law. The law
has a universal logic, it is addressed to the general case, the
reasonable man. By contrast, for you, punishment has to be
perpetually differentiating, for each particular case. That
becomes complex: How is it possible to reconcile the generality
of a public policy of punishment and this idea that the public
policy has to be adapted to each situation, to each case? You
need, for that, a lot of knowledge about individuals, in which
case perhaps you have come back into the domain of criminol-
ogy. And that creates a tension: at the beginning, you said you
11

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
wanted to leave aside the criminological approach; but in the
end, you may need to use just such kind of knowledge.
One last remark. I would like to raise some questions—but
here I speak with respect for the courage of your statement—
about your position on capital punishment and the death pen-
alty.12 In your blog about capital punishment, you give this
equation: for murder, the death penalty is valid because indi-
viduals may be sensible to the risk associated to this penalty.
You give this reasoning: in the case where one execution deters
five homicides, naturally, the cost-benefit analysis militates in
favor of saving the five lives and thus in favor of the death pen-
alty. You extend this reasoning to the case where one execution
saves one life. You argue that in this situation as well, you
would choose capital punishment. Why? Because, you say, the
value of the life of both individuals involved is not the same: the
life of the murderer does not have the same value as that of the
innocent person.
Okay. We could perhaps agree with you. But this then
raises two questions: first, that kind of statement, that kind of
assessment, is not exactly an economic one. It is a moral one.
Also, when you say such kinds of things, the murderer is abso-
lutely condemned for the rest of his life, while you do not know
what will be the future of the innocent person. At that point,
your evaluation of the price of life is not exactly an economic
one in a relation of risk, but a moral one. And here, then, you
are in competition and conflict with other kinds of moral
evaluation. For instance, when I was young, I had to read Les
évangiles, and I found statements there of Jesus saying, with
regard to the criminals: “For my Father, the criminal Magdalene,
12

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
has the same value—maybe even more value—than a good,
moral person.”
So, I would ask: Aren’t we here at the limit of economic
reasoning? It is a presupposition of economic analysis that
everything has a value that can be expressed by a price, a money
value. But the question here, in the context of the death pen-
alty, is: “Is it possible to assess the price of life, of the future of
an individual?” That is perhaps beyond the limit of economics,
and it is why, in my opinion, you are making at this point a
moral judgment, not an economic one. That was my final
remark. I thank you for this opportunity.
Bernard Harcourt: Gary, do you want to address some of
those comments?
Gary Becker: Well, let me address it in a broader context. I will
come to some of the comments, definitely, because they are
very interesting comments and I appreciate them.
Let me first come back to Foucault. I’m no expert on
Foucault, unlike both of you. In fact, the only things I’ve read
of Foucault are these two lectures that you had me read. I
should be reading more, if I were sensible, because of what I’ve
found in reading these two essays. My beliefs about modern
French philosophers were that they were opaque, impossible to
understand. So I read Foucault, these two essays—they are
lectures in translations, obviously not the best from the point
of view of giving clarity—and yet they were clear. I mean, I
understood what he was saying, and generally agreed with most
of what he said, which I’ll come to in a little while. But I
thought they were perceptive, clearly written, not hiding
behind a lot of complicated phraseology that didn’t amount to
13

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
anything. So to me, it said that I should be reading more of
him. He’s a very good thinker.
Now, in discussing his comments on my work, let me first
give people here, who may not be that familiar with my paper
on crime, a very short synopsis of what I do there. Then I’ll
discuss some of Foucault’s comments on it, and then I’ll dis-
cuss, François, your comments.
I set up a very simple model, fundamentally. It’s a norma-
tive model. It explicitly was normative. And the normative
question was: We have laws—and I don’t evaluate whether
these are good laws or not, and I’ll come back to that in the
context of what Foucault says—We have laws and we try to
discourage up to a point, and only up to a point, violation of
these laws. And so, the question posed in that essay is, “What’s
the optimal way to approach that kind of a problem?” When I
say “optimal,” it means taking account of various consider-
ations. You have to integrate several different types of consid-
erations in order to see this problem, and try to attack the
problem. Now, what are the considerations? Well, first of all,
you have the laws, and then you have some assessment about
what the cost is to society of violating these laws—what
Foucault calls, I don’t know if I use that language—the “exter-
nality” involved. You have potential criminals, and how can you
deter their behavior with the instruments you have available?
Now, what are the instruments? In the Crime and
Punishment paper, I stress two instruments, and you mention
them in discussion: the likelihood that you’re going to appre-
hend and convict somebody, and the magnitude and nature of
the punishment that you impose. Now, the framework there, of
14

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
course, deals with other instruments. Maybe a more effective
way to reduce crime is to educate the population better, so
their opportunities are better in non-criminal activities. You
have various instruments, and the paper focuses on the proba-
bility of conviction and the magnitude of the punishment. And
punishment can take different forms. It could be a fine. In fact,
I argue that one possible fine is actually the best form of pun-
ishment from an effectiveness point of view. But, of course, it
often deals with imprisonment for the more serious crimes,
because fines are not adequate for a variety of reasons in those
situations.
Now, it’s costly to impose punishment: police, the impris-
onment (or other types of punishment), the judiciary—there
are a variety of costs. And these costs—and this is important—
these costs limit how much you want to do in terms of the
punishment. I’ll come back to Foucault’s comments on that a
little bit later.
And finally you have: How responsive are criminals to dif-
ferent punishments? So if criminals respond a lot, in Foucault’s
language—I don’t know if I use it, I guess I use it in my
paper—if criminals are very elastic to the punishment (this is
language Foucault uses in his lecture) then maybe a small
amount of punishment can have a big effect. On the other
hand, if criminals are very unresponsive, then you say, well,
maybe the punishment won’t do any good because you won’t
be able to deter them. When I say criminals, I mean not simply
the criminals that you are punishing in a particular courtroom,
but all criminals who might be engaging in theft, robbery, rape,
murder and other crimes. It’s not just an individual, even
though the theory is based on an individual. It’s really a group
15

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
behavior that you’re concerned about. How does punishing X
affect the criminal activities of Y, Z and everybody else?
Now it’s true that when you punish X by putting X in
prison, you prevent X from committing crime—at least against
non-prisoners—while they’re in prison. But basically, the
framework asks: “How do you affect other people?” And if you
don’t have much effect on other people, that says, well, maybe
you don’t want to use this instrument very much, because you
really can’t accomplish a lot with this instrument. I mean, you
may like to do it, but the cost of doing it is too great.
That’s the framework. What are the components of it? You
have the laws, you have the potential criminal—and the
approach doesn’t say there’s one type who are criminals and
another type who isn’t—it doesn’t make any distinction, funda-
mentally. Yes, of course some people may be more willing to
obey the law for non-punishment reasons, but it doesn’t say
there’s some criminal type based on physiology, etc. It basically
says that most, if not everybody, can be affected if you have the
right sort of instruments, including education and punishment.
So you have the criminal, you have the laws, you have the cost
of enforcing the laws, and then you come out with some con-
clusion about how much you want to do with regard to differ-
ent crimes and with regard to different types of individuals.
That’s the framework that Foucault is commenting on.
So then I read Foucault’s essay, and here I’ll have to look
at some of the comments I made as I was reading the essay.
Foucault doesn’t like neoliberalism, and he classifies me as a
neoliberal. And I am a neoliberal, I suppose, whatever that
term means. I am a liberal, a classical liberal I would classify
16

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
myself as, and that’s sometimes meant as a neoliberal. So he
doesn’t like neoliberalism, and the first part of this chapter he
criticizes some other neoliberals: Röpke and some of the oth-
ers, then he criticizes Bentham—I don’t know if you would call
him a neoliberal, but he criticizes Bentham—and Beccaria and
so on.
Foucault puts me in this class of neoliberals, but as I read
the essay it’s hard for me to see something in that essay that
Foucault doesn’t like in terms of my work. I’ll tell you to look
at the various comments he makes. What he likes is—he starts
out, when he discusses my essay, and he’s also discussing essays
by some other economists, important essays by George Stigler,
a colleague and friend of mine, and a former student of mine,
Isaac Ehrlich, but he mainly focuses on my essays. I’ll act as if
it’s my essay, but there’s other literature that he discusses.
He says, “Well, Becker says that all one is interested in, in
terms of the definition of crime, is what the penal code defines
as behaviors that can be punished.” And then, the editor notes,
“there’s laughter” in the auditorium. And Foucault scolds his
audience. He says, “No, you shouldn’t laugh at that. That’s
what the French penal code says, basically.” It’s not a bad
approach to the problem, he says. So that’s how he starts off.
And what he likes about that approach and what he
doesn’t like about Bentham, in particular, is there’s no attempt
to have a calculus of what laws there should be or shouldn’t be
in that approach. There’s other literature that goes into it, and
I’ve gone into that literature, as in the capital punishment case
and other cases; but he says, there’s no attempt in this approach,
17

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
one doesn’t try to do that, and he likes that, because he’s criti-
cal of a lot of the laws that get passed.
The second thing is that he dislikes Bentham. His interpre-
tation of Bentham—and I didn’t go back to read Bentham but
it seemed to be right—was that Bentham thought he could
eliminate all crime by having the right punishment and this
panoptic prison where every criminal can be seen all the time,
there is no privacy, and the like. And he says, in this approach,
in this economic approach, one recognizes the cost of punish-
ment, which means that there will be an optimal amount of
crime. I mean, I like to challenge people, and I say, “The the-
ory is about the optimal amount of crime.” Optimal in what
sense? There are different meanings you can give to the word
optimal, but the meaning that I’m giving it in this context is:
optimal in the sense that you have to benefit the value of trying
to reduce crime versus the gain.
Foucault gives an example, I like the example. It was not
up in the air, but a very practical example of how you reduce
theft of inventory in a store. If theft is at a high rate, you can
cut it down pretty easily from 50% to 40% to 30%, you go
through a bunch of numbers – except, when you get down to
5% to cut it down any more, it’s going to be very costly and it
probably doesn’t pay to do it. So that’s the optimal amount of
theft in that case, would be 5%. And I think that’s absolutely
right, it’s a very good example, and it’s certainly fundamental
to this type of approach.
Now the third thing it seems to me he liked, was it recog-
nizes that there’s no fundamental person we can identify as a
criminal by their physiology, their genetics, and so on. Maybe
18

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
genetics will eventually tell us about it, but we definitely don’t
know that now. We know there’s a lot of influence in determin-
ing whether people commit crime and the different types of
crime—that people who commit white collar crimes are differ-
ent in terms of education and background, typically, than
people who commit assaults and felonies of various types.
There’s not a criminal individual, per se, but a different indi-
vidual is going to be affected differently, to be sure, by the
punishment, depending on the nature of the individual, or the
nature of the individuals committing a crime, and the nature of
the crimes.
So you have this heterogeneity both by type of crime and
type of individual, and in principle you like to tailor the punish-
ments to take account of this type of heterogeneity. You may
not know enough to be able to do it, but you try to do what
you can in that regard.
Here’s an example. Let’s say drugs. Now my paper doesn’t
discuss drugs, although I’ve since written a fair amount on the
drug question. Foucault says, “Well, people respond differ-
ently. The addict,” he says, “is not at all responsive to price.” I
don’t think that’s right. The addict is a bit responsive, but in
the long run they can be considerately responsive. Modern
analysis, and I think data, if you look at data, show that addicts
respond to punishment and higher price, but they may, in gen-
eral, respond less. People respond differently and you want to
have, maybe, different punishments for the addict and the per-
son who’s just starting out in taking drugs. If you want to
reduce the incident with drugs, that’s his approach: the high
price for the person who’s experimenting so they don’t experi-
ment, and a low price for the addict—because they’re addicted,
19

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
you’re not going to do any good and with a high price; they’ll
just commit a lot of crime, so you’ll want to cut that down.
So there’s, I thought, a lot of insight in that analysis. I
wouldn’t agree that the addicts aren’t responsive, but the basic
framework, I think, is the right one. So, those are my basic
comments on Foucault.
My conclusion was—I think, Bernard, you asked me,
“Well, where did Foucault agree and where did he disagree?”—
and I didn’t find any place where he explicitly disagreed. I
mean, in these lectures. Maybe in his other work he does.
It’s a bit hard to tell how much he’s expositing what I’m
saying, and how much he’s agreeing with what I’m saying. He
wasn’t hesitant to disagree with Bentham, Röpke, and some of
the other neoliberals. I don’t see anything in there where he’s
really disagreeing, so maybe we’ll come back to that.
Bernard Harcourt: Yes.
Gary Becker: Now, let me come to your comments, François.
I agree with a lot of what you said, and some of them are
related to what I said. Let me just mention a few of them:
criticism of government, analysis aside from moral reasoning,
and I’ll come back to the capital punishment issue that you
raised. Nowhere in my essay do I discuss capital punishment,
by the way, but my former student, Ehrlich, discussed capital
punishment. In some subsequent blogs, I discuss capital pun-
ishment,13 so I’ll stand behind what I said about capital punish-
ment. I’ll have to come back to that later on.
My essay is not taking a moral stand on laws and govern-
ment; it’s just looking at how you can affect the adherence to
20

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
these laws. I agree there’s no psychology. The criminal you
mention—I agree, there’s not a psychology of the criminal. I
think most attempts to give a psychology of the criminal have
really misled penology and how to deter crime. What I was try-
ing to do in this essay was free one‘s thinking from that
approach to criminology.
“Not to eradicate crime”—you mention that, and I agree
100%. “Limit to the power of the state that implies the limits
of the power of the state, because they can only do a limited
amount of activities,” which I agree. “Economy of power”—I
mean, absolutely. A neoliberal is very much worried about the
power of the state, what laws get passed, and so on. That’s why
neoliberals come out generally for a small state, a limited state.
I haven’t read Foucault’s other work on power, but I think
overall, on the basic picture, I would tend to agree with that.
You don’t want to have an economy of power, it’s too easily
corrupted. Imprisonment can be used as a way of enforcing the
power of the state, and certainly it’s a great concern of myself
and neoliberals in general. This essay recognizes that you may
be imprisoning people for the wrong reasons, they’re not
criminals, you’re doing other things, and so you have to bal-
ance. And even if the intent is right, the evidence is limited.
You convict people on limited evidence, and so you have to
have a procedure whereby—I mean, you want to have a proce-
dure whereby you can reevaluate the evidence in the light of
additional evidence. That’s what the appeal process does in
most societies. You want to provide a lot of protection in that
dimension. I think this approach certainly does that.
Fundamental to the approach, and I think you didn’t use
the word, is “deterrence.” In your discussion you didn’t use
21

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
the word deterrence, but you’re really describing deterrence.
Deterrence is fundamental to this type of approach. I agree
with you on that. You can’t deter [everyone] because it’s too
costly to do, basically. There’s a couple of qualifications to that.
Now my last comment would be on capital punishment.
The theory is silent on whether you want capital punishment or
not. It’s a calculation: What’s the advantage in terms of what’s
the deterrent effect of capital punishment? If capital punish-
ment didn’t deter, you still want to prevent murderers from
committing additional murders, so you may keep them in
prison, and so on. That’s fine. You could easily come out with
this theory and say you’re opposed to capital punishment. I
don’t have the slightest argument with that.
When I discuss the capital punishment in my blog… Let
me tell you a funny story about this. I gave a lecture in Italy for
roughly 2,000 individuals, so a huge audience. I was lecturing
about education, nothing to do with this topic, and there was
a question and answer period and somebody got up to me—
and the boy, he was obviously very emotionally involved and he
said to me, “You have written in favor of capital punishment.
You should be thrown out of Italy for doing that!” So I said,
“Well, I wasn’t talking about capital punishment.” I went in
and discussed my views on capital punishment, and he calmed
down a little bit.
The theory is agnostic about whether you want to use
capital punishment. The view I took in my blog, and I still take,
depends upon how much you can reduce subsequent murders
by capital punishment. If you can reduce a lot, and remember
you’re comparing capital punishment to alternatives, so let’s
22

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
say life in prison is an alternative. In fact, most people convicted
of murder do not spend life in prison in the United States. I
don’t know the French situation, but if life in prison is the
alternative, what additional deterrent effect and cost involved
in capital punishment versus others, recognizing that you may
be making an error when you convict somebody of murder and
you have to watch the appeal process. You may conclude from
that, the additional benefit is not worth the cost both in terms
of improper conviction and the like.
Why do I conclude, therefore, that I favor capital punish-
ment? I make the judgment based on very poor and limited
evidence. There’s a great controversy in the empirical evi-
dence—hold that for a moment, and let me make a broader
point. I said in the beginning that the essay was normative:
asking what should governments do, what would be the best
policy. It had in it a lot of positive or empirical aspects to it:
How big is deterrence? Does it differ if you send someone to
prison, or fine them, or increase the probability of apprehen-
sion? What’s the cost of punishing people? How do you change
that by varying your police force, and the like? It led to a lot of
empirical work based on trying to assess for different types of
crime, — how can you deter crime? Including things like:
increasing education, reducing unemployment, providing bet-
ter opportunities for individuals who might commit felonies. It
led to a lot of empirical work. A very small fraction of that
empirical work dealt with capital punishment, and the evidence
is mixed on that. Some studies conclude that capital punish-
ment had very little deterrent effect; some studies conclude
that capital punishment has pretty sizable effect, starting with
23

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
Ehrlich’s study, but other subsequent studies. And so it is
mixed.
The exact evidence isn’t clear, but we have to have a policy.
My judgment is that capital punishment does deter murder.
Then I go into this discussion that you didn’t like, and I’ll try
to defend what I was doing. I say most people would agree that
if we were convinced that using capital punishment could
reduce five murders, most people would be inclined to say,
“Well, we don’t like capital punishment, but we’re going to use
it.” Just like we don’t like going to war, but we’re going to use
it. So the question I ask is: “Where is the dividing line?”
Nobody knows where the dividing line is, because a lot of
people don’t ask that question. They usually just say, “I don’t
like capital punishment,” without asking: “Are you saving lives?
How many lives are you saving?” To use a hypothetical, we’ll
come to your example: “If I could save one life, would I be in
favor of capital punishment?”
That’s a tough one. It’s not easy. You’re taking one life and
you’re saving one additional life. And I argue there, it was a
judgment. It doesn’t come out—I mean, it comes out in maybe
some other analysis; there is a whole literature, as you know, on
the statistical value of life which tries to measure that.
I suppose I could measure that and integrate that into this,
and if I did that I would come to the conclusion: Yes, on the
whole, it’s worth using capital punishment, because the life
you’re saving is going to be some innocent person. It’s more
valuable than the life you’re taking who is going to, on the
whole, be some other person who’s going to commit other
crimes, and so on.
24

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
If you accepted that, push it further. Say you agree 1:1 –
what about .75:1? You save ¾ of a life for the murder you take.
It’s getting tougher. What about ½:1? I mean, I don’t know
where to draw the line. But I do believe that most people
would conclude that if you felt capital punishment deterred at
least one life for each capital punishment, most people would
say, “Well, I don’t like it, but it’s worth using,” taking account
of all the cost.
I’m just about finished.
Bernard Harcourt: Okay.
Gary Becker: That’s my basic comments. I’ll summarize what
they are, aside from giving an outline of what I try to do in the
paper. And remember, capital punishment was not in the paper.
I don’t consider that an important part of the work of the eco-
nomics of crime, because, I mean, you can take that either way.
It doesn’t have a conclusion. It is a framework for discussing a
lot of different crimes, and I read Foucault on this and I like
what he said. Maybe because he was agreeing with what I said.
I didn’t detect—even though he doesn’t like neoliberalism and
he classifies me explicitly as a neoliberal, which is right—I
didn’t detect any significant criticism. Maybe I’m wrong about
that. I’d like to discuss some of them, if there are any.
Bernard Harcourt: All right. Let me try to sharpen the
exchange, then, in a couple of ways.
Last session we were discussing human capital and we did
identify one particular critique of your theory of human capital.
The critique concerned the investments and disinvestments in
populations that would follow from a human capital approach.
25

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
Let’s put that aside for now, and move to Foucault’s second
lecture, which is about crime and punishment.
Here I think that Foucault’s text—which is an analysis of
the kind of rationality that forms the basis of your theory—
motivates two separate critiques. Unfortunately, the two cri-
tiques are further developed and come out more clearly in the
next lecture that Foucault delivered, on March 28, 1979—so
we are going to need to have a third session! But in any event,
the text motivates two critiques.
The first critique has to do with the particular type of gov-
ernable actor that is assumed and that is integral to the rational
actor model—and that is evident in your Crime and Punishment
article from 1968. This critique is located in Foucault’s lecture
around the time when the audience laughs14—I will come back
to this later because that passage is a critical moment in the
lecture, in the sense that it also reveals, importantly, a critical
path not taken. In any event, at that moment, Foucault draws
a parallel between your economic model and French penal law.
There is both a parallel and an important distinction. The paral-
lel is that your model defines crime in the same way as French
penal law: Crime is defined, in a positivist way, as behavior that
is punishable under the criminal code. You use a formal defini-
tion of crime, as does the French penal code, limiting yourself
to the words of the criminal code. Same formal approach, but
a very different view. Your view is from the perspective of the
rational actor in the model, whereas the French view is from
the perspective of the sovereign in the model. This differential
produces a very different way of thinking about and then gov-
erning individuals.
26

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
It’s that differential—namely, the fact that we’re now look-
ing at it from the view of the rational actor, from the individu-
al’s point of view, rather than from the perspective of the
sovereign—that produces the unique mode of governability of
neoliberalism, namely the mode that involves behavioral tech-
niques and environmental changes, etc. Foucault discusses this
mode of governability on page 252 of the English edition, but
actually the payoff, or the critique, comes in the next lecture
around page 270, where he talks about the more aberrant
forms of behavioral techniques associated, for instance, with
Skinner.15 But it is…
Gary Becker: I don’t want to associate with Skinner.
Bernard Harcourt: No, of course not, and Foucault is not
associating you with Skinner. But that is the slope or the direc-
tion in which this particular notion of governability can lead.
The second critique that Foucault’s text motivates is an
epistemological critique. It is connected to what we might call
the “theory of the subject,” but it also has to do with an epis-
temology of governance: What we can know well, and what we
cannot know well about the subject, about the individual,
about his or her interests. The insight here is that the rational
actor model rests on the premise that the individual subject can
know well his personal interests, in contrast to the State that
doesn’t have that knowledge in the same way. There is an inex-
tricable connection between the rational actor knowing his
interest best, but being faced by a governing body that does
not, and whose calculations misfire because they don’t have
that knowledge. And this produces, by itself, a certain need for
limited government intervention.
27

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
In other words, the idea of a limited government is built
into the theory of the subject in the rational actor model. And
this second critique, we will have to address at our next session
in more depth. It will take us to page 282 of the English edi-
tion, where you will find the argument that the theory of the
subject ultimately disqualifies the political sovereign.16 These
then are two critiques that emerge specifically out of Foucault’s
reading of your 1968 essay.
However, I would like to develop a third critique that
could have been made, but was not, and that represents, to my
eyes, a more penetrating critique. And this takes me back to the
passage discussed earlier where Foucault defends you against
his French audience—when he chastises his audience. It is a
critical passage because Foucault, at that moment, makes a for-
malist move that, in my opinion, results in his missing his tar-
get.
Gary Becker: He being Foucault?
Bernard Harcourt: Yes, Foucault. Foucault misses his target—
in other words, you—at that particular juncture by adopting, as
you do, a formalist view of the law. Let me explain.
By not questioning the formalist definition of the criminal
law in your work—in other words, by taking the penal code as
a given, as a limiting factor that defines the behaviors that we
are then going to subject to a social welfare analysis—you are
doing a few things. You are bracketing out some of the most
important considerations. Now, I can understand that it’s an
attempt to find a partial equilibrium; that you are bracketing
out the definition of crime to simplify the model. But it seems
28

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
to me that what you’ve done by bracketing out the definition
of crime is problematic for three reasons.17
First, you’re bracketing out the whole complexity of the
problem, the definitions of the criminal law, where all of the
morality, all of the theories of dangerousness, all of the psy-
chiatry, etc., are going to be at play. So you are trying to create
a theory that eliminates the need for psychiatry and criminol-
ogy, but you’ve almost done that by definition at the very out-
set, at the beginning of the enterprise, by bracketing off the
very definition of crime.
Second, and more importantly, you also avoid the radical
potential of your own theory. Simultaneously, you create ten-
sion between what you can then say, for instance, with regard
to drugs. There’s an internal tension in the sense that, ulti-
mately, you might want to say we should decriminalize drugs—
you do not say it in this text, but in other work…
Gary Becker: I do believe in that, yes.
Bernard Harcourt: Yes, you do believe in that, but then
there’s a tension –
Gary Becker: Not necessarily that this theory leads to that
conclusion.
Bernard Harcourt: Right. But the tension… well, wait a min-
ute. We’re taking the definition of crimes as given. If so, how
can it be that a social welfare analysis would then lead to the
elimination of a definition of crime? That is precisely the ten-
sion that I would want to push you on.
29

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
What this tension reveals is that there would have been a
far more radical theory that you could have developed in ’68,
which would have been to subject all human behavior to the
kind of calculus to which you subject only criminal behaviors
defined as such in the criminal code. Your theory could have
defined crime. It could have addressed all behaviors, whether
or not they are formally defined as crimes in the penal code,
and determined which should be criminalized. The model
would have defined as criminal any behavior that if punished—
i.e. criminally sanctioned—in the right amount and to the cor-
rect extent would maximize social welfare and minimize social
costs.
That is the theory, it seems to me, that you could have and
should have argued for in 1968: Any human behavior that can
be efficiently regulated by means of the criminal sanction—by
means of punishment properly applied—should be criminal-
ized. If you had done that, of course, all domains of economic,
social, political life would have been subjected to potential
regulation. It opens all human activity to state sanction, includ-
ing, well, anything. We can draw the list: infidelity, impolite-
ness, sexism, political protest, financial contributions to political
parties—in sum, any activity could be subjected to the kind of
analysis that you’re proposing, and we would then know what
should be criminal: that which you can efficiently regulate by
means of the criminal law and punishment. Some things we can
efficiently regulate by punishment, and some things we can’t—
but there is no way of knowing ahead of time.
When you limited the definition of crime to the formal
definition, you severely limited the potential of your model.
But worse, you injected into the theory a particular political
30

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
vision – a somewhat libertarian vision. There are certain liber-
tarian values that are lurking in the very decision to bracket the
definition of crime. The more radical model would subject all
human behavior to social welfare analysis and could potentially
expand the scope of government regulation. Instead, your
1968 model begins by taking a defined subset of human behav-
ior—behavior defined as crime by law—and then limits that
scope.
So, I think that Foucault missed an important critique by
agreeing with your decision to formally bracket the definition
of crimes. I believe that that formalist move reveals a libertarian
bias that should make one suspicious about the positivistic
nature of the model itself, and about all of the measurements
that would then have to be made. After all, your model calls for
a myriad of complicated measurements—the costs of policing
and punishing, the values of life, victimization, etc. These are
really complicated measurements. But your decision to bracket
makes me suspicious that something is biased in your approach,
biased against state intervention.
One final point on the death penalty. When you say –
Gary Becker: But I don’t want to spend a lot of time on the
death penalty. It’s not a big part of the essay.
Bernard Harcourt: No, me neither, but it’s a good illustration
of the same critique. When you say, how many lives are we sav-
ing, that calculation itself is only the tip of the iceberg. You see,
Gary Becker wouldn’t just ask, “How many lives are we sav-
ing?” Gary Becker would have to ask the next questions, which
are the much more complicated questions: “How much money
does it cost to engage in an execution? How much could an
31

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
equivalent amount of money buy in health care? How many
lives could be saved if we used that money differently?” Etc.
In other words, we don’t limit ourselves simply to the
empirical fact that an execution may deter one or more homi-
cides, assuming that it does. It is not just a question of how
many lives. It turns into the larger calculus whether the money
could be better spent saving lives in some other domain, such
as health care or education or nutrition, etc.
At which point, I think, you have to throw up your hands
and say, “I can’t say I’m in favor of the death penalty, I can’t
say I’m against the death penalty.” I’d say it’s a hugely, mas-
sively complicated calculus that involves lots of different fac-
tors—not just whether it’s one life to one life, but also how
much money are we spending for lawyers, should we be spend-
ing that money differently, etc.
I think that Gary Becker would have to say, “I don’t know
the answer to this complex question.”
Gary Becker: Yes, okay, thanks. Let me respond to these com-
ments.
This essay had a limited goal. It was not trying to say what
laws we should have, and what laws we shouldn’t have. We
have some laws, how are we going to engage in deterrence with
regard to these laws.
In my other manifestations, in my other writings, of course
I’ve written a lot about what laws we should have. I believe
there’s a lot of risk of government overregulating society with
too many laws, and that’s why I’ve always been a small govern-
ment person.
32

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
This essay has a more modest goal: it says, given the laws
that we have and the various cost that we have, what is the best
way to sort of optimize social welfare? When they say, “Well,
it’s a bad law so you should get rid of the law rather than trying
to optimize it,” and I don’t disagree with that. No one essay
can try to deal with every single problem, and I didn’t try to
do that in this essay.
Now, let me deal with a couple of the other issues that you
mention. The individual versus the sovereign: yes, this takes the
individual’s point of view. I had the feeling from my reading of
Foucault in this chapter that he liked that, as opposed to taking
the sovereign’s point of view. I don’t know if I have the exact
statement on that, but I think it wasn’t a critique that he had,
but I’ll have to find what he says.
Bernard Harcourt: It’s on the bottom of page 252 of the
English edition. Basically, what he says is: “It simply means that
economic behavior is the grid of intelligibility one will adopt on
the behavior of a new individual. It also means that the indi-
vidual becomes governmentalizable”18 in a particular way.
Gary Becker: Yes. I don’t see any critique of that. Homo eco-
nomicus is “the surface of contact between the individual and
the power exercised on him,”19 but that doesn’t mean that
every individual has no other motivations. Anyway, it is
nowhere… I don’t think you can cite, Bernard, a passage where
he says that that is a worse view than taking it from the point
of view of the sovereign, which he does say is the French
approach. So my reading of this essay—but I may be wrong on
that—is that he didn’t think it was inferior to taking the sover-
eign’s approach.
33

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
Now, “taking laws as given”: you mentioned that on sev-
eral different occasions. The same approach might be useful in
discussing what laws we should have. It may be useful. For
instance, in a cost-benefit analysis of particular types of legisla-
tion, let’s say, whether drugs should be illegal or not. We have
a benefit-cost analysis of whether drugs should be illegal: I’ve
done that, and a lot of other people have done that. One looks
at similar types of considerations: What’s the benefit of having
a law? How much effect does it have on drug use? What’s the
cost of doing it? Is it worth having this law when there are
other alternatives, for instance taxing the use of drugs? So the
same approach is an approach to law in general, I agree. He
says he doesn’t try to do that because you have to go down
other dimensions, you have to evaluate in various ways what
law is doing. You have, and you can take that benefit-cost
analysis and do that, and much evaluation of public policy,
whatever the approach, is really implicitly doing that.
Bernard Harcourt: Right. But not just laws. Behaviors, right?
We could subject any behavior to some sort of calculus to
determine whether or not the use of punishment, the state
sanction…
Gary Becker: Well, state sanction would mean: “We have a law
against this type of behavior.” That’s a state sanction. And
therefore you have to ask yourself: “Is it desirable or not to
have that law?” And then you have to do an analysis of it. I
don’t care if you take this approach or any other approach.
Bernard Harcourt: The only difference would be civil reme-
dies versus criminal penalties. So what would be criminalized
would be those behaviors for which, when you go through
34

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
your analysis, if you impose a criminal form of punishment
(rather than civil liability, compensation, etc.), it would most
efficiently bring that behavior to a level at which it minimizes
the social costs or maximize social welfare, right?
Gary Becker: Absolutely. In my essay, I do distinguish between
torts or civil law, and criminal law. And I have a definition that
people may not like, according to which criminal law applies to
activities or crimes that you cannot use a fine to deter, as
opposed to civil violation. If you can use a fine, then it’s part of
tort law or civil law. If you cannot then it becomes a crime. So,
yes, I think that distinction comes out of the analysis. You don’t
have to add it as a separate distinction.
Bernard Harcourt: But notice how radically regulatory, how
much government analysis of social welfare would be going on
if we in fact did that for any possible behavior, including being
impolite, talking too much…
Gary Becker: Well, we may have a general principle for a lot of
issues that when the effectiveness of government is so poor, we
don’t want to regulate, and that’s my view. The government
makes matters worse on many issues, rather than making them
better. Take the capital punishment issue: you say, “Well, some-
one has to adopt a certain approach and make all these calcula-
tions.” What’s the alternative? What kind of calculation would
you make?
Bernard Harcourt: Well, one approach is, as you say, to make
a huge calculation about whether using capital punishment is
an efficient use of resources.
Gary Becker: Right. What’s the alternative?
35

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
Bernard Harcourt: There are plenty of alternatives. For
instance, we could adopt a deontological principle. You could
come up with the principle that we don’t take life, among other
alternatives.
Gary Becker: But then you have to analyze that principle: “We
don’t take life because of that reason, this reason, and even
though we may be saving ten lives we’re not taking this life.”
Okay, you may want to do that, but you still have to go
through, you still have to probe behind that phrasing and make
some sense out of it. You still have to go into some kind of
analysis of this kind.
Bernard Harcourt: Well, you do not necessarily have to do a
social welfare maximizing analysis of a deontological principle,
but my point is not to argue for one versus the other.
My point was to develop an internal critique of a social
welfare maximizing approach to the death penalty. I meant to
argue that, in fact, we have got a lot of calculations to make, we
have to do far more than find out the number of lives that we
might save, because even if we could be saving five lives—even
if that were true, if those studies were true—it might still turn
out that with the amount of money it takes to execute some-
one, which is say, 2.5 million dollars because of judicial
expenses and whatnot, we could save twenty lives through
improved health care.
Gary Becker: Any approach has to do something like that.
Unless you want to avoid analysis and replace it by a phrase, like
“We don’t take lives.” That’s avoiding analysis. If you got to
provide an analysis, you have to analyze such a sentence, and
wonder: “Why do I not want to take a life? What are the con-
36

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
sequences, plus and minus?” And if you don’t want to do this,
you’re avoiding the question, not answering it.
Bernard Harcourt: Right. But I would say that from your
approach, which may be the right approach, one cannot ex ante
say one is in favor of the death penalty. That’s all.
Gary Becker: Absolutely. That’s what I said. I think …. The
paper does not even take a stand on this. I could easily be con-
vinced not to use capital punishment!
Bernard Harcourt: And similarly, all behaviors would also be
subject to that analysis.
Gary Becker: Well, there’s a lot of uncertainty about all this.
And a model sets out various concepts. Now, to implement a
model in actual policy, you have to quantify these contexts.
That’s why I said my analysis stimulated a lot of literature try-
ing to quantify these concepts. What’s the cost of doing this?
How much deterrence is there? Tremendous literature, contro-
versial literature. These are not things that are easily discovered.
I’m not saying one can just take the model and say: “Well, we
want to do this, and that.” No, it requires various judgments.
I’m willing to make a judgment, we all have to make judg-
ments, but in order to make stronger judgments we have to
make them from a foundation.
Bernard Harcourt: Alright. But when you say, “That’s why
I’ve always been a small government person,” where does that
come from? What’s the basis for that statement?20
Gary Becker: It comes from a belief that the government usu-
ally makes things worse, rather than making them better, for
the bulk of the population. It’s an analysis—it may be a wrong
37

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
analysis, but that’s the analysis. Some people may say that’s not
true, that the government is better than the private sector for
solving a lot of problems.
Bernard Harcourt: Right, but I’m just trying to figure out…
How did you come to that conclusion? Is it an evidence-based
conclusion?
Gary Becker: I think so, but not a conclusion that is a hundred
percent proven, so that somebody else couldn’t have a different
conclusion. Why do people differ on different public policy? I
think most of the differences between people on public policy
is not due to the fact that your values are different from mine,
but to the fact that we have different evaluations of the conse-
quences of different types of behaviors. So it’s a different judg-
ment about magnitudes.
When I say I’m a small government person, I am making
the judgment that whatever the imperfection when the private
sector operates, the effects are worse when I see the govern-
ment operating. Now, other people may say that the evidence
for that is not so clear, that in other sectors it is different. I
recognize that. But that is what it would be based on.
Bernard Harcourt: Okay, but just to get back to Foucault,
and to let François Ewald have the last word…
Gary Becker: Yes, François, you should say something!
Bernard Harcourt: … I have a sense that what Foucault is
arguing—and this will be for the next session because it comes
out in the third and final lecture on American neoliberalism…
38

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
Gary Becker: People say there is no good second act, now
we’re going to have a third!
Bernard Harcourt: I have a sense that what Foucault is argu-
ing is that, somehow, embedded in the theory of subjectivity
that is part of your 1968 article, and that differs from the
French perspective on sovereignty, that somehow embedded in
your notion of subjectivity is the conclusion that, in your
words, “I’m a small government person.”
Gary Becker: That does not stem necessarily from my essay by
the way. You can read my essay, believe in the essay, and say I’m
a big government person because there are tools… I mean
there are other types of readings. I guess Foucault considered
himself a socialist?
François Ewald: Socialist, no! On the Left.
Gary Becker: But well, what does Left mean? In terms of the
role of government, let’s say that Left usually means bigger
government.
François Ewald: At this time, Foucault was in search of a new
kind of governmentality. It was the research for new possibili-
ties in politics that motivated his work on governmentality.
Bernard Harcourt: In fact, what Foucault explicitly says in
these lectures is that socialism lacks a theory of governmental-
ity.21 And so, to a certain extent, what he’s doing when he’s
probing your thought is trying to explore forms of governmen-
tality, in particular the form of neoliberal governmentality.
Gary Becker: Yes, well, in probing that—I don’t know enough
about Foucault to know where he ends up—you have to make
39

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
some evaluation. Is the government going to do X or Y? I put
it in pragmatic terms because these are the issues we tend to
deal with. What should be the role of government health care
policy? That takes some analysis. I don’t care what conclusions
you come out with, whether you say government should con-
trol prices or not… You have some analysis of that problem.
And when I say that I’m a small government person, I
don’t mean that there should be no government. Government
is crucial to the functioning of any society. But for a lot of these
policies, my judgment—and the evidence is limited in many of
these areas—is that intervention just makes matters worse. And
I don’t see how you can resolve these issues… To me the cru-
cial issue is, if you want to resolve these issues, is that you have
to have some analysis, and an analysis is going to take you down
the path of considering some costs and benefits. Now, people
may have different costs and benefits, and different assess-
ments. They may put value on having freedom and people not
being coerced by the government, things like that. And mine is
just one particular form of that type of analysis.
Bernard Harcourt: So, I’m going to give the last word to
François Ewald to close this discussion. But while you think of
your last word, François, I will just say that from the perspec-
tive of an internal critique, everything you say I can buy within
the system, except making any kind of claim about being a small
government person or not. It’s just subject to a kind of com-
plicated calculus that we need to make in every case, and I
don’t know what the outcome is ahead of time.
Gary Becker: I don’t disagree. You need that calculus, and in
a lot of areas we don’t have enough evidence to make that cal-
40

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
culation with confidence. So one is making a judgment when
one says one thinks the government should be extended or
contracted; one is making a judgment in the face of very imper-
fect knowledge and information about what the outcomes will
be. It’s not a judgment based on certainty. The framework—
and I’m going to stress this—the essay I wrote on crime and
punishment could easily be used by people who think the gov-
ernment should dominate the economy. There is nothing in
there that dictates the conclusion that one should be a small
government person.
Bernard Harcourt: Well, except for the fact that you limit the
definition of crime to the penal code. You are effectively brack-
eting the space within which we are going to explore govern-
ment intervention, and then, within that limited space, you
bracket it even more by deciding what is not efficiently regu-
lated by the criminal law.
I think you would want to say—you, Gary Becker—if you
could rewrite the essay now: “The same economic analysis
applies to all behaviors. Frankly, I can’t tell you what the out-
come will be. I cannot tell you whether I’m a big or small
government person. You have to do the work!”
Gary Becker: Well, you would say this particular framework
does not lead you to any conclusion about whether you’re a big
or small government person. You would need other kinds of
evidence to determine that. But I did say something like that
elsewhere…
Bernard Harcourt: Okay, we will read that too for the next
seminar! François?
41

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
François Ewald: I think the discussion has addressed two
aspects of your analysis. The first has to do with the economic
analysis as a critique of a specific type of public policy. I think
that, in this respect, there is no problem. And yet, at the same
time, and after your work, people tried to set up new ways of
punishing, relying on the normative rather than the critical side
of your work. The side on which you try to rebuild, to conceive
a new kind of art of punishment. But both sides are embedded
in your work.
You were useful for Foucault for your critical insights. And
you gave him the idea that it may be possible to make a critique
of governmentality that is internal to a system. That is, you are
a positivist. You take a set of laws and you wonder if they are
effective, optimal. And you give us answers. For that, you build
a specific set of tools, a dispositif of economic analysis.
The main question comes with the normative dimension
of your work – it is there that you enter into competition with
other approaches. For example, a moral one, with respect to
deterrence, especially if you are Kantian. Kant says that the
main moral rule is that it is forbidden to treat a man as a means,
you always have to treat a man as an end. So then, what of
deterrence? With deterrence as a tactic of punishment, you
punish a person to protect and dissuade other persons. This
takes one as a means to another end. At this point, you enter in
the normative dimension and you are in competition with
other normative views. And you can ask the question again
about the effectiveness of these other dimensions. Indeed. But
that is not the only way to compare them.
42

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
My second remark is that our problem, the main problem
about punishment, what is it? It is not the evil of men, but a
lack of information. You can only observe crime after it has
been committed. And I think the difficulty with punishment, if
it is given the role of deterring future crime, is that this tool, to
use punishment to do this, is immensely difficult. The dream—
or the horror—would be the capacity to prevent the crime
before it happens. We are faced with a lack of information. This
last observation brings out a major difficulty because it would
imply that to build an effective punishment policy, we have to
know everything. And that is, for you, impossible.
Bernard Harcourt: Thank you François. Thank you Gary.
NOTES
1 This is an edited transcript of a conversation held at The University of
Chicago on May 15, 2013, in Foster Hall 505, the seminar room of the
Committee on Social Thought. The video recording of the open seminar
can be viewed on-line at http://vimeo.com/68074285. It represents a
continuation of a conversation begun the year before, titled “Becker on
Ewald on Foucault on Becker”: American Neoliberalism & Michel
Foucault’s 1979 Birth of Biopolitics Lectures. That first session can be
viewed on-line as well at h ttp://vimeo.com/43984248, and the tran-
script of that first session can be read here http://www.thecarceral.org/
cn7_Becker_Ewald_Conversation.pdf. Professors Gary Becker and
François Ewald have individually reviewed their portions of the conversa-
tion; Professor Bernard Harcourt has edited and annotated the text. We
are extremely grateful to Eléonore Rimbault for transcribing the conver-
sation.
2 Michel Foucault, The Birth of Biopolitics: Lectures at the Collège de France,
1978-79, ed. Michel Senellart, English series ed. Arnold I. Davidson,
trans. Graham Burchell (Palgrave Macmillan 2008), pp. 215-239;
43

"Becker and Foucault on Crime and Punishment"
Foucault, Naissance de la biopolitique. Cours au Collège de France. 1978-
1979. Ed. Michel Senellart (Gallimard/Le Seuil 2004).
3 Gary S. Becker, “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” The
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 76, No. 2. (Mar. - Apr., 1968), pp.
169-217. A sample of Professor Gary Becker’s other publications include:
Gary S. Becker, Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis,
with Special Reference to Education (University of Chicago Press 1964);
The Economics of Discrimination (University of Chicago Press 1971); A
Treatise on the Family (Harvard University Press 1991); and Accounting
for Tastes (Harvard University Press 1996).
4 Foucault, The Birth of Biopolitics, pp. 239-265; Foucault, Naissance de la
biopolitique, pp. 245-270.
5 Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans.
Alan Sheridan (Pantheon Books 1978 [1975]); cf. also Michel Foucault,
La Société punitive. Cours au Collège de France. 1972-1973. Ed. Bernard
E. Harcourt (Gallimard/Le Seuil forthcoming 2013).
6 Richard Posner, Frontiers of Legal Theory, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2001, p. 34.
7 Ibid.
8 Professor François Ewald’s publications include, in English: François
Ewald, “Omnes et singulatim. After Risk,” Carceral Notebooks 7, pp.
77-107 (2011); François Ewald, “The Return of Descartes’s Malicious
Demon: An Outline of a Philosophy of Precaution,” in Tom Baker and
Jonathan Simon, eds., Embracing Risk (University of Chicago Press
2002); and François Ewald, “Insurance and Risk,” in Graham Burchell,
Colin Gordon & Peter Miller, eds, The Foucault Effect: Studies in
Governmentality (University of Chicago Press 1991); and in French:
François Ewald, L’État providence (Grasset 1986); and François Ewald,
Christian Gollier, and Nicolas de Sadeleer, Le principe de précaution (PUF
2001).
9 E-mail correspondence from Gary Becker to Bernard Harcourt dated
May 13, 2013 (on file).
10 Foucault, Naissance de la biopolitique, p. 252; Foucault, Birth of
Biopolitics, p. 246.
44

Gary Becker, François Ewald, and Bernard Harcourt
11 On truth-telling, see generally, Michel Foucault, Wrong-Doing, Truth-
Telling: The Function of Avowal in Justice, eds. Fabienne Brion and
Bernard E. Harcourt (University of Chicago Press, forthcoming).
12 Gary S. Becker and Richard A. Posner, Uncommon Sense: Economic
Insights, from Marriage to Terrorism, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2009, pp. 253-258.
13 Becker and Posner, Uncommon Sense, pp. 253-258.
14 Foucault, Birth of Biopolitics, p. 251; Foucault, Naissance de la biopoli-
tique, p. 256.
15 Ibid., p. 270; French edition, p. 274.
16 Ibid., p. 282; French edition, p. 286.
17 See also Bernard E. Harcourt, The Illusion of Free Markets: Punishment
and the Myth of Natural Order (Harvard University Press, 2011), pp.
127-128 and 133-136.
18 Foucault, Birth of Biopolitics, p. 252; Foucault, Naissance de la biopoli-
tique, p. 258.
19 Ibid., pp. 252-253; French edition, p. 258
20 Cf. Harcourt, The Illusion of Free Markets, p. 40.
21 Fouca ult, Naissance de la biopolitique, p. 93 ; Foucault, Birth of Biopolitics,
p. 92-94.
45