






￼
Menu
	•	Home
	•	Featured Decisions
	•	Latest Decisions
	•	Browse Decisions
	•	Advanced Search
￼ ￼ ￼
Sign in
	1	Home
	2	Browse Decisions
	3	N.Y.2d
	4	73 N.Y.2d
	5	73 N.Y.2d 487 (1989)
 
HYMOWITZ v. LILLY & CO.


	•	View Case
73 N.Y.2d 487 (1989)
Mindy Hymowitz, Respondent, v. Eli Lilly and Company et al., Appellants, et al., Defendants. Attorney-General of the State of New York, Intervenor-Respondent. Elizabeth Tigue et al., Respondents, v. E. R. Squibb & Sons, Inc., et al., Appellants, et al., Defendants. Jane Dolan et al., Respondents, v. Eli Lilly and Company et al., Appellants. (And Other Actions.) Barbara Hanfling et al., Respondents, v. Eli Lilly and Company et al., Appellants, et al., Defendants.
Court of Appeals of the State of New York.https://leagle.com/images/logo.png
Argued February 15, 1989.
Decided April 4, 1989.

Attorney(s) appearing for the Case
Russel H. Beatie, Jr., Sanford N. Berland and Susan A. Winston for Eli Lilly and Company, appellant in the first above-entitled action.
Karl E. Seib, Jr., and Robert D. Wilson, Jr., for Abbott Laboratories, appellant in the first above-entitled action.
Robert M. Dato, David J. Fleming, Barry M. Epstein and Lindsay H. Lew for E. R. Squibb & Sons, Inc., appellant in the first above-entitled action.
Robin J. Stout, Jay P. Mayesh and William A. Rome for The Upjohn Company, appellant in the first above-entitled action.
Paul D. Rheingold for respondent in the first above-entitled action.
Robert Abrams, Attorney-General (Andrea Green and O. Peter Sherwood of counsel), intervenor-respondent pro se in the first above-entitled action.
Herbert Semmel for New York Public Interest Research Group, Inc., and others, amici curiae, in the first above-entitled action.
Alexander C. Cordes, Paul K. Stecker, Marc S. Klein, Lindsay H. Lew, David J. Fleming and Robert M. Dato for E. R. Squibb & Sons, Inc., appellant in the second above-entitled action.
John L. McGoldrick, Karl E. Seib, Jr., Theodore V. H. Mayer, John F. Brenner and Charles S. Lozow for Abbott Laboratories and others, appellants in the second above-entitled action.
A. Edward Grashof, Thomas F. Clauss, Jr., Sheila Moeller Fessler and Paul A. Scrudato for Rexall Drug Company, appellant in the second above-entitled action.
Jay P. Mayesh, Burton N. Lipshie, Robin J. Stout and William A. Rome for The Upjohn Company, appellant in the second above-entitled action.
Charles M. McCaghey and William K. Dodds for Boyle & Co., appellant in the second above-entitled action.
Paul D. Rheingold for respondents in the second above-entitled action.
Sharon E. Jaffe, Joseph A. DiBenedetto and Lisa A. Schoolman for Rorer Pharmaceutical Corporation, appellant in the third above-entitled action.
Alexander C. Cordes, Paul K. Stecker, Barry M. Epstein, Marc S. Klein, Lindsay H. Lew, David J. Fleming and Robert M. Dato for E. R. Squibb & Sons, Inc., appellant in the third above-entitled action, relying upon its briefs in Hymowitz and Tigue.
Jay P. Mayesh, Burton N. Lipshie, Robin J. Stout, Carole W. Nimaroff and William A. Rome for The Upjohn Company, appellant in the third above-entitled action.
Russell H. Beatie, Jr., Sanford N. Berland and Susan A. Winston for Eli Lilly & Company, appellant in the third above-entitled action.
William D. Fireman and Alfred S. Julien for Jane Dolan and others, respondents in the third above-entitled action.
Sybil Shainwald, Howard Eison and Perry S. Reich for Erin Murphy and another, respondents in the third above-entitled action.
W. Burlette Carter, Theodore V. H. Mayer and Charles Lozow for Merck & Co., Inc., appellant in the fourth above-entitled action.
Russel H. Beatie, Jr., Kenneth J. King and Charna L. Gerstenhaber for Eli Lilly and Company, appellant in the fourth above-entitled action.
Karl E. Seib, Jr., and Robert D. Wilson, Jr., for Abbott Laboratories, appellant in the fourth above-entitled action.
Robin J. Stout, James T. Conlon, David M. Covey and Ann L. Wilson for The Upjohn Company, appellant in the fourth above-entitled action.
Herald Price Fahringer, Arthur M. Luxenberg, Morris J. Eisen and Perry Weitz for respondents in the fourth above-entitled action.
Judges ALEXANDER, TITONE and HANCOCK, JR., concur with Chief Judge WACHTLER; Judge MOLLEN dissents in part and votes to modify in a separate opinion; Judges SIMONS, KAYE and BELLACOSA taking no part.

Court of Appeals of the State of New York.
Chief Judge WACHTLER.
Plaintiffs in these appeals allege that they were injured by the drug diethylstilbestrol (DES) ingested by their mothers during pregnancy. They seek relief against defendant DES manufacturers. While not class actions, these cases are representative of nearly 500 similar actions pending in the courts in this State; the rules articulated by the court here, therefore, must do justice and be...

	1	
	2	
	3	
Let's get started
￼
Welcome to the leading source of independent legal reporting  Sign on now to see your case.  Or view more than 10 million decisions and orders.
	•	Updated daily.
	•	Uncompromising quality.
	•	Complete, Accurate, Current.
Subscribe Now!




Listed below are the cases that are cited in this Featured Case. Click the citation to see the full text of the cited case. Citations are also linked in the body of the Featured Case.
Cited Cases
	•	No Cases Found
Listed below are those cases in which this Featured Case is cited. Click on the case name to see the full text of the citing case.
Citing Cases
	•	

 
Copyright © 2026, Leagle, Inc.
	•	Disclaimer
	•	Terms of Use
	•	Privacy Statement
	•	Corporate Social Responsibility
	•	About Us
	•	Contact Us
