Copyright 2021. Aspen Publishing.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN
AN: 2750409 ; Richard K. Neumann Jr, Ellie Margolis, Kathryn M. Stanchi.; Legal Reasoning and Legal Writing
Account: s2953473.main.ehost

1

i

LEGAL REASONING
AND LEGAL WRITING

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

2

ii

EDITORIAL ADVISORS
Rachel E. Barkow
Segal Family Professor of Regulatory Law and Policy
Faculty Director, Center on the Administration of Criminal Law
New York University School of Law
Erwin Chemerinsky
Dean and Jesse H. Choper Distinguished Professor of Law
University of California, Berkeley School of Law
Richard A. Epstein
Laurence A. Tisch Professor of Law
New York University School of Law
Peter and Kirsten Bedford Senior Fellow
The Hoover Institution
Senior Lecturer in Law
The University of Chicago
Ronald J. Gilson
Charles J. Meyers Professor of Law and Business
Stanford University
Marc and Eva Stern Professor of Law and Business
Columbia Law School
James E. Krier
Earl Warren DeLano Professor of Law Emeritus
The University of Michigan Law School
Tracey L. Meares
Walton Hale Hamilton Professor of Law
Director, The Justice Collaboratory
Yale Law School
Richard K. Neumann, Jr.
Alexander Bickel Professor of Law
Maurice A. Deane School of Law at Hofstra University
Robert H. Sitkoff
John L. Gray Professor of Law
Harvard Law School
David Alan Sklansky
Stanley Morrison Professor of Law
Faculty Co-Director, Stanford Criminal Justice Center
Stanford Law School

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

3

iii

ASPEN COURSEBOOK SERIES

LEGAL REASONING
AND LEGAL WRITING
NINTH EDITION
RICHARD K. NEUMANN
Professor of Law
Maurice A. Deane School of Law
at Hofstra University

ELLIE MARGOLIS
Professor of Law
Temple University Beasley
School of Law

KATHRYN M. STANCHI
E.L. Cord Professor of Law
University of Nevada, Las Vegas
William S. Boyd School of Law

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

4

iv

Copyright © 2021 Richard K. Neumann, Jr., Ellie Margolis, and Kathryn M. Stanchi.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopy, recording, or utilized by any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission
from the publisher. For information about permissions or to request permissions online, visit us at www
.AspenPublishing.com.

Cover image: Shutterstock/Rawpixel.com
To contact Customer Service, e-mail customer.service@aspenpublishing.com, call 1-800-950-5259, or mail
correspondence to:
Aspen Publishing
Attn: Order Department
PO Box 990
Frederick, MD 21705
Printed in the United States of America.
1234567890
ISBN 978-1-5438-1085-1
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Neumann, Richard K., 1947- author. | Margolis, Ellie, author. | Stanchi, Kathryn M., author.
Title: Legal reasoning and legal writing / Richard K. Neumann (Professor of Law, Maurice A. Deane School of Law at
Hofstra University), Ellie Margolis (Professor of Law, Temple University Beasley School of Law), Kathryn M.
Stanchi (E.L. Cord Professor of Law, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, William S. Boyd School of Law).
Description: Ninth edition. | Frederick, MD: Aspen Publishing, [2021] | Series: Aspen coursebook series | Includes
bibliographical references and index. | Summary: “This is an introductory text on legal writing and
reasoning”—Provided by publisher.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020053840 (print) | LCCN 2020053841 (ebook) | ISBN 9781543810851 (paperback) | ISBN
9781543831191 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Legal composition. | Law—United States—Methodology. | Trial practice—United States. | Practice of
law—United States. | Law—United States—Language.
Classification: LCC KF250 .N48 2021 (print) | LCC KF250 (ebook) | DDC 808.06/634—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020053840
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020053841

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

5

v

About Aspen Publishing
Aspen Publishing is a leading provider of educational content and digital learning solutions to law schools in
the U.S. and around the world. Aspen provides best-in-class solutions for legal education through
authoritative textbooks, written by renowned authors, and breakthrough products such as Connected eBooks,
Connected Quizzing, and PracticePerfect.
The Aspen Casebook Series (famously known among law faculty and students as the “red and black”
casebooks) encompasses hundreds of highly regarded textbooks in more than eighty disciplines, from large
enrollment courses, such as Torts and Contracts to emerging electives such as Sustainability and the Law of
Policing. Study aids such as the Examples & Explanations and the Emanuel Law Outlines series, both highly
popular collections, help law students master complex subject matter.
Major products, programs, and initiatives include:
• Connected eBooks are enhanced digital textbooks and study aids that come with a suite of online content
and learning tools designed to maximize student success. Designed in collaboration with hundreds of
faculty and students, the Connected eBook is a significant leap forward in the legal education learning
tools available to students.
• Connected Quizzing is an easy-to-use formative assessment tool that tests law students’ understanding
and provides timely feedback to improve learning outcomes. Delivered through CasebookConnect.com,
the learning platform already used by students to access their Aspen casebooks, Connected Quizzing is
simple to implement and integrates seamlessly with law school course curricula.
• PracticePerfect is a visually engaging, interactive study aid to explain commonly encountered legal
doctrines through easy-to-understand animated videos, illustrative examples, and numerous practice
questions. Developed by a team of experts, PracticePerfect is the ideal study companion for today’s law
students.
• The Aspen Learning Library enables law schools to provide their students with access to the most
popular study aids on the market across all of their courses. Available through an annual subscription, the
online library consists of study aids in e-book, audio, and video formats with full text search, note-taking,
and highlighting capabilities.
• Aspen’s Digital Bookshelf is an institutional-level online education bookshelf, consolidating everything
students and professors need to ensure success. This program ensures that every student has access to
affordable course materials from day one.
• Leading Edge is a community centered on thinking differently about legal education and putting those
thoughts into actionable strategies. At the core of the program is the Leading Edge Conference, an annual
gathering of legal education thought leaders looking to pool ideas and identify promising directions of
exploration.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

6

vii

For
Marjorie Batter Neumann
and in memory of Richard K. Neumann Sr.
— RKN Jr.
Adam, Isaac, and Naomi Guth
— EM
In memory of Jeanette M. Stanchi and
Edward J. Stanchi, Jr.
— KMS

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

7

ix

The power of clear statement is the great power at the bar.
— Daniel Webster
(also attributed to Rufus Choate,
Judah P. Benjamin, and perhaps others)

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

8

xi

Summary of Contents
Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
PART I INTRODUCTION TO LAW
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3

Legal Writing and Law
Rule-Based Reasoning
Issues, Facts, Precedents, and Statutes
PART II INTRODUCTION TO LEGAL WRITING

Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6

Predictive Writing
Inside the Writing Process
More About Writing
PART III GENERAL ANALYTICAL SKILLS

Chapter 7
Chapter 8
Chapter 9
Chapter 10

Selecting Authority
Working with Statutes
Working with Precedent
Working with Facts
PART IV ORGANIZING PROOF OF A CONCLUSION OF LAW

Chapter 11
Chapter 12

A Paradigm for Organizing Proof of a Conclusion of Law
Varying the Depth of Rule Proof and Rule Application

xii
Chapter 13
Chapter 14

Combining Proofs of Separate Conclusions of Law
Working with the Paradigm
PART V PREDICTIVE ANALYSIS DOCUMENTS

Chapter 15
Chapter 16
Chapter 17
Chapter 18
Chapter 19

Interviewing the Client
Office Memoranda
Email Communication
Oral Presentations to Your Supervising Lawyer
Client Advice Letters

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

9

PART VI GENERAL WRITING SKILLS
Chapter 20
Chapter 21
Chapter 22

Paragraphing
Effective Style
Quotations
PART VII THE SHIFT TO PERSUASION

Chapter 23
Chapter 24
Chapter 25
Chapter 26
Chapter 27
Chapter 28
Chapter 29
Chapter 30
Chapter 31

Introduction to Motions and Appeals
Developing a Persuasive Theory of the Case
Telling Your Client’s Story in a Statement of the Case (or Facts)
Developing Persuasive Arguments
Handling the Procedural Posture
Motion Memoranda
Appellate Practice
Point Headings and Subheadings
Questions Presented
PART VIII INTO THE COURTROOM

Chapter 32

Oral Argument
APPENDICES

Appendix A Statute Analysis Exercises
Appendix B Precedent Analysis Exercise
Appendix C Sample Office Memorandum
Appendix D Sample Email Memo
Appendix E Sample Client Advice Letter

xiii
Appendix F Sample Motion Memorandum
Appendix G Excerpts from Appellant’s Fourth Circuit Brief in G.G. v. Gloucester County School Bd. (2016)
Appendix H Excerpts from Appellee’s Fourth Circuit Brief in G.G. v. Gloucester County School Bd. (2016)

Index

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

10

xv

Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments

I
INTRODUCTION TO LAW

1. Legal Writing and Law
§1.1
§1.2
§1.3
§1.4
§1.5

Legal Writing Is Decisional Writing
Writing Skills Can Profoundly Affect a Lawyer’s Career
Where Law Comes From
The Common Law
Law’s Vocabulary

2. Rule-Based Reasoning
§2.1 The Inner Structure of a Rule
§2.2 Organizing the Application of a Rule
§2.3 Some Things to Be Careful About with Rules
§2.4 Causes of Action and Affirmative Defenses
Exercise
Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure

xvi

3. Issues, Facts, Precedents, and Statutes
§3.1 A Precedent’s Anatomy
Exercise I Dissecting the Text of Roberson v. Rochester Folding Box Co.
§3.2 The Interdependence of Facts, Issues, and Rules
Exercise II Analyzing the Meaning of Roberson v. Rochester Folding Box Co.
§3.3 The Anatomy of a Statute

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

11

Exercise III Analyzing the Meaning of §§ 50 and 51 of the New York Civil Rights Law
§3.4 How Statutes and the Common Law Interact

II
INTRODUCTION TO LEGAL WRITING

4. Predictive Writing
§4.1 How Predictive Writing Differs from Persuasive Writing
§4.2 The Documents Lawyers Write
§4.3 How to Predict
Exercises
Nansen and Byrd

5. Inside the Writing Process
§5.1
§5.2
§5.3
§5.4
§5.5
§5.6
§5.7
§5.8

Product and Process
Five Phases of Writing
Planning the Work
Researching and Analyzing
Organizing Raw Materials into an Outline
Producing a First Draft
Rewriting
Polishing

6. More About Writing
§6.1
§6.2
§6.3
§6.4
§6.5
§6.6

Writing and Thinking Are One Process
Your Readers
Voice
Overcoming Writer’s Block
Plagiarism
Professional Tone

xvii
§6.7
§6.8

For All Writers — Even the Famous Ones — Writing Is Very Hard Work
Don’t Imitate Older Judicial Writing, Even If You Find It in Casebooks

III
GENERAL ANALYTICAL SKILLS

7. Selecting Authority
§7.1
§7.2

Why Authority Matters
How Courts Are Organized
§7.2.1 State Courts
§7.2.2 Federal Courts

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

12

§7.3

Sources of Law
§7.3.1 Primary Authority
§7.3.2 Secondary Sources
§7.4 The Hierarchy of Authority
§7.5 How to Use Nonmandatory Precedent and Secondary Sources to Fill a Gap in Local Law
§7.5.1 Laying the Foundation
§7.5.2 Filling the Gap
§7.6 How Courts Use Dicta
§7.7 Nonprecedential Opinions
Exercise
The Hierarchy of Authority

8. Working with Statutes
§8.1 Five Tools of Statutory Interpretation
§8.2 The Statute’s Words
§8.3 The Statute’s Context
§8.4 Canons of Statutory Construction
§8.5 Interpretations from Nonmandatory Authority
§8.6 Legislative History
§8.7 An Example of Statutory Interpretation at Work
§8.8 How to Present Statutory Analysis in Writing
Exercise I Plagiarism and the Board of Bar Examiners
Exercise II The Ironwood Tract

xviii

9. Working with Precedent
§9.1
§9.2
§9.3
§9.4
§9.5
§9.6

Eight Tools for Working with Precedent
Synthesis
Determining Policy from Precedent
Analogizing and Distinguishing
Testing for Realism
An Example of the Precedent Skills at Work
§9.6.1 The Client’s Story
§9.6.2 Four Precedents
§9.6.3 Using the Precedent Analysis Tools
Exercise I Duress
Exercise II Emil Risberg’s Diary

10. Working with Facts
§10.1 What Is a Fact?
§10.2 Identifying Determinative Facts
§10.3 Building Inferences from Facts
§10.4 Identifying Hidden and Unsupportable Factual Assumptions
Exercise
The Menu at the Courthouse Cafe

IV
ORGANIZING PROOF OF A CONCLUSION OF LAW

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

13

11. A Paradigm for Organizing Proof of a Conclusion of Law
§11.1
§11.2
§11.3
§11.4

Why We Need to Organize Proof of a Conclusion of Law
A Paradigm for Structuring Proof
Why Readers Prefer This Type of Organization
Varying the Paradigm Formula to Suit Your Needs
§11.4.1 Varying the Sequence
§11.4.2 Varying the Depth
§11.4.3 Combining Separately Structured Analyses
Exercise
Changing Planes in Little Rock

xix

12. Varying the Depth of Rule Proof and Rule Application
§12.1 Introduction
§12.2 Conclusory Explanations
§12.3 Substantiating Explanations
§12.4 Comprehensive Explanations
§12.5 Cryptic Explanations
Exercise
Punitive Damages and Bedbugs

13. Combining Proofs of Separate Conclusions of Law
§13.1
§13.2
§13.3
§13.4
§13.5
§13.6

Introduction
How to Organize Where More Than One Element Is at Issue
How to Organize Where More Than One Claim or Defense Is at Issue
How to Organize Alternative Ways of Proving a Single Conclusion
How to Organize When You’re Writing About Separate but Related Issues
How to Start Working with Multi-Issue Situations

14. Working with the Paradigm
§14.1 Using the Paradigm Formula to Outline and to Begin Your First Draft
§14.2 Rewriting: How to Test Your Writing for Effective Organization
Exercise
Teddy Washburn’s Gun

V
PREDICTIVE ANALYSIS DOCUMENTS
15. Interviewing the Client
§15.1
§15.2

Clients and Lawyers
The Interview
§15.2.1 Learning What the Client Knows
§15.2.2 Questions
§15.2.3 Listening and Talking
§15.2.4 How to Conclude

xx

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

14

16. Office Memoranda
§16.1
§16.2
§16.3

Office Memorandum Format
Writing an Office Memo
How to Test Your Writing for Predictiveness

17. Email Communication
§17.1

§17.2
§17.3
§17.4
§17.5

Professional Tone and Appearance
§17.1.1 Keeping It Professional
§17.1.2 Writing the Email
§17.1.3 Making the Email Easy to Read
Email and Confidentiality Problems
Email Pitfalls
Communicating Legal Analysis in an Email Memo
How to Test Your Emails for Professional Effectiveness

18. Oral Presentations to Your Supervising Lawyer
§18.1

§18.2
§18.3
§18.4
§18.5

Preparing
§18.1.1 Getting the Assignment
§18.1.2 Researching
§18.1.3 Writing Out Your Analysis
§18.1.4 Whittling Down the Analysis to the Initial Summary
Questions from Your Supervisor During the Meeting
Typical Questions
The Most Essential Points
Mistakes to Avoid

19. Client Advice Letters
§19.1
§19.2
§19.3

Advice in Writing
Style and Tone in a Client Advice Letter
How to Organize a Client Advice Letter

VI
GENERAL WRITING SKILLS
20. Paragraphing
§20.1

How Paragraphing Reveals Your Organization

xxi
§20.2 Probative Paragraphs and Descriptive Paragraphs
§20.3 Thesis Sentences, Topic Sentences, and Transition Sentences
§20.4 The Two Most Common Ways of Botching a Paragraph’s Beginning
§20.5 How to Test Your Writing for Effective Paragraphing
Exercise I The First Weeks of Law School (Probative and Descriptive Paragraphs)
Exercise II Escape from Prison (Paragraph Unity, Coherence, and Length)

21. Effective Style
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

15

§21.1 Clarity and Vividness
§21.2 Conciseness
§21.3 Forcefulness
§21.4 Punctuation and Other Rules of Grammar
§21.5 How to Test Your Writing for Effective Style
Exercise
Kalmar’s Driveway

22. Quotations
§22.1 Quotation Format
§22.2 How to Test Your Writing for Effective Use of Quotations
Exercise
The First Amendment

VII
THE SHIFT TO PERSUASION
23. Introduction to Motions and Appeals
§23.1
§23.2
§23.3

Introduction to Persuasion Through Motions and Appeals
§23.1.1 What Happens During a Motion
§23.1.2 What Happens During an Appeal
The Roles of the Brief and of Oral Argument
How Judges Read Briefs

24. Developing a Persuasive Theory of the Case
§24.1
§24.2
§24.3

Strategic Thinking
Theories: Of the Case, of the Motion, of the Appeal
Developing a Theory: Be Open to Possibility

xxii
§24.4 Developing a Theory: Process
§24.5 How to Evaluate Your Theory
Exercise
Escape from Prison? (Developing a Theory)

25. Telling Your Client’s Story in a Statement of the Case (or Facts)
§25.1 The Basics
§25.2 The Basic Tools of Persuasive Storytelling
§25.3 The Opening
§25.4 Tips for Effective Storytelling
§25.5 Dealing with Bad Facts
§25.6 The Procedural History
§25.7 How to Evaluate Your Statement of Facts
§25.8 Story Ethics
Exercise I
Exercise II Escape from Prison? (Rewriting Fact Statements)

26. Developing Persuasive Arguments

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

16

§26.1
§26.2
§26.3

§26.4
§26.5
§26.6

What Is an Argument?
What Judges Expect from Written Argumentation
Types of Legal Arguments
§26.3.1 Motivating and Justifying Arguments
§26.3.2 Policy Arguments
§26.3.3 Brainstorming Arguments
§26.3.4 Selecting and Organizing Your Arguments
§26.3.5 Stating Rules Clearly and Persuasively (Rule and Rule Proof)
§26.3.6 Working Carefully with the Facts (Fact Application)
How to Handle Adverse Authority and Arguments
Argumentation Ethics
Evaluating Your Arguments

27. Handling the Procedural Posture
§27.1
§27.2

§27.3
§27.4

Why Procedural Postures Matter
Types of Procedural Postures
§27.2.1 Motions Challenging the Quality of a Party’s Allegations
§27.2.2 Motions Challenging Other Aspects of the Way in Which the Litigation Began
§27.2.3 Motions Challenging the Quality of a Party’s Evidence
§27.2.4 Miscellaneous Case Management Motions
§27.2.5 Appeal
Writing in a Procedural Posture
Researching to Account for Your Case’s Procedural Posture

xxiii

28. Motion Memoranda
§28.1
§28.2

Motion Memorandum Format
Writing a Motion Memorandum

29. Appellate Practice
§29.1
§29.2
§29.3
§29.4

Appellate Brief Format
Writing the Appellate Brief
§29.2.1 Developing a Theory of the Appeal
§29.2.2 The Process of Writing a Brief
Handling the Standard of Review and the Procedural Posture Below
Limitations on Appellate Review

30. Point Headings and Subheadings
§30.1
§30.2
§30.3
§30.4
§30.5

How Points and Headings Work
The Basics
The Process of Creating Point Headings: Brainstorming Arguments
The Importance of Facts
How to Evaluate Your Headings for Effectiveness

31. Questions Presented
§31.1 Introduction
§31.2 Four Ways of Structuring a Question Presented
§31.3 Writing an Effective Question Presented
§31.4 How to Evaluate Your Questions Presented for Persuasiveness
Exercise
G.G. v. Gloucester County School Board
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

17

VIII
INTO THE COURTROOM
32. Oral Argument
§32.1
§32.2
§32.3
§32.4
§32.5
§32.6
§32.7

Your Three Goals at Oral Argument
Structure of an Oral Argument
Questions from the Bench
Delivery, Affect, and Style
Formalities and Customs of the Courtroom
Preparation for Oral Argument
State v. Dobbs and Zachrisson: An Oral Argument Dissected

xxiv

APPENDICES
A.

Statute Analysis Exercises

B.

Precedent Analysis Exercise

C.

Sample Office Memorandum

D.

Sample Email Memo

E.

Sample Client Advice Letter

F.

Sample Motion Memorandum

G.

Excerpts from Appellant’s Fourth Circuit Brief in G.G. v. Gloucester County
School Bd. (2016)

H.

Excerpts from Appellee’s Fourth Circuit Brief in G.G. v. Gloucester County
School Bd. (2016)

Index

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

18

xxv

Preface
We created this book to help students learn how to make professional writing decisions — to think
simultaneously as lawyers and writers. As we say on page 1, a lawyer’s life is a writer’s life.
Richard K. Neumann, Jr.
Ellie Margolis
Kathryn M. Stanchi
December 2020

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

19

xxvii

Acknowledgments
We’re grateful to many people who generously contributed their thoughts to various editions of this book,
among them Burt Agata, Lisa Aisner, Jamie Abrams, Aaron Balasny, Kathleen Beckett, Sara Bennett,
Barbara Blumenfeld, Sonya Bonneau, Ben Bratman, Ralph Brill, Susan Brody, Susan Bryant, Juli
Campagna, Kenneth Chestek, J. Scott Colesanti, Leona Cunningham, Deborah Ezbitski, Neal Feigenson,
Judith Fischer, Eric Freedman, Ian Gallacher, William Ginsburg, Marc Grinker, Donna Hill, Sam Jacobson,
Derek Kiernan-Johnson, Lawrence Kessler, Martha Krisel, Eric Lane, Jan Levine, Noah Messing, Karin
Mika, Alex Neumann, Lillianna Neumann, Stuart Rabinowitz, Terry Seligman, Amy Rima Sirota, Sloan,
Judith Stinson, Amy Stein, Mary Rose Strubbe, David Thomson, Grace Tonner, Marshall Tracht, Ursula
Weigold, Grace Wigal, Mark Wojcik, Cliff Zimmerman, and particularly Lyn Entrikin and Little, Brown and
Aspen’s anonymous reviewers.
And we’re grateful for research assistance by Elizabeth L. Driscoll, Stevie Tran, Heather Canning,
Samantha Hynes, Vicky Ku, Fusae Nara, Karen Nielsen, Rachael Ringer, and Carolyn Weissbach.
We’d like to recognize the lawyers at the American Civil Liberties Union and the Richmond law firm of
Harman, Claytor, Corrigan & Wellman. Excerpts of their briefs appear in Appendices G and H. We would
also like to thank Dr. Alison Slaughter, currently a 4L at Temple University Beasley School of Law, for
giving us permission to use her motion brief in Appendix F and to Professor Susan DeJarnatt for sending us
Dr. Slaughter’s brief.
Richard Heuser, Carol McGeehan, Dana Wilson, Richard Audet, Nick Niemeyer, Cate Rickard, Lisa
Wehrle, and their colleagues at Aspen and earlier at Little, Brown have had much insight into the qualities
that make a text useful. Their perceptiveness and skill caused this book to become a different and far better
text than it otherwise would have been.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

20

xxix

LEGAL REASONING
AND LEGAL WRITING

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

21

1

I
INTRODUCTION TO LAW

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

22

3

1

Legal Writing and Law

§1.1 Legal Writing Is Decisional Writing
Before law school, you probably wrote primarily to communicate information that would satisfy the
reader’s curiosity. Lawyers write for a different reason — to guide decision-making.
A junior lawyer in a law firm might write an office memorandum to a senior lawyer explaining how the
law affects a decision the senior lawyer must make. The memorandum’s purpose is to help the senior lawyer
make that decision. This is called objective or predictive writing.
In a courthouse, a lawyer might submit a motion memorandum or an appellate brief to persuade a judge or
several judges to decide in favor of the lawyer’s client. The document’s purpose is to persuade each judge
that the client’s position is the legally preferrable one. This is called persuasive writing.
A lawyer’s job is to get good results for clients. A lawyer does that by making the right decisions herself
and by helping or persuading other people to make the right decisions. In legal writing, your reader — your
audience — reads for the purpose of deciding.

§1.2 Writing Skills Can Profoundly Affect a Lawyer’s Career
A lawyer’s life is a writer’s life.
To a lawyer, words are professional tools. Everything depends on how well the lawyer uses words —
speaking them, interpreting them, and writing them.
4
Law is “one of the principal literary professions” because “the average lawyer in the course of a lifetime
does more writing than a novelist.”1
Good writing skills are essential to a young lawyer looking for a job. Employers will use your writing
sample to confirm that you have those skills. A person who supervised 400 lawyers at a major corporation
put it this way: “You are more likely to get good grades in law school if you write well. You are more likely
to become a partner in your law firm, or receive comparable promotions in your law department or
government law office.”2 It really is true that “good writing pays well and bad writing pays badly.”3 Now is
the time to learn how to write professionally.

§1.3 Where Law Comes From
Law is primarily rules, which Chapters 2 and 3 explain in detail. Asking where law comes from is the
same as asking who makes the rules.
Sources of law can be divided into two categories: one is statutes and statute-like provisions; the other is
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

23

judge-made law.
Statutes and statute-like provisions. Legislatures create rules by enacting statutes. When we say, “There
ought to be a law punishing people who text-message while driving,” we vaguely imagine telling our state
representative about the dangers of distraction behind the wheel and suggesting that she introduce a bill
along these lines and persuade her colleagues in the legislature to enact it into law. If the legislature does
that, and if the governor approves, the result is a statute. At the federal level, statutes are enacted by
Congress. In the first-year of law school, the most statutory courses are Criminal Law (the Model Penal
Code) and Contracts (the Uniform Commercial Code).
Statute-like provisions include constitutions, administrative regulations, and court rules. They are not
enacted by legislatures, but in some — though not all — ways they are drafted like statutes. In your course
on Constitutional Law, you will study the federal constitution. And in your course on Civil Procedure, you
will study court rules called the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
Judge-made law. Courts record their decisions in judicial opinions, which establish precedents. Under the
doctrine of stare decisis, those precedents can bind other courts in circumstances explained in Chapter 7.
Lawyers
5
use the words cases, decisions, and opinions interchangeably to refer to those precedents. Finding them is
called researching the case law.
Courts make law in two ways. One is by interpreting statutes and statute-like provisions, which can be
vague or ambiguous. Often we don’t know what a statute means until the courts tell us through the judicial
decisions that enforce it. When a court interprets the statute, it essentially finishes the legislature’s job. The
other method is by creating and changing the common law, which is entirely judge-made, for reasons
explained in the next section of this chapter.

§1.4 The Common Law
The past is never dead. It’s not even past.
— William Faulkner

Courts originally created the common law through precedent, and they have the power to change it
through precedent. Before you arrived in law school, you may not have realized that courts are able to create
their own body of law, separate from the law made in legislatures. The idea of law created without
legislatures seems so counter-intuitive that it needs explanation.
The common law exists because of events that happened over 900 years ago, with consequences for
law-making and legal vocabulary that lawyers still encounter daily. In the year 1066, a French duke named
William of Normandy got together an army, crossed the English Channel in boats, invaded England,
defeated an English army in the Battle of Hastings, terrorized the rest of the country, and had himself
crowned king in London. He then expropriated nearly all the land in England and parceled it out among his
Norman followers, who became a new aristocracy. And he set about systematically making English
institutions, including law, subservient to his will.
Before the Norman Conquest, English law had differed from one place to another based on local custom.
In a village, law had been whatever rules people had followed there for generations. In another village, law
might be somewhat different because people there had been following somewhat different rules. Law
amounted to traditions reflecting community views on what was right and wrong.
For two reasons, William’s royal descendants would not allow this to continue. The political reason was
that to complete the Conquest, the monarchy centralized power in itself and eventually created national
courts with judges under royal control. The practical reason was that a judge of a national court cannot be
expected to know the customary law of each locality. Law had to become uniform everywhere. It had to
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

24

become common to the entire country. This common law could not come from a legislature. The modern
concept of a legislature — one that could enact law — did not yet exist.
6
How was the common law created? The somewhat oversimplified answer is that the judges figured it out
for themselves. They started with the few rules that plainly could not be missing from medieval society, and
over centuries — faced with new conditions and reasoning by analogy — they discovered other rules of
common law, as though each rule had been there from the beginning, but hidden.
Centuries later, British colonists in North America were being governed according to that common law.
Their rebellion was not against common law, which they accepted as fair. Their quarrel was instead with the
British government and its officeholders. During and after the Revolution, as each colony became a state, it
adopted common law as state law. Today, state courts continue to evolve the common law. In your Torts and
Contracts courses, you will see examples of this process at work.
Law-passing legislatures — the British Parliament, the U.S. Congress, and state legislatures — were all
created centuries after the common law began. Today, however, legislatures have the superior law-making
power. Common law is still judge-made law. But if a legislature enacts a statute that directly contradicts a
common law rule, the statute prevails, and the common law rule ceases to exist. Common law reasoning,
however, permeates the practice and study of law.

§1.5 Law’s Vocabulary
To a lawyer, words are professional tools, and the law is full of specialized vocabulary, which you will
learn to use. Many of law’s technical terms aren’t from the English language; they’re from Latin or from an
old dialect called Norman Law French — or just Law French.
Before the Norman Conquest, people in England all spoke a language called Old English. Almost
everyone was illiterate. The few people who could read and write tended to do so in Latin because it was a
uniform language not broken up into regional dialects. Law had been conducted partly in English but mostly
in Latin, and many technical terms in our law are still in Latin. Stare decisis, for example, is Latin for “let
stand that which has been decided” — in other words, follow earlier decisions, which are precedent.
After the Conquest, government was conducted in Norman French, and law was conducted both in Latin
and in Norman Law French, which could still be heard in courtrooms many centuries later. Even today the
bailiff’s cry that still opens many American court sessions — “Oyez, oyez, oyez!’’ — is the Norman French
equivalent of “Be quiet and listen.’’
Law is filled with terms of art that express technical and specialized meanings, and a large proportion of
these terms survive from Norman Law French. Some of the more familiar examples include allegation,
appeal, arrest, assault,
7
attorney, contract, counsel, court, crime, damages, defendant, evidence, felony, judge, jury, misdemeanor,
plaintiff, slander, suit, tenant, tort, and verdict. In the next few months, you’ll also encounter battery,
damages, demurrer, devise, easement, estoppel, indictment, lien, livery of seisin, and replevin.
Some words entered the English language directly from the events of the Conquest itself. In the course on
Property, you’ll soon become familiar with various types of fees: fee simple absolute, fee simple conditional,
fee simple defeasible, fee tail. These aren’t money paid for services. They’re forms of property rights, and
they’re descended directly from the feudal enfeoffments that William introduced into England in order to
distribute the country’s land among his followers. Even today, these terms appear in the French word order
(noun first, modifiers afterward).
Law has a huge vocabulary of technical terms. It is derived from three languages: English, French, and
Latin. And law is impossible without its specialized use of words. Medicine is applied biology, and
engineering is physics and math. But in law the exact meaning of a word can make the difference between
winning a case and losing it.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

25

Use a legal dictionary — either a small book you can carry around with other books or an online legal
dictionary if you’d rather work from your laptop. Look up every word that seems like lawyer-talk. But don’t
stop there. Look up every word or phrase that seems to be used in an unusual way. Some words or phrases
obviously have a special meaning to lawyers, such as parol evidence, habeas corpus, and res ipsa loquitur.
But others are deceptive. They might look like words you’ve seen many times before, but they mean
something different in the law. Examples are consideration, performance, and remedy. Look up in a legal
dictionary every word or phrase that seems to be used in an unusual way.
1. William L. Prosser, English as She Is Wrote, 7 J. Leg. Educ. 155, 156 (1954).
2. Richard S. Lombard (formerly general counsel at Exxon), remarks reprinted in Lost Words: The Economical,
Ethical and Professional Effects of Bad Legal Writing, Occasional Paper 7 of the ABA Section of Legal Educ.
Admissions to the Bar, at 54 (1993).
3. Donald N. McCloskey, The Writing of Economics 2 (1987).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

26

9

2

Rule-Based Reasoning

§2.1 The Inner Structure of a Rule
At this moment the King, who had for some time been busily writing in his notebook, called out ‘‘Silence!’’
and read from his book, ‘‘Rule Forty-two. All persons more than a mile high to leave the court.’’
Everyone looked at Alice.
‘‘I’m not a mile high,’’ said Alice.
‘‘You are,’’ said the King.
‘‘Nearly two miles high,’’ added the Queen.
— Lewis Carroll,
Alice in Wonderland

Law is made up of rules. A rule is a formula for making a decision.
Every rule has three components: (1) a set of elements, collectively called a test; (2) a result that occurs
when all the elements are present (and the test is thus satisfied); and (3) a causal term that determines
whether the result is mandatory, prohibitory, discretionary, or declaratory. (As you’ll see in a moment, the
result and the causal term are usually integrated into the same phrase or clause.) Additionally, many rules
have (4) one or more exceptions that, if present, would defeat the result, even if all the elements are present.
Alice was confronted with a test of two elements. The first was the status of being a person, which
mattered because at that moment she was in the company of a lot of animals — all of whom seem to have
been exempt from any requirement to leave. The second element went to height — specifically
10
a height of more than a mile. The result would have been a duty to leave the court, because the causal term
was mandatory (‘‘All persons . . . to leave . . .’’). No exceptions were provided for.
Alice has denied the second element (her height), impliedly conceding the first (her personhood). The
Queen has offered to prove a height of nearly two miles. What would happen if the Queen were not able to
make good on her promise and instead produced evidence showing only a height of 1.241 miles? (Read the
rule.) What if the Queen were to produce no evidence and if Alice were to prove that her height was only
0.984 miles? (Read the rule.)
A causal term can be mandatory, prohibitory, discretionary, or declaratory. Because the causal term is the
heart of the rule, if the causal term is, for example, mandatory, then the whole rule is, too.
A mandatory rule requires someone to act and is expressed in words like ‘‘shall’’ or ‘‘must’’ in the causal
term. ‘‘Shall’’ means ‘‘has a legal duty to do something.’’ ‘‘The court shall grant the motion’’ means the
court has a legal duty to grant it.
A prohibitory rule is the opposite. It forbids someone to act and is expressed by ‘‘shall not,’’ ‘‘may not,’’
or ‘‘must not’’ in the causal term. ‘‘Shall not’’ means the person has a legal duty not to act.
A discretionary rule gives someone the power or authority to do something. That person has discretion to
act but is not required to do so. It’s expressed by words like ‘‘may’’ or ‘‘has the authority to’’ in the causal
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

27

term.
A declaratory rule simply states (declares) that something is true. That might not seem like much of a rule,
but you’re already familiar with declaratory rules and their consequences. For example: ‘‘A person who
drives faster than the posted speed limit is guilty of speeding.’’ Because of that declaration, a police officer
can give you a ticket if you speed, a court can sentence you to a fine, and your state’s motor vehicle
department can impose points on your driver’s license. A declaratory rule places a label on a set of facts (the
elements). Often the declaration is expressed by the word ‘‘is’’ in the causal term. But other words could be
used there instead. And some rules with ‘‘is’’ in the causal term aren’t declaratory. You have to look at what
the rule does. If it simply states that something is true, it’s declaratory. If it does more than that, it’s
something else.
Below are examples of all these types of rules. The examples come from the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure, and you’ll study them later in the course on Civil Procedure. (Rules of law are found not just in
places like the Federal Rules. In law, they are everywhere — in statutes, constitutions, regulations, and
judicial precedents.)
If the rules below seem hard to understand at first, don’t be discouraged. In a moment, you’ll learn a
method for taking rules like these apart to find their meaning. For now, just read them to get a sense of how
the four kinds of rules
11
differ from each other. The key words in the causal terms have been italicized to highlight the differences.
mandatory:

prohibitory:

discretionary:
declaratory:

If a defendant located within the United States fails, without good cause, to sign and return a waiver
requested by a plaintiff located within the United States, the court must impose on the defendant (A)
the expenses later incurred in making service and (B) the reasonable expenses, including attorney’s
fees, of any motion required to collect those service expenses.1
The court must not require a bond, obligation, or other security from the appellant when granting a
stay on an appeal by the United States, its officers, or its agencies, or on an appeal directed by a
department of the federal government.2
The court may assert jurisdiction over property if authorized by a federal statute.3
A civil action is commenced by filing a complaint with the court.4

Here’s a three-step method of figuring out what a rule means:
Step 1: Break the rule down into its parts. List and number the elements in the test. (An element in a test is
something that must be present for the rule to operate.) Identify the causal term and the result. If there’s an
exception, identify it. If the exception has more than one element, list and number them as well. (Exceptions
can have elements, too; an exception’s element is something that must be present for the exception to
operate.) In Step 1, you don’t care what the words mean. You only want to know the structure of the rule.
You’re breaking the rule down into parts small enough to understand. Let’s take the mandatory rule above
and run it through Step 1. Here’s the rule diagrammed:
12

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

28

You don’t need to lay out the rule exactly this way — and you certainly don’t need to use boxes. You can
use any method of diagramming that breaks up the rule so you can understand it. The point is to break the
rule up visually so that it’s no longer a blur of words and so you can see separately the elements in the test,
the causal term, the result, and any exception. When can you combine the causal term and the result? You
can do it whenever doing so does not confuse you. If you can understand what’s in the box below, you can
combine, at least with this rule:

13

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

29

causal term and result:
the court must impose on the defendant (A) the expenses later incurred in making service
and (B) the reasonable expenses, including attorney’s fees, of any motion required to
collect those service expenses
Step 2: Look at each of those small parts separately. Figure out the meaning of each element, the causal
term, the result, and any exception. Look up the words in a legal dictionary, and read other material your
teacher has assigned until you know what each word means. You already know what a plaintiff and a
defendant are. Find the word service in a legal dictionary and read the definition carefully. Do it now. After
reading the definition, look again at the “result” box above. What does the phrase “the expenses later
incurred in making service” mean there?
If you read other material surrounding this rule in Civil Procedure, you’ll learn that a request for a waiver
is a plaintiff’s request that the defendant accept service by mail and waive (give up the right to) service by
someone who personally brings the papers to the defendant. The surrounding materials also tell you that the
expenses of service are whatever the plaintiff has to pay to have someone hired for the purpose of delivering
the papers personally to the defendant.
Step 3: Put the rule back together in a way that helps you use it. Sometimes that means rearranging the
rule so that it’s easier to understand. If when you first read the rule, an exception came at the beginning and
the elements came last, rearrange the rule so the elements come first and the exception last. It will be easier
to understand that way. For many rules — though not all of them — the rule’s inner logic works like this:
What events or circumstances set the rule into operation?
(These are the test’s elements.)
When all the elements are present, what happens?
(The causal term and the result tell us.)
Even if all the elements are present, could anything prevent the result?
(An exception, if the rule has any.)
Usually, you can put the rule back together by creating a flowchart and trying out the rule on some
hypothetical facts to see how the rule works. A flowchart
14
is essentially a list of questions. You’ll be able to make a flowchart because of the diagramming you did
earlier in Step 1. Diagramming the rule not only breaks it down so that it can be understood, but it also
permits putting the rule back together so that it’s easier to apply. The flowchart below comes straight out of
the diagram in Step 1 above. (When you gain more experience at this, it will go so quickly and seamlessly
that Steps 1, 2, and 3 will seem to merge into a single step.) Assume that Keisha wants Raymond to pay the
costs of service.
elements:
1. Is Raymond a defendant?
2. Is Raymond located within the United States?
3. Did Raymond fail to comply with a request for waiver?
4. Is Keisha a plaintiff who made that request?
5. Is Keisha located within the United States?
If the answers to all these questions are yes, the court must impose the costs subsequently incurred in
effecting service on Raymond — but only if the answer to the question below is no.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

30

exception:
Does Raymond have good cause for his failure to comply?
Step 3 helps you add everything up to see what happens when the rule is applied to a given set of facts. If all
the elements are present in the facts, the court must order the defendant to reimburse the plaintiff for
whatever the plaintiff had to pay to have someone hired for the purpose of delivering the papers personally
to the defendant — unless good cause is shown.
The elements don’t have to come first. If you have a simple causal term and result, a long list of elements,
and no exceptions, you can list the elements last. For example:
Common law burglary is committed by breaking and entering the dwelling of another in the nighttime with intent to
commit a felony inside.5

How do you determine how many elements are in a rule? Think of each element as an integral fact, the
absence of which would prevent the rule’s operation. Then explore the logic behind the rule’s words. If you
can think of a reasonably predictable scenario in which part of what you believe to be one element could be
true but part not true, then you have inadvertently combined
15
two or more elements. For example, is ‘‘the dwelling of another’’ one element or two? A person might be
guilty of some other crime, but he is not guilty of common law burglary when he breaks and enters the
restaurant of another, even in the nighttime and with intent to commit a felony inside. The same is true
when he breaks and enters his own dwelling. In each instance, part of the element is present and part
missing. ‘‘The dwelling of another’’ thus includes two factual integers — the nature of the building and the
identity of its resident — and therefore two elements.
Often you cannot know the number of elements in a rule until you have consulted the precedents
interpreting it. Is ‘‘breaking and entering’’ one element or two? The precedents define ‘‘breaking’’ in this
sense as the creation of a gap in a building’s protective enclosure, such as by opening a door, even where the
door was left unlocked and the building is thus not damaged. The cases further define ‘‘entering’’ for this
purpose as placing inside the dwelling any part of oneself or any object under one’s control, such as a
crowbar.
Can a person ‘‘break’’ without ‘‘entering’’? A would-be burglar would seem to have done so where she
has opened a window by pushing it up from the outside, and where, before proceeding further, she has been
apprehended by an alert police officer — a moment before she can “enter.” ‘‘Breaking’’ and ‘‘entering’’ are
therefore two elements, but you could not know for sure without discovering precisely how the courts have
defined the terms used.
Where the elements are complex or ambiguous, enumeration may add clarity to the list:
Common law burglary is committed by (1) breaking and (2) entering (3) the dwelling (4) of another (5) in the
nighttime (6) with intent to commit a felony inside.

Instead of elements, some rules have factors, which operate as criteria or guidelines. These tend to be rules
empowering a court or other authority to make discretionary decisions, and the factors define the scope of
the decision-maker’s discretion. The criteria might be few (‘‘a court may extend the time to answer for good
cause shown’’), or they might be many (like the following, from a typical statute providing for a court to
terminate a parent’s legal relationship with a child).
In a hearing on a petition for termination of parental rights, the court shall consider the manifest best interests of the
child. . . . For the purpose of determining the manifest best interests of the child, the court shall consider and
evaluate all relevant factors, including, but not limited to:
(1) Any suitable permanent custody arrangement with a relative of the child. . . .

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

31

16
(2) The ability and disposition of the parent or parents to provide the child with food, clothing, medical care or
other remedial care recognized and permitted under state law instead of medical care, and other material needs of
the child.
(3) The capacity of the parent or parents to care for the child to the extent that the child’s safety, well-being, and
physical, mental, and emotional health will not be endangered upon the child’s return home.
(4) The present mental and physical health needs of the child and such future needs of the child to the extent that
such future needs can be ascertained based on the present condition of the child.
(5) The love, affection, and other emotional ties existing between the child and the child’s parent or parents,
siblings, and other relatives, and the degree of harm to the child that would arise from the termination of parental
rights and duties.
(6) The likelihood of an older child remaining in long-term foster care upon termination of parental rights, due to
emotional or behavioral problems or any special needs of the child.
(7) The child’s ability to form a significant relationship with a parental substitute and the likelihood that the child
will enter into a more stable and permanent family relationship as a result of permanent termination of parental
rights and duties.
(8) The length of time that the child has lived in a stable, satisfactory environment and the desirability of
maintaining continuity.
(9) The depth of the relationship existing between the child and the present custodian.
(10) The reasonable preferences and wishes of the child, if the court deems the child to be of sufficient
intelligence, understanding, and experience to express a preference.
(11) The recommendations for the child provided by the child’s guardian ad litem or legal representative.6

Only seldom would all of these factors tip in the same direction. With a rule like this, a judge does
something of a balancing test, deciding according to the tilt of the factors as a whole, together with the angle
of the tilt.
Factors rules are a relatively new development in the law and grow out of a recent tendency to define
more precisely the discretion of judges and other officials. But the more common rule structure is still that of
a set of elements, the presence of which leads to a particular result in the absence of an exception.
17

§2.2 Organizing the Application of a Rule
Welty and Lutz are students who have rented apartments on the same floor of the same building. At midnight,
Welty is studying, while Lutz is listening to a Black Keys album with his new four-foot concert speakers. Welty has
put up with this for two or three hours, and finally she pounds on Lutz’s door. Lutz opens the door about six inches,
and, when he realizes that he cannot hear what Welty is saying, he steps back into the room a few feet to turn the
volume down, without opening the door further. Continuing to express outrage, Welty pushes the door completely
open and strides into the room. Lutz turns on Welty and orders her to leave. Welty finds this to be too much and
punches Lutz so hard that he suffers substantial injury. In this jurisdiction, the punch is a felonious assault. Is Welty
also guilty of common law burglary?

You probably said ‘‘no,’’ and your reasoning probably went something like this: ‘‘That’s not burglary.
Burglary happens when somebody gets into the house when you’re not around and steals all the valuables.
Maybe this will turn out to be some kind of trespass.’’ But in law school a satisfactory answer is never
merely ‘‘yes’’ or ‘‘no.’’ An answer necessarily includes a sound reason, and, regardless of whether Welty is
guilty of burglary, this answer is wrong because the reasoning is wrong. The answer can be determined only
by applying a rule like the definition of common law burglary found earlier in this chapter. Anything else is a
guess.
Where do you start? Remember that a rule is a structured idea: The presence of all the elements causes the
result, and the absence of any of them causes the rule not to operate. Assume that in our jurisdiction the

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

32

elements of burglary are what they were at common law:
1. a breaking
2. and an entry
3. of the dwelling
4. of another
5. in the nighttime
6. with intent to commit a felony inside
To discover whether each element is present in the facts, simply annotate the list:
1. a breaking: If a breaking can be the enlarging of an opening between the door and the jam without
permission, and if Lutz’s actions do not imply permission, there was a breaking.
2. and an entry: Welty ‘‘entered,’’ for the purposes of the rule on burglary, by walking into the room,
unless Lutz’s actions implied permission to enter.
3. of the dwelling: Lutz’s apartment is a dwelling.
18
4. of another: And it is not Welty’s dwelling; she lives down the hall.
5. in the nighttime: Midnight is in the nighttime.
6. with intent to commit a felony inside: Did Welty intend to assault Lutz when she strode through the
door? If not, this element is missing.
Now it’s clear how much the first answer (‘‘it doesn’t sound like burglary’’) was a guess. By examining
each element separately, you find that elements 3, 4, and 5 are present, but that you’re not sure about the
others without some hard thinking about the facts and without consulting the precedents in this jurisdiction
that have interpreted elements 1, 2, and 6.
The case law might turn up a variety of results. Suppose that, although local precedent defines Welty’s
actions as a breaking and an entry, the cases on the sixth element strictly require corroborative evidence that
a defendant had a fully formed felonious intent when entering the dwelling. That kind of evidence might be
present, for example, where an accused was in possession of safecracking tools when he broke and entered,
or where, before breaking and entering, the accused had told someone that he intended to murder the
occupant. Against that background, the answer here might be something like the following: ‘‘Welty is not
guilty of burglary because, although she broke and entered the dwelling of another in the nighttime, there’s
no evidence that she had a felonious intent when entering the dwelling.’’
Suppose, on the other hand, that under local case law Welty’s actions again are a breaking and an entry;
that the local cases don’t require corroborative evidence of a felonious intent; and that local precedent
defines a felonious intent for the purposes of burglary to be one that the defendant could have been forming
— even if not yet consciously — when entering the dwelling. Under those sub-rules, if you believe that
Welty had the requisite felonious intent, your answer would be something like this: ‘‘Welty is guilty of
burglary because she broke and entered the dwelling of another in the nighttime with intent to commit a
felony inside, thus meeting all the elements of common law burglary.’’
These are real answers to the question of whether Welty is guilty of burglary. They state not only the
result, but also the reason why.

§2.3 Some Things to Be Careful About with Rules
A rule might be expressed in any of a number of ways. Where law is made through precedent — as much
of our law is — different judges, writing in varying circumstances, may enunciate what seems like the same
rule in a variety of distinct phrasings. At times, it can be hard to tell whether the judges have spoken of the
same rule in different voices or instead have spoken of slightly
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

33

19
different rules. In either situation, it can be harder still to discover — because of the variety — exactly
what the rule is or what the rules are.
Ambiguity and vagueness can obscure meaning unless the person stating the rule is particularly careful
with language. The classic example asks whether a person riding a bicycle or a skateboard through a park
violates a rule prohibiting the use there of ‘‘vehicles.’’ What had the rule-maker intended? How could the
intention have been made more clear?
A rule usually doesn’t express its purpose — or, as lawyers say, the policy underlying the rule. A rule’s
policy or purpose is the key to unravelling ambiguities. Is a self-propelled lawn mower a prohibited
‘‘vehicle’’? Try to imagine what the rule-makers were trying to accomplish. Why did they create this rule?
What harm were they trying to prevent, or what good were they trying to promote?
Not only is it difficult to frame a rule so that it controls all that the rule-maker wishes to control, but once
a rule has been framed, situations will inevitably crop up that the rule-maker didn’t contemplate or couldn’t
have been expected to contemplate. Would a baby carriage powered by solar batteries be a ‘‘vehicle’’?
Finally, the parts of a rule may be so complex that it may be hard to pin down exactly what the rule is and
how it works. And this is compounded by interaction between and among rules. A word or phrase in one rule
may be defined, for example, by another rule. Or the application of one rule may be governed by yet another
rule — or even a whole body of rules.
Two skills will help you become agile in the lawyerly use of rules. The first is language mastery,
including an ‘‘ability to spot ambiguities, to recognize vagueness, to identify the emotive pull of a word . . .
and to analyze and elucidate class words and abstractions.’’7
The second is the capacity to think structurally. A rule is a structured idea, and the rule’s structure is more
like an algebraic formula than a value judgment. You need to be able to figure out an idea’s structure and
apply it to facts.

§2.4 Causes of Action and Affirmative Defenses
The law cannot remedy every wrong. Many problems are more effectively resolved through other means,
such as the political process, mediation, bargaining, and economic and social pressure. Unless the legal
system focuses its resources on resolving those problems it handles best, it would collapse under the weight
of an unmanageable workload and would thus be prevented from attempting even the problem-solving it
does well.
20
A harm the law will remedy is called a cause of action (or, in many courts, a claim ). If a plaintiff proves a
cause of action, a court will order a remedy unless the defendant proves an affirmative defense. If the
defendant proves an affirmative defense, the plaintiff will get no remedy, even if that plaintiff has proved a
cause of action. Causes of action and affirmative defenses (like other legal rules) are formulated as tests with
elements and the other components, as explained in §2.1.
For example, where a plaintiff proves that a defendant intentionally confined him and that the defendant
was not a law enforcement officer acting within the scope of an authority to arrest, the plaintiff has proved a
cause of action called false imprisonment. The test is expressed as a list of elements: ‘‘False imprisonment
consists of (1) a confinement (2) of the plaintiff (3) by the defendant (4) intentionally (5) where the
defendant is not a sworn law enforcement officer acting within that authority.’’ Proof of false imprisonment
would customarily result in a court’s awarding a remedy called damages, which obliges the defendant to
compensate the plaintiff in money for the latter’s injuries.
But that isn’t always so: If the defendant can prove that she caught the plaintiff shoplifting in her store and
restrained him only until the police arrived, she might have an affirmative defense that is sometimes called a
shopkeeper’s privilege. Where a defendant proves a shopkeeper’s privilege, a court will not award the
plaintiff damages, even if he has proved false imprisonment. The affirmative defense has its list of elements:
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

34

‘‘A shop-keeper’s privilege exists where (1) a shopkeeper or shopkeeper’s employee (2) has reasonable
cause to believe that (3) the plaintiff (4) has shoplifted (5) in the shopkeeper’s place of business and (6) the
confinement occurs in a reasonable manner, for a reasonable time, and no more than needed to detain the
plaintiff for law enforcement purposes.’’
Notice that some elements encompass physical activity (‘‘a confinement’’), while others specify states of
mind (‘‘intentionally’’) or address status or condition (‘‘a shopkeeper or shopkeeper’s employee’’) or
require abstract qualities (‘‘in a reasonable manner, for a reasonable time, and no more than needed to
detain the plaintiff for law enforcement purposes’’). State-of-mind and abstract-quality elements will
probably puzzle you more than others will.
How will the plaintiff be able to prove that the defendant acted ‘‘intentionally,’’ and how will the
defendant be able to show that she confined the plaintiff ‘‘in a reasonable manner, for a reasonable time, and
no more than needed to detain the plaintiff for law enforcement purposes’’? Because thoughts and
abstractions cannot be seen, heard, or felt, the law must judge an abstraction or a party’s state of mind from
the actions and other events surrounding it. If, for example, the plaintiff can prove that the defendant took
him by the arm, pulled him into a room, and then locked the door
21
herself, he may be able — through inference — to carry his burden of showing that she acted
‘‘intentionally.’’ And through other inferences, the defendant may be able to carry her burden of proving the
confinement to have been reasonably carried out if she can show that when she took the defendant by the
arm, he had been trying to run from the store; that she called the police immediately; and that she turned the
defendant over to the police as soon as they arrived.
Exercise
Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
Provisions from Rule 11 appear below. For each provision, decide whether it is mandatory, prohibitory,
discretionary, or declaratory. Then diagram it. Finally, create a flowchart showing the questions that would
need to be answered to determine when a court must strike a paper.
Provision A
Provision B

Provision C
Provision D

The court must strike an unsigned paper unless the omission is promptly corrected after being
called to the attorney’s or party’s attention.
If, after notice and a reasonable opportunity to respond, the court determines that Rule 11(b) has
been violated, the court may impose an appropriate sanction on any attorney, law firm, or party
that violated the rule or is responsible for the violation.
Absent exceptional circumstances, a law firm must be held jointly responsible for a violation
committed by its partner, associate, or employee.
This rule does not apply to disclosures and discovery requests, responses, objections, and motions
under Rules 26 through 37.

1. Rule 4(d)(2) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
2. Rule 62(e) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
3. Rule 4(n)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
4. Rule 3 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
5. This was the crime at common law. It does a good job of illustrating several different things about rule structure.
But the definition of burglary in a modern criminal code will differ.
6. Fla. Stat. § 39.810 (2006).
7. William L. Twining & David Miers, How to Do Things with Rules 120 (1976).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

35

23

3

Issues, Facts, Precedents, and Statutes

§3.1 A Precedents’ Anatomy
An opinion announcing a court’s decision — also called a precedent or, most commonly, a case — can
include up to nine ingredients:
1. a description of procedural events (what lawyers and judges did before the decision was made)
2. a narrative of pleaded or evidentiary events (what the witnesses saw and the parties did before the
lawsuit began)
3. a statement of the issue or issues to be decided by the court
4. a summary of the arguments made by each side
5. the court’s holding on each issue
6. the rule or rules of law the court enforces through each holding
7. the court’s reasoning
8. dicta
9. a statement of the relief granted or denied
Most opinions don’t include all these things, although a typical opinion probably has most of them. Let’s
look at each.
Opinions often begin with (1) a recitation of procedural events during the litigation that have raised the
issue decided by the court. Examples are motions, hearings, trial, judgment, and appeal. Although the court’s
description of these events may — because of unfamiliar terminology — seem at first confusing, you must
be able to understand them because the manner in which an issue is raised determines the method a court
will use to decide it. A court
24
decides a motion for a directed verdict, for example, very differently from the way it rules on a request for
a jury instruction, even though both might require the court to consider the same point of law. The
procedural events add up to the case’s procedural posture at the time the decision was made.
Frequently, the court will next describe (2) the pleaded events or the evidentiary events on which the
ruling is based. In litigation, parties allege facts in a pleading and then prove them with evidence. The court
has no other way of knowing what transpired between the parties before the lawsuit began. A party’s
pleadings and evidence tell a story that favors that party. The other party’s pleadings and evidence tell a
different and contrary story.
As you read the court’s description of the pleadings and evidence, you can often tell, even before reading
the rest of the opinion, which party’s story persuaded the court. Stories persuade. Usually the court tells you,
the reader, the same story that the winning lawyer told the court. An effective lawyer can tell an effective
story and tell it well through pleadings or evidence or both.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

36

A court might also set out (3) a statement of the issue or issues before the court for decision and (4) a
summary of the arguments made by each side, although either or both are often only implied. A court will
further state, or at least imply, (5) the holding on each of the issues and (6) the rule or rules of law the court
enforces in making each holding, together with (7) the reasoning behind — often called the rationale for —
its decision. Somewhere in the opinion, the court might place some (8) dicta. You’ll learn more about dicta
in the next few months, but for the moment think of it as discussion unnecessary to support a holding and
therefore not mandatory precedential authority.
An opinion usually ends with (9) a statement of the relief granted or denied. If the opinion is the decision
of an appellate court, the relief may be an affirmance, a reversal, or a reversal combined with a direction to
the trial court to proceed in a specified manner. If the opinion is from a trial court, the relief is most
commonly the granting or denial of a motion.
An opinion announcing a court’s decision is called the court’s opinion or the majority opinion. If one or
more of the judges involved in the decision don’t agree with some aspect of the decision, the opinion might
be accompanied by one or more concurrences or dissents. A concurring judge agrees with the result the
majority reached but would have used different reasoning to justify that result. A dissenting judge disagrees
with both the result and the reasoning.
Concurrences and dissents are themselves opinions, but they represent the views only of the judges who
are concurring or dissenting. Because concurrences and dissents are opinions, they contain some of the
elements of a court’s opinion. A concurring or dissenting judge might, for example, describe procedural
events, narrate pleaded or evidentiary events, state issues, summarize arguments, and explain reasoning.
25
Be an active and engaged reader. Most people read passively most of the time — breezing through
paragraphs, understanding some or most of what’s on the page and guessing about the rest. Lawyers don’t
read cases and statutes that way. You cannot succeed in law school by reading passively.
Active and engaged reading includes pulling apart, in your mind, what’s on the page and wringing
meaning out of it. Consciously or unconsciously, active readers have silent dialogs with themselves about
what they’re reading. They ask themselves questions, which they try to answer while reading. For example:
“Why is the judge emphasizing this fact?”
(This is active reading. A passive reader isn’t curious.)
“What does that phrase mean? How can I find out?”
(A passive reader will skim over the phrase without trying to understand it.)
“What’s preventing me from understanding that paragraph?”
(A passive reader will give up and ignore the paragraph.)
Who’s in charge — the reader or the page? For a passive reader, the page is in charge because the passive
reader lets words hide their meaning. An active reader won’t allow words to do that. An active reader
silently interrogates until the words surrender and confess what they mean.
Exercise I
Dissecting the Text of Roberson v. Rochester Folding Box Co.
Read Roberson v. Rochester Folding Box Co. below and determine where (if anywhere) each ingredient
occurs. Mark up the text generously and be prepared to discuss your analysis in class. Look up in a legal
dictionary every unfamiliar word as well as every familiar word that is used in an unfamiliar way.
The majority opinion in Roberson discusses — and disagrees with — one of the most influential articles
ever published in an American law review: Samuel Warren & Louis Brandeis, The Right to Privacy, 4 Harv.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

37

L. Rev. 193 (1890). Law reviews are periodicals that publish articles analyzing legal questions in scholarly
depth. Almost every law review is sponsored by a law school and edited by students.
Like the cases reprinted in your casebooks for other courses, the version of Roberson printed here has
been edited extensively to make it more readable. In casebooks and in other legal writing, certain customs
are observed when quoted material is edited. Where words have been deleted, you’ll see ellipses (strings of
three or four periods). Where words have been added, usually to substitute for deleted words, the new words
will be in brackets (squared-off parentheses).
26
ROBERSON v. ROCHESTER FOLDING BOX CO.
64 N.E. 442 (N.Y. 1902)

PARKER, Ch. J. [The defendant demurred] to the complaint . . . upon the ground that the complaint does
not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action. [The courts below overruled the demurrer.]
[We must decide] whether the complaint . . . can be said to show any right to relief either in law or in
equity. [We hold that it does not show any right to relief.]
The complaint alleges that the Franklin Mills Co., one of the defendants, was engaged . . . in the
manufacture and sale of flour; that before the commencement of the action, without the knowledge or
consent of plaintiff, defendants, knowing that they had no right or authority so to do, had obtained, made,
printed, sold and circulated about 25,000 lithographic prints, photographs and likenesses of plaintiff . . . ;
that upon the paper upon which the likenesses were printed and above the portrait there were printed, in
large, plain letters, the words, ‘‘Flour of the Family,’’ and below the portrait in large capital letters,
‘‘Franklin Mills Flour,’’ and in the lower right-hand corner in smaller capital letters, ‘‘Rochester Folding
Box Co., Rochester, N.Y.’’; that upon the same sheet were other advertisements of the flour of the Franklin
Mills Co.; that those 25,000 likenesses of the plaintiff thus ornamented have been conspicuously posted and
displayed in stores, warehouses, saloons and other public places; that they have been recognized by friends
of the plaintiff and other people with the result that plaintiff has been greatly humiliated by the scoffs and
jeers of persons who have recognized her face and picture on this advertisement and her good name has been
attacked, causing her great distress and suffering both in body and mind. . . .
[The] portrait . . . is said to be a very good one, and one that her friends and acquaintances were able to
recognize; indeed, her grievance is that a good portrait of her, and, therefore, one easily recognized, has been
used to attract attention toward the paper upon which defendant mill company’s advertisements appear. Such
publicity, which some find agreeable, is to plaintiff very distasteful, and thus, because of defendants’
impertinence in using her picture without her consent for their own business purposes, she has been caused
to suffer mental distress where others would have appreciated the compliment . . . implied in the selection of
the picture for such purposes; but as it is distasteful to her, she seeks the aid of the courts to enjoin a further
circulation of the lithographic prints containing her portrait made as alleged in the complaint, and as an
incident thereto, to reimburse her for the damages to her feelings, which the complaint fixes at the sum of
$15,000.
There is no precedent for such an action to be found in the decisions of this court. . . . Nevertheless, [the
court below] reached the conclusion that plaintiff had a good cause of action against defendants, in that
defendants had invaded what is called a ‘‘right of privacy’’ — in other words, the right to be let alone.
Mention of such a right is not to be found in Blackstone, Kent or any other of the great commentators upon
the law, nor so far as the learning of counsel or the courts in this case have been able to discover, does its
existence seem to have been asserted prior to about the year 1890, when it was [theorized] in the Harvard
Law Review . . . in an article entitled, ‘‘The Right of Privacy.’’
27
The so-called right of privacy is, as the phrase suggests, founded upon the claim that a man has the right
to pass through this world, if he wills, without having his picture published, his business enterprises
discussed, his successful experiments written up for the benefit of others, or his eccentricities commented
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

38

upon either in handbills, circulars, catalogues, periodicals or newspapers, and, necessarily, that the things
which may not be written and published of him must not be spoken of him by his neighbors, whether the
comment be favorable or otherwise. . . .
If such a principle be incorporated into the body of the law through the [process of judicial precedent], the
attempts to logically apply the principle will necessarily result, not only in a vast amount of litigation, but in
litigation bordering upon the absurd, for the right of privacy, once established [through judicial precedent],
cannot be confined to the restraint of the publication of a likeness but must necessarily embrace as well the
publication of a word-picture, a comment upon one’s looks, conduct, domestic relations or habits. [Thus, a]
vast field of litigation . . . would necessarily be opened up should this court hold that privacy exists as a legal
right enforceable in equity by injunction, and by damages where they seem necessary to give complete relief.
The legislative body could very well interfere and arbitrarily provide that no one should be permitted for
his own selfish purpose to use the picture or the name of another for advertising purposes without his
consent. In such event, no embarrassment would result to the general body of the law, for the rule would be
applicable only to cases provided for by the statute. The courts, however, being without authority to
legislate, are . . . necessarily [constrained] by precedents. . . .
So in a case like the one before us, which is concededly new to this court, it is important that the court
should have in mind the effect upon future litigation and upon the development of the law which would
necessarily result from a step so far outside of the beaten paths of both common law and equity [because] the
right of privacy as a legal doctrine enforceable in equity has not, down to this time, been established by
decisions.
The history of the phrase ‘‘right of privacy’’ in this country seems to have begun in 1890 in a clever
article in the Harvard Law Review — already referred to — in which a number of English cases were
analyzed, and, reasoning by analogy, the conclusion was reached that — notwithstanding the unanimity of
the courts in resting their decisions upon property rights in cases where publication is prevented by
injunction — in reality such prevention was due to the necessity of affording protection to . . . an inviolate
personality, not that of private property. . . .
. . . Those authorities are now to be examined in order that we may see whether they were intended to and
did mark a departure from the established rule which had been enforced for generations; or, on the other
hand, are entirely consistent with it.
The first case is Prince Albert v. Strange (1 Macn. & G. 25; 2 De G. & S. 652). The queen and the prince,
having made etchings and drawings for their own amusement, decided to have copies struck off from the
etched plates for presentation to friends and for their own use. The workman employed, however, printed
some copies on his own account, which afterwards came into the hands of Strange, who purposed exhibiting
them, and published a descriptive catalogue. Prince Albert applied for an injunction as to both
28
exhibition and catalogue, and the vice-chancellor granted it, restraining defendant from publishing . . . a
description of the etchings. [The] vice-chancellor . . . found two reasons for granting the injunction, namely,
that the property rights of Prince Albert had been infringed, and that there was a breach of trust by the
workman in retaining some impressions for himself. The opinion contained no hint whatever of a right of
privacy separate and distinct from the right of property. . . .
[In similar ways, the other English cases cited in the Harvard article do not actually support a common
law cause of action for invasion of privacy.] In not one of [them] was it the basis of the decision that the
defendant could be restrained from performing the act he was doing or threatening to do on the ground that
the feelings of the plaintiff would be thereby injured; but, on the contrary, each decision was rested either
upon the ground of breach of trust or that plaintiff had a property right in the subject of litigation which the
court could protect. . . .
[Of the American cases offered in support of a common law right to privacy, none actually does so when
the decisions are examined in detail.] An examination of the authorities [thus] leads us to the conclusion that
the so-called ‘‘right of privacy’’ has not as yet found an abiding place in our jurisprudence, and, as we view
it, the doctrine cannot now be incorporated without doing violence to settled principles of law by which the
profession and the public have long been guided. [Thus, there is no common law right of privacy in New
York.]
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

39

The judgment of the Appellate Division and of the Special Term [is] reversed. . . .
GRAY, J. (dissenting). . . . These defendants stand before the court, admitting that they have made,
published and circulated, without the knowledge or the authority of the plaintiff, 25,000 lithographic
portraits of her, for the purpose of profit and gain to themselves; that these portraits have been conspicuously
posted in stores, warehouses and saloons, in the vicinity of the plaintiff’s residence and throughout the
United States, as advertisements of their goods; that the effect has been to humiliate her . . . and, yet,
claiming that she makes out no cause of action . . . .
Our consideration of the question thus presented has not been foreclosed by the decision in Schuyler v.
Curtis, (147 N.Y. 434). In that case, it appeared that the defendants were intending to make, and to exhibit,
at the Columbian Exposition of 1893, a statue of Mrs. Schuyler, . . . conspicuous in her lifetime for her
philanthropic work, to typify ‘‘Woman as the Philanthropist’’ and, as a companion piece, a statue of Miss
Susan B. Anthony, to typify the ‘‘Representative Reformer.’’ The plaintiff, in behalf of himself, as the
nephew of Mrs. Schuyler, and of other immediate relatives, sought by the action to restrain them from
carrying out their intentions as to the statue of Mrs. Schuyler; upon the grounds, in substance, that they were
proceeding without his consent, . . . or that of the other immediate members of the family; that their
proceeding was disagreeable to him, because it would have been disagreeable and obnoxious to his aunt, if
living, and that it was annoying to have Mrs. Schuyler’s memory associated with principles, which Miss
Susan B. Anthony typified and of which Mrs. Schuyler did not approve. His right to maintain the action was
denied and the denial was expressly placed upon the ground that he, as a relative, did not represent any right
of privacy which Mrs. Schuyler possessed in her lifetime and that, whatever her right had been, in that
respect, it died
29
with her. The existence of the individual’s right to be protected against the invasion of his privacy, if not
actually affirmed in the opinion, was, very certainly, far from being denied. ‘‘It may be admitted,’’ Judge
Peckham observed, when delivering the opinion of the court, ‘‘that courts have power, in some cases, to
enjoin the doing of an act, where the nature, or character, of the act itself is well calculated to wound the
sensibilities of an individual, and where the doing of the act is wholly unjustifiable, and is, in legal
contemplation, a wrong, even though the existence of no property, as that term is usually used, is involved in
the subject.’’ . . .
[The majority misinterprets both the English and the American precedents.] Security of person is as
necessary as the security of property; and for that complete personal security, which will result in the
peaceful and wholesome enjoyment of one’s privileges as a member of society, there should be afforded
protection, not only against the scandalous portraiture and display of one’s features and person, but against
the display and use thereof for another’s commercial purposes or gain. The proposition is, to me, an
inconceivable one that these defendants may, unauthorizedly, use the likeness of this young woman upon
their advertisement, as a method of attracting widespread public attention to their wares, and that she must
submit to the mortifying notoriety, without right to invoke the exercise of the preventive power of a court of
equity.
Such a view, as it seems to me, must have been unduly influenced by a failure to find precedents in
analogous cases . . . ; without taking into consideration that, in the existing state of society, new conditions
affecting the relations of persons demand the broader extension of . . . legal principles. . . . I think that such a
view is unduly restricted, too, by a search for some property, which has been invaded by the defendants’
acts. Property is not, necessarily, the thing itself, which is owned; it is the right of the owner in relation to it.
. . . It seems to me that the principle, which is applicable, is analogous to that upon which courts of equity
have interfered to protect the right of privacy, in cases of private writings, or of other unpublished products
of the mind. The writer, or the lecturer, has been protected in his right to a literary property in a letter, or a
lecture, against its unauthorized publication; because it is property, to which the right of privacy attaches. . . .
I think that this plaintiff has the same property in the right to be protected against the use of her face for
defendant’s commercial purposes, as she would have, if they were publishing her literary compositions. The
right would be conceded, if she had sat for her photograph; but if her face, or her portraiture, has a value, the
value is hers exclusively; until the use be granted away to the public. . . .
O’BRIEN, CULLEN and WERNER, JJ., concur with PARKER, Ch. J.; BARTLETT and HAIGHT, JJ., concur with
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

40

GRAY, J.
A decision’s citation is made up of the case’s name, references to the reporter or reporters in which the
decision was printed, the name of the court where the decision was made, and the year of the decision. For
Roberson, all this information appears in the heading on page 26.
The case name is composed by separating the last names of the parties with a ‘‘v.’’ If the opinion was
written by a trial court, the name of the plaintiff
30
appears first. In some appellate courts, the name of the appellant comes first, but in others the parties are
listed as they were in the trial court. In a case with multiple plaintiffs or defendants, the name of only the
first listed per side appears in the case name. That’s why the Roberson opinion mentions two defendants, but
only one appears in the case name.
In Torts casebooks, Roberson could be used as an example of how the law makes false starts as it grows.
The 1890 Harvard Law Review article to which Judge Parker refers is probably the most famous law review
article in history.1 It was written by Louis Brandeis, who was later appointed to the U.S. Supreme Court, and
Samuel Warren, who was Brandeis’s law partner at the time the article was published. Brandeis and Warren
argued that the common law should recognize a new cause of action for tortious invasion of privacy. In
Roberson, the New York Court of Appeals refused to do so. But eventually courts in other states — virtually
all of them after Roberson — did adopt Brandeis and Warren’s cause of action.
Facts typically make the case, and the Roberson facts illustrate why Brandeis and Warren were right. A
large company used an 18-year-old girl’s photograph in advertising without her permission and without
offering any compensation. She was a private person who didn’t want that kind of publicity. She felt used —
which she had been. When she sued, she was objectified and told condescendingly by the Court of Appeals
that she should have felt flattered by the photograph. This was an era in which women had limited economic
rights and couldn’t even vote. But the public supported her, and the New York legislature enacted a statute
specifically written to overrule the Court’s decision.
Despite that statute, Roberson is in some respects still the law in New York. The reasons are explained,
with the statute, later in this chapter.
In 1904, two years after Roberson, Judge Alton Parker, author of the majority opinion, ran for President of
the United States. He lost in a landslide to the incumbent, Theodore Roosevelt. During the campaign, Parker
complained that newspaper photographers often took his picture while he was slouching or looking
otherwise unpresidential, and that his family had lost their privacy because they were so frequently
photographed. He demanded that photographers stop.
When Abigail Roberson learned of this, she wrote a letter to Parker sarcastically pointing out that “you
have no such right as that which you assert. I have very high authority for my statement, being nothing less
than a decision of the Court of Appeals of this State wherein you wrote the prevailing opinion [and] I was
the plaintiff.”2 She was 21 years old when she wrote the letter, and it was printed on the front page of the
New York Times.
31

§3.2 The Interdependence of Facts, Issues, and Rules
Many facts are in an opinion only to provide background, continuity, or what journalists call ‘‘human
interest’’ to what would otherwise be a tedious and disjointed recitation. Of the remaining facts, some are
merely related to the court’s thinking, while others caused the court to come to its decision. This last group
could be called the determinative facts or the essential facts. They are essential to the court’s decision
because they determined the outcome. If they had been different, the decision would have been different.
The determinative facts lead to the rule of the case — the rule of law for which the case stands as
precedent. The most important goal of case analysis is discovering and understanding that rule. Where
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

41

several issues are raised together in a case, the court must make several rulings and an opinion may thus
stand for several rules.
Identify determinative facts by asking the following question: If a particular fact had not happened, or if
it had happened differently, would the court have made a different decision? If so, that fact is one of the
determinative facts. This can be illustrated through a nonjudicial decision of a sort with which you might
recently have had some experience. Assume that a rental agent has just shown you an apartment and that the
following facts are true:
A. The apartment is located half a mile from the law school.
B. It’s a studio apartment (one room plus a kitchenette and bathroom).
C. The building appears to be well maintained and safe.
D. The apartment is on the third floor, away from the street, and the neighbors do not appear to be
disagreeable.
E. The rent is $500 per month, furnished.
F. The landlord will require a year’s lease, and if you don’t stay in the apartment for the full year,
subleasing it to someone else would be difficult.
G. You have a widowed aunt, with whom you get along well and who lives alone in a house 45
minutes by bus from the law school, and she has offered to let you use the second floor of her house
during the school year. The house and neighborhood are safe and quiet, and the living arrangements
would be satisfactory to you.
H. You have made a commitment to work next summer in El Paso.
I. You neither own nor have access to a car.
J. Reliable local people have told you that you probably won’t find an apartment that is better,
cheaper, or more convenient than the one you’ve just inspected.
Which facts are essential to your decision? If the apartment had been two miles from the law school (rather
than a half-mile), would your decision be different? If the answer is no, the first listed fact couldn’t be
determinative. It might be part
32
of the factual mosaic and might explain why you looked at the apartment in the first place, but you wouldn’t
base your decision on it. (Go through the listed facts and mark in the margin whether each would determine
your decision.)
Facts recited specifically in an opinion can sometimes be reformulated generically. In the hypothetical
above, for example, a generic restatement of fact G might be the following: ‘‘You have a rent-free
alternative to the apartment, but the alternative would require 45 minutes of travel each way plus the expense
of public transportation.’’ This formulation is generic because it would cover other possibilities that would
have the same effect. It could include, for example, the following, seemingly different, facts: ‘‘You’re a
member of the clergy in a religion that has given you a leave of absence to attend law school; you may
continue to live rent-free in the satisfactory quarters your religion has provided, but to get to the law school,
you will have to walk 15 minutes and then ride a subway for 30 minutes more, at the same cost as a bus.’’
A rule of law is a principle that governs how a particular type of decision is to be made — or, put another
way, how certain types of facts are to be treated by the official (such as a judge) who must make a decision.
Where a court ambiguously states a rule, you might arrive at an arguably supportable formulation of the rule
by considering the determinative facts to have caused the result. There’s room for interpretive maneuvering
wherever you could reasonably interpret the determinative facts narrowly (specifically) or broadly
(generically).
Notice how different formulations of a rule can be extracted from the apartment example. A narrow
formulation might be the following:
A law student who has a choice between renting an apartment and living in the second floor of an aunt’s house
should choose the aunt’s house where the apartment’s rent is $500 per month but the aunt’s second floor is free
except for bus fares; where the student must work in El Paso during the summer; and where it would be difficult to
sublease the apartment during the summer.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

42

Because this formulation is limited to the specific facts given in the hypothetical, it could directly govern
only a tiny number of future decision-makers. It would not, for example, directly govern the member of the
clergy described above, even if she will spend next summer doing relief work in Rwanda.
Although a decision-maker in a future situation might be able to reason by analogy from the narrow rule
set out above, a broader, more widely applicable formulation, stated generically, would directly govern both
situations:
A student should not sign a year’s lease where the student cannot live in the leased property during the summer
and where a nearly free alternative is available.

The determinative facts, the issue, the holding, and the rule are all dependent on each other. In the
apartment hypothetical, if the issue were different — say, ‘‘How shall I respond to an offer to join the
American Automobile Association?’’ — the
33
selection of determinative facts would also change. (In fact, the only determinative one would be fact I:
‘‘You neither own nor have access to a car.’’) You’ll often find yourself using what the court tells you about
the issue or the holding to fill in what the court hasn’t told you about the determinative facts, and vice versa.
For example, if the court states the issue but doesn’t identify the rule or specify which facts are
determinative, you might discover the rule and the determinative facts by answering the following questions:
1. Who is suing whom over what series of events and to get what relief?
2. What issue does the court say it intends to decide?
3. How does the court decide that issue?
4. On what facts does the court rely in making that decision?
5. What rule does the court enforce?
In answering the fifth question, use the same kind of reasoning we applied to the apartment hypothetical:
Develop several different phrasings of the rule (broad, narrow, middling) and identify the one the court is
most likely to have had in mind.
Exercise II
Analyzing the Meaning of Roberson v. Rochester Folding Box Co.
What was the issue on appeal in Roberson? What rule did the appellate court enforce? What were the
determinative facts?

§3.3 The Anatomy of a Statute
The Roberson decision was so unpopular that the following year the New York legislature enacted a
statute providing exactly the relief that the Roberson court held was unavailable under the common law. The
Roberson majority understood that that might happen. Recall the majority’s words: ‘‘The legislative body
could very well interfere and arbitrarily provide that no one should be permitted for his own selfish purpose
to use the picture or the name of another for advertising purposes without his consent.’’ The statute has been
amended several times. Here is its current form:
New York Civil Rights Law §§ 50 – 51
§ 50. Right of Privacy
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

43

A person, firm or corporation that uses for advertising purposes, or for the purposes of trade, the name,
portrait or picture of any living person without having first obtained the written consent of such person . . . is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
34
§ 51. Action for Injunction and for Damages
Any person whose name, portrait, picture or voice is used within this state for advertising purposes or
for the purposes of trade without the written consent first obtained as above provided [in § 50] may
maintain an equitable action in the supreme court of this state against the person, firm or corporation so
using his name, portrait, picture or voice, to prevent and restrain the use thereof; and may also sue and
recover damages for any injuries sustained by reason of such use and if the defendant shall have
knowingly used such person’s name, portrait, picture or voice in such manner as is forbidden or declared
to be unlawful by [§ 50], the jury, in its discretion, may award exemplary damages. . . .
A statute expresses rules the legislature has enacted. It does nothing else. Unlike judicial opinions,
statutory text on its face contains no stories. Usually a statute does not explain the legislature’s reasoning.
Typically the explanations are in other documents, such as legislative committee reports. Most statutes are
pure rules, structured as Chapter 2 describes. Sometimes those rules are straightforward, like the one in § 50
above. Sometimes they are convoluted like the one in § 51.
Exercise III
Analyzing the Meaning of §§ 50 and 51 of the New York Civil Rights Law
Reading §§ 50 and 51 together as a single statute, what do they prohibit or require? If a person subject to
New York law were to violate this prohibition or requirement, what might be the consequences? In what
ways did §§ 50 and 51 change the rule of Roberson?

§3.4 How Statutes and the Common Law Interact
The common law has grown to include four separate invasion of privacy torts, and many states recognize
all four of them. Intrusion upon seclusion is invasion of a person’s private space — for example, by opening
his mail or by spying through his windows with binoculars. Public disclosure of private facts is the
dissemination of facts that don’t legitimately concern the public and that are sufficiently private that a
reasonable person would consider their disclosure highly offensive. False light is the dissemination of facts
that, even if true, create a misleading and highly offensive impression about a person. Appropriation of name
or likeness is what happened to Abigail Roberson.
The Court of Appeals held in Roberson that no common law right to privacy of any kind existed in New
York. Section 51 of the New York Civil Rights Law created a statutory cause of action for appropriation.
But no legislation in New
35
York has created a statutory cause of action for intrusion, public disclosure of private facts, or false light.
Because the legislature created a statutory cause of action only for appropriation, Roberson is still the law
in New York on the other three invasion of privacy torts. If a plaintiff sues in New York for intrusion, public
disclosure of private facts, or false light, that plaintiff will lose. A court will hold that those common law
torts don’t exist in New York, citing Roberson, and that New York recognizes only appropriation.
A statute does only what its words express. Sections 50 and 51 are narrowly drafted, and they only create
a misdemeanor and a cause of action for appropriation. The following case illustrates that.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

44

COSTANZA v. SEINFELD
181 Misc. 2d 562, 693 N.Y.S.2d 897
(Sup. Ct., N.Y. County 1999)
HAROLD TOMKINS, J.

A person is seeking an enormous sum of money for claims that the New York State courts have rejected
for decades. This could be the plot for an episode in a situation comedy. Instead, it is the case brought by
plaintiff Michael Costanza who is suing the comedian, Jerry Seinfeld, Larry David (who was the cocreator of
the television program ‘‘Seinfeld’’), the National Broadcasting Company, Inc. and the production companies
for $100 million. He is seeking relief for violation of New York’s Civil Rights Law §§50 and 51. . . .
The substantive assertions of the complaint are that the defendants used the name and likeness of plaintiff
Michael Costanza without his permission, that they invaded his privacy, [and] that he was portrayed in a
negative, humiliating light. . . . Plaintiff Michael Costanza asserts that the fictional character of George
Costanza in the television program ‘‘Seinfeld’’ is based upon him. In the show, George Costanza is a
long-time friend of the lead character, Jerry Seinfeld. He is constantly having problems with poor
employment situations, disastrous romantic relationships, conflicts with his parents and general
self-absorption.
. . . Plaintiff Michael Costanza points to various similarities between himself and the character George
Costanza to bolster his claim that his name and likeness are being appropriated. He claims that, like him,
George Costanza is short, fat, bald, that he knew Jerry Seinfeld from college purportedly as the character
George Costanza did and they both came from Queens. Plaintiff Michael Costanza asserts that the
self-centered nature and unreliability of the character George Costanza are attributed to him and this
humiliates him.
The issues in this case come before the court [through] a preanswer motion to dismiss. . . . [P]laintiff
Michael Costanza’s claims for being placed in a false light and invasion of privacy must be dismissed. They
cannot stand because New York law does not and never has allowed a common-law claim for invasion of
privacy, Howell v. New York Post Co., 81 N.Y.2d 115 (1993);
36
Freihofer v. Hearst Corp., 65 N.Y.2d 135 (1985). As the New York Court of Appeals explained,
While legal scholarship has been influential in the development of a tort for intentional infliction of emotional
distress, it has had less success in the development of a right to privacy in this State. In a famous law review article
written more than a century ago, Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis advocated a tort for invasion of the right to
privacy. . . . Relying in part on this article, Abigail Marie Roberson sued a flour company for using her picture,
without consent, in the advertisement of its product (Roberson v. Rochester Folding Box Co., 171 N.Y. 538).
Finding a lack of support for the thesis of the Warren-Brandeis study, this Court, in a four to three decision, rejected
plaintiff’s claim.
The Roberson decision was roundly criticized. . . . The Legislature responded by enacting the Nation’s first
statutory right to privacy (L. 1903, Ch. 132), now codified as sections 50 and 51 of the Civil Rights Law. Section 50
prohibits the use of a living person’s name, portrait or picture for ‘‘advertising’’ or ‘‘trade’’ purposes without prior
written consent. . . . Section 50 provides criminal penalties and section 51 a private right of action for damages and
injunctive relief.

Howell at 122-123. In New York State, there is [still] no common law right to privacy, Freihofer v. Hearst
Corp. at 140, and any relief must be sought under the statute.
The court now turns to the assertion that plaintiff Michael Costanza’s name and likeness are being
appropriated without his written consent. This claim faces several separate obstacles. First, defendants assert
that plaintiff Michael Costanza has waived any claim by [personally] appearing on the show. [This defense
fails because the] statute clearly provides that written consent is necessary for use of a person’s name or
likeness, Kane v. Orange County Publs., 232 A.D.2d 526 (2d Dept. 1996). However, defendants note the
limited nature of the relief provided by Civil Rights Law §§ 50 and 51. It extends only to the use of a name
or likeness for trade or advertising, Freihofer v. Hearst Corp., at 140. The sort of commercial exploitation
prohibited and compensable if violated is solicitation for patronage, Delan v. CBS, Inc., 91 A.D.2d 255 (2d
Dept. 1983). In a case similar to this lawsuit involving the play ‘‘Six Degrees of Separation,’’ it was held
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

45

that ‘‘works of fiction and satire do not fall within the narrow scope of the statutory phrases ‘advertising’
and ‘trade,’ ’’ Hampton v. Guare, 195 A.D.2d 366 (1st Dept. 1993). The Seinfeld television program was a
fictional comedic presentation. It does not fall within the scope of trade or advertising. . . .
Plaintiff Michael Costanza’s claim for violation of Civil Rights Law §§ 50 and 51 must be dismissed. . . .
1. Samuel Warren & Louis D. Brandeis, The Right to Privacy, 4 Harv. L. Rev. 193 (1890).
2. Parker Taken to Task by Indignant Woman; If I Can Be Photographed, Why Not You Asks Miss Roberson; Quotes
His Own Decision, N.Y. Times, July 26, 1904.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 12:16 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

46

Copyright 2021. Aspen Publishing.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

37

II
INTRODUCTION TO LEGAL WRITING

EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN
AN: 2750409 ; Richard K. Neumann Jr, Ellie Margolis, Kathryn M. Stanchi.; Legal Reasoning and Legal Writing
Account: s2953473.main.ehost

47

39

4

Predictive Writing

§4.1 How Predictive Writing Differs from Persuasive Writing
Predictive writing and persuasive writing are decisional — but in different ways. In predictive writing,
you help your reader — a supervising lawyer or your client — make a decision. In persuasive writing, you
try to convince a judge to decide a case in favor of your client.
Predictive writing: A newspaper might ask its lawyer whether an article it wants to publish would make
the newspaper liable for defamation, which is the tort of communicating damaging falsehoods about a
person. The article describes certain people in unflattering ways, and the newspaper worries about whether it
has gone too far. The newspaper might ask, “Is the article defamatory?” That’s the same as asking, “If we
publish the article, will a court hold us liable for defamation?” Regardless of how the question is put, the
only way a lawyer can answer is to predict what a court would do. The article is defamatory if a court would
hold the newspaper liable for defamation. If a court would not do that, the article is not defamatory.
The newspaper asks the question so it can decide whether to publish the article. If the lawyer says the
article is defamatory, the newspaper might ask a follow-up question: “How can the article be changed so that
it isn’t defamatory?” The lawyer might answer, “It won’t be defamatory if you delete the fourth sentence.”
The lawyer predicts to help the client make a decision.
After the article is published, a person mentioned in it consults her lawyer and asks what her rights are.
Regardless of how the client phrases the question,
40
she is really asking, “If I sue the newspaper, will a court award me damages for defamation?” The
lawyer’s prediction will help her decide whether to sue.
Predictive writing is neutral and objective. If the client will lose in court, good predictive writing should
say that even though the client will be disappointed. The best predictions are accurate ones.
Persuasive writing: Here a lawyer explains to a court why it should make rulings the lawyer’s client
wants. Persuasive writing is not neutral. It is advocacy. The court’s decision will determine who wins and
who loses. Good persuasive writing influences the court to decide in favor of the lawyer’s client.

§4.2 The Documents Lawyers Write
Predictive writing is often done in office memoranda (which are explained in Chapter 16), professional
emails (Chapter 17), and client letters (Chapter 18).
Persuasive writing is often done in trial court motion memoranda (Chapter 28) and in appellate briefs (
Chapter 29). Chapters 23 through 26 explain how to make persuasive arguments and tell a client’s story

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

48

persuasively in writing.
Many skills are common to both predictive and persuasive writing. They include working with statutes,
cases, and other authority (Chapters 7–9); working with facts (Chapter 10); organizing written analysis (
Chapters 11–14); as well as paragraphing, style, and quoting (Chapters 20–22).
Lawyers write a wide range of other documents as well: contracts, wills, pleadings, motions,
interrogatories, affidavits, stipulations, judicial opinions, orders, judgments, statutes, administrative
regulations, and more. But those documents usually aren’t covered in a first-year writing course. They’re
covered instead in second- or third-year drafting courses.

§4.3 How to Predict
The prophecies of what the courts will do in fact, and nothing more pretentious, are what I mean by the law.
— Oliver Wendell Holmes

Let’s take up Welty’s facts from Chapter 2. Here they are again:
Welty and Lutz are students who have rented apartments on the same floor of the same building. At midnight,
Welty is studying, while Lutz is listening to a

41
Black Keys album with his new four-foot concert speakers. Welty has put up with this for two or three hours, and
finally she pounds on Lutz’s door. Lutz opens the door about six inches, and, when he realizes that he cannot hear
what Welty is saying, he steps back into the room a few feet to turn the volume down, without opening the door
further. Continuing to express outrage, Welty pushes the door completely open and strides into the room. Lutz turns
on Welty and orders her to leave. Welty finds this to be too much and punches Lutz so hard that he suffers
substantial injury. In this jurisdiction, the punch is a felonious assault. Is Welty also guilty of burglary?

(Before continuing here, you should review §2.2 in Chapter 2 on how legal rules are structured.)
Assume that in your state the crime of common law burglary has been codified and renamed burglary in
the first degree:
Criminal Code § 102: A person commits burglary in the first degree by breaking and entering the dwelling of
another in the nighttime with intent to commit a felony inside.

Also assume that the elements of burglary in the first degree have been statutorily defined as follows:
Criminal Code § 101(c): A “breaking” is the making of an opening, or the enlarging of an opening, so as to
permit entry into a building, or a closed off portion of a building, if neither the owner nor the occupant has
consented thereto.
Criminal Code § 101(d): An “entering” or an “entry” is the placing, by a defendant, of any part of his body or
anything under his control within a building, or a closed off portion of a building, if neither the owner nor the
occupant has consented thereto.
Criminal Code § 101(e): A “closed off portion” of a building is one divided from the remainder of the building
by walls, partitions, or the like so that it can be secured against entry.
Criminal Code § 101(f): A “dwelling” is any building, or any closed off portion thereof, in which one or more
persons habitually sleep.
Criminal Code § 101(g): A dwelling is “of another” if the defendant does not by right habitually sleep there.
Criminal Code § 101(h): “Nighttime” is the period between sunset and sunrise.
Criminal Code § 101(k): “Intent to commit a felony inside” is the intent to commit, while inside a building or
closed off portion of a building, a crime classified in this Code as a felony, but only if the defendant had that intent
at the moment the defendant broke and entered.

42
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

49

And assume that the legislature has also enacted the following:
Criminal Code § 11: No person shall be convicted of a crime except on evidence proving guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.
Criminal Code § 403: An assault causing substantial injury is a felony.

Finally, assume — for the sake of simplicity — that none of these sections has yet been interpreted by the
courts, and that you are therefore limited to the statute itself. (That is an unusual situation. More often, you
will also be working with judicial decisions that have interpreted the statute.)
If you were Welty’s lawyer and must predict whether Welty will be convicted of first-degree burglary,
you might think about it in the following way. (What you say to yourself is shown in the box below.)
First-degree burglary has six elements and no exceptions. Welty will be guilty if the prosecutor proves every
element beyond a reasonable doubt. I’ll make a list of the elements and annotate it by writing next to each
element the relevant facts.
[You start making notes while continuing talking to yourself silently.]
It’s an apartment. Lutz lives there. Welty doesn’t.
[In your notes, you put a checkmark next to the “dwelling” element and another checkmark next to the “of
another” element. The checkmarks mean that you believe the prosecutor can prove those elements.]
It was midnight.
[Next to the “nighttime” element, you write “midnight” and add a check-mark. The prosecutor can
obviously prove that element.]
When Welty pushed the door back, she enlarged an opening. Neither Lutz nor the landlord (the owner) told
her that she had permission.
[In your notes, you write three facts next to the “breaking” element:
Welty pushed door open
no permission from Lutz
no permission from owner/landlord

43
Then you put a checkmark next the breaking element because the prosecutor can prove it.]
She entered when she walked in. Neither Lutz nor the landlord (the owner) told her that she had permission to
be inside.
[Next to the “entering” element you write that Welty walked in without permission. And you add a
checkmark because the prosecutor can prove she entered.]
What she did next, punching Lutz, is a felony. But under § 101(k), the intent-to-commit-a-felony element isn’t
satisfied unless — at the moment she pushed the door open and walked in — she already had the intent to hit
him. She was furious. But before the punch, Lutz had turned on her and ordered her to leave. She’ll testify that
she “found this to be too much.” That creates reasonable doubt about whether, at the moment she opened the
door and walked in, she already had the intent to strike him. She may have been angry when she pushed the door
open and walked in. But anger doesn’t necessarily include intent to assault somebody. Most of the anger that
people feel in life isn’t followed by violence.
[You look at your notes. Next to the intent-to-commit-a-felony element, you write these facts:

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

50

angry when came in
Lutz ordered her out
will testify that was “too much”
only then did she punch him
But you don’t write a checkmark.]
The prosecutor can’t prove the intent-to-commit-a-felony element beyond a reasonable doubt.
[You have a good argument for acquitting Welty of burglary.]

To write your prediction, you might produce something like the left column below. In the right column are
our comments on the writing and how it is organized. Pay close attention to the organization, which matters
a great deal in legal writing.
44
The prosecution cannot prove all the elements of first degree burglary in
Welty’s case.

This is your
conclusion.

bottom-line

Under § 102 of the Criminal Code, the elements of first degree burglary
are (1) breaking and (2) entering (3) the dwelling (4) of another (5) in the
nighttime (6) “with intent
to commit a felony inside.” Under § 11, a defendant can be convicted
only “on evidence proving guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.” Although
Welty broke and entered Lutz’s
dwelling in the nighttime, and although the assault she committed there is
classified as a felony by § 403, the evidence does not prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that she had the intent to assault Lutz when she broke
and entered.

Section 102 is the basic rule
governing the dispute.

Section 101(k) defines “intent to commit a felony inside” as “the intent to
commit, while inside a building or closed off portion of a building, a
crime classified in this Code as a felony, but only if the defendant had
that intent at the moment the defendant broke and entered.” When Lutz
turned around and ordered her to leave, she had been complaining about
his noise. She says that she found his ordering her out to be “too much”
and punched him. A reasonable explanation is that she entered the
apartment to complain and, after she was already in the room, decided to
punch him. Section 101(k) requires that, when she walked through the
door, she intended to punch him. The prosecution would have to prove
that beyond a reasonable doubt. But no words or action on her part show
that she when she walked through the door she intended to punch Lutz.

The determinative issue is
addressed before the other
elements. Why consider at the
beginning an element that the
statute lists last? (Reread § 102.)
The reason is that if one element
is unprovable, that element
becomes the most important one.
Welty can be convicted only if
all the elements are proved. If
one element can’t be proved, that
element is the most important
one because it makes her not
guilty.

Welty’s pushing open Lutz’s apartment door was, however, a breaking,
which § 101(c) defines as “the making of an opening, or the enlarging of
an opening, so as to permit entry into a building, or a closed off portion
of a building,

Why bother to consider the other
elements at all? The reason is
that you might be wrong about
the element you think is
dispositive, and the reader is
entitled to a full accounting.

Section 11 operates together with
§ 102.
This is a roadmap sentence
telling the reader the route your
analysis will follow.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

51

45
if neither the owner nor the occupant has consented thereto.” Lutz’s
apartment is a “closed off portion” of a building, which is defined by §
101(e) as “one divided from the remainder of the building by walls,
partitions, or the like so that it can be secured against entry.” It is difficult
to imagine an apartment that is not divided from the rest of the building in
which it is located. Lutz opened his front door about six inches after Welty
knocked on it to complain of noise, and, when she walked into his
apartment, he immediately ordered her out. His opening the door by six
inches would not have been enough to let Welty in, and Lutz’s prompt
order to leave shows that he had not consented to her opening the door
farther. And nothing suggests that Welty had consent from the landlord
who owns the apartment.

This paragraph begins with
your conclusion on the
breaking issue, followed by the
rule defining a breaking, and
an application of the rule to the
facts. This is a natural
sequence in legal writing. State
your conclusion. Then state the
rule. Then apply the rule to the
facts. Later chapters in this
book expand that sequence and
explain how to make it work.

Welty’s walking into Lutz’s apartment was an entry, which § 101(g)
defines as “the placing, by a defendant, of any part of his body or anything
under his control within a building, or a closed off portion of a building, if
neither the owner nor the occupant has consented thereto.” Welty walked
into Lutz’s apartment, and the circumstances do not show consent to an
entry for the same reasons that they do not show consent to a breaking.

This paragraph is structured
like the preceding one, except
that
for
economy
it
incorporates by reference the
parallel analysis set out earlier.

The prosecution can also prove the other elements beyond a reasonable
doubt. Lutz’s apartment is a dwelling, which § 101(f) defines as “any
building, or closed off portion thereof, in which one or more persons
habitually sleep.” Lutz will testify that he habitually sleeps in his
apartment. To Welty, that apartment is the dwelling of another, as defined
by § 101(n), because she does not habitually sleep there. Finally, these
events happened at midnight and within § 101(m)’s definition of nighttime.

These elements are so
straightforward that a reader
will quickly agree that the
prosecution can prove all of
them. You must account for
them. But they aren’t
dispositive, and the analysis
can be compressed.

46
Exercises
Nansen and Byrd
Exercise A. With the aid of §§ 16 and 221(a) of the Criminal Code (below), break down the rule in § 220
into a list of elements and exceptions. Annotate the list by adding definitions for the elements (and for any
exceptions you might come across). Under each element you list, leave lots of white space. When you do the
second part of this exercise, you will need room to write more.
Criminal Code § 16: When a term describing a kind of intent or knowledge appears in a statute
defining a crime, that term applies to every element of the crime unless the definition of the crime
clearly indicates that the term is meant to apply only to certain elements and not to others.
Criminal Code § 220: A person is guilty of criminal sale of a controlled substance when he
knowingly sells any quantity of a controlled substance.
Criminal Code § 221(a): As used in section 220 of this code, “sell” means to exchange for goods or
money, to give, or to offer or agree to do the same, except where the seller is a licensed physician
dispensing the controlled substance pursuant to a permit issued by the Drug Enforcement Commission

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

52

or where the seller is a licensed pharmacist dispensing the controlled substance as directed by a
prescription issued by a licensed physician pursuant to a permit issued by the Drug Enforcement
Commission.
Exercise B. You’ve interviewed Nansen, who lives with Byrd. Neither is a licensed physician or a
licensed pharmacist. At about noon on July 15, both were arrested and charged with criminal sale of a
controlled substance. Nansen has told you the following:
Byrd keeps a supply of cocaine in our apartment. He had been out of town for a month, and I had used
up his stash while he was gone. I knew that was going to bend Byrd completely out of shape, but I
thought I was going to get away with it. I had replaced it all with plaster. When you grind plaster down
real fine, it looks like coke. For other reasons, I had decided to go to Alaska on an afternoon flight on
July 15 and not come back. Byrd was supposed to get back into town on July 16, and by the time he
figured out what had happened, I’d be in the Tongass Forest.
But on the morning of the 15th, Byrd opened the door of the apartment and walked in, saying he had
decided to come back a day early. I hadn’t started packing yet — I wouldn’t have much to pack anyway
— but I didn’t know how I was going to pack with Byrd standing around because of all the explaining
I’d have to do. I also didn’t want Byrd hanging around the apartment and working up an urge for some
cocaine that wasn’t there. So I said, “Let’s go hang out on the street.”
We had been on the sidewalk about ten or fifteen minutes when a guy came up to us and started
talking. He was dressed a little too well to be a regular street person, but he looked kind of desperate. I
figured he was looking to buy some drugs. Then I realized that that was the solution to at least some of
my problem.
47
I took Byrd aside and said, “This guy looks like he’s ready to buy big. What do you think he’d pay
for your stash?” Byrd looked reluctant, so I turned to the guy and said, “We can sell you about three
ounces of coke, but we have to have a thousand for it.” When the guy said, “Yeah,” Byrd said, “Wait
here” and ran inside the apartment building. A thousand was far more than the stuff was worth.
Byrd walked out onto the stoop with the whole stash in his hand in the zip-lock bag he kept it in.
While he was walking down the steps, about ten feet away from me and the guy who wanted to buy,
two uniforms appeared out of nowhere and arrested Byrd and me.
The “guy” turned out to be Officer D’Asconni, an undercover policeman who will testify to the
conversation Nansen has described. The police laboratory reports that the bag contained 2.8 ounces of
plaster and 0.007 ounces of cocaine. When you told Nansen about the laboratory report, he said the
following:
I didn’t think there was any coke in that bag. What they found must have been residue. I had used up
every last bit of Byrd’s stuff. I clearly remember looking at that empty bag after I had used it all and
wondering how much plaster to put in it so that it would at least look like the coke Byrd had left behind.
I certainly didn’t see any point in scrubbing the bag with cleanser before I put the plaster in it.
With the aid of Criminal Code § 221(b) (below), finish annotating your list of elements by writing, under
each element, the facts that are relevant to that element.
Criminal Code § 221(b): As used in section 220, “controlled substance” includes any of the
following: . . . cocaine . . . .
Exercise C. You’ve been asked to determine whether Nansen or Byrd is likely to be convicted of criminal
sale of a controlled substance. The question isn’t whether Nansen or Byrd criminally sold a controlled
substance, but whether either of them is likely to be convicted of doing that. To make that prediction, take
into account § 10(a) of the Criminal Code.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

53

Criminal Code § 10(a): No person shall be convicted of a crime except on evidence proving guilt
beyond a reasonable doubt.
Using your annotated outline of elements, decide whether each element can be proved beyond a reasonable
doubt, and whether any exceptions are satisfied. Then make your prediction. Finally, decide the order in
which the elements would best be explored in the Discussion section of an office memo.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

54

49

5

Inside the Writing Process

§5.1 Product and Process
A writing course teaches both the product created through writing and the process of creating it.
Your product — the document you produce — might be an office memo, a motion memo for a trial court,
a client letter, a professional email, or a brief filed in an appellate court. Every type of document has its own
purposes and characteristics. Later chapters in this book explain what each type of document should look
like and what it should accomplish.
Your writing process is how you go about creating a legal document — what goes through your mind as
you write. Part of that is analyzing the law, perhaps by interpreting statutes and precedent, which involves
several aspects of thinking like a lawyer. The other part is thinking like a writer: how you organize your
thoughts and find the best words to express them, as well as how you manage the work and in general
perform the act of creation. Later chapters explain legal analysis. This chapter and Chapter 6 explain some
basics of how writers think and work.
Process is harder to learn than product. Product is tangible. It can be held in the hand. A sample office
memo, like the one in Appendix C, can be discussed in class to learn what makes it effective or ineffective.
Process is much harder to observe because it happens mostly in your mind when you’re alone. And there are
many different effective processes of writing. If you put 50 bestselling book authors in one room and ask
them how they write, they’ll probably give you 50 different answers. But most effective processes of writing
share some basic traits, which this book explains.
50
A process that works for one writer won’t necessarily work for another. Finding one that works best for
you can happen only through experimentation in which you simultaneously do the writing and think about
how you’re doing it. Observe yourself writing. What did you do first? Second? Did you feel ready to write?
How did you organize your materials? What did you do when you felt stuck?
Afterward ask yourself some more questions. Which aspects of your process seemed to work well? Which
seemed inefficient or counterproductive? Some questions are much more important than you might imagine.
What do you like about yourself as a writer, both in what you produced and in how you produced it? Is there
anything about the work that you enjoyed? In §6.7, we’ll explain why what you like and enjoy are important
questions.

§5.2 Five Phases of Writing
Writing happens in five phases:

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

55

1. Researching authorities and analyzing what you find (§5.4)
2. Organizing your raw materials into an outline (§5.5)
3. Producing a first draft (§5.6)
4. Rewriting it through several more drafts (§5.7)
5. Polishing it (§5.8)
Writers tend not to go through these phases in strict order, finishing one phase before beginning the next.
Rarely, if ever, do they start at the beginning, write until they get to the end, and then stop.
Instead, writers often circle back to reopen something already done and redo some aspect of it. For
example, you’ll continue to analyze while you organize, while you write the first draft, and while you rewrite
it several times, although much of the analytical work comes at the beginning. While writing the first draft,
you might decide to go back and rewrite something you wrote a few pages ago. While rewriting, you might
reorganize.
Still, it helps to think about writing in the five phases listed above. Each phase is a different kind of work,
requiring somewhat different skills.

§5.3 Planning the Work
Suppose your teacher distributes an assignment with a deadline three weeks later for submitting your
work. On the day you receive the assignment, you have two options.
51
The first is to toss it aside when you get home so you can try not to think about it for at least two weeks,
leaving only the last few days before the deadline to do the entire job. Many students did this in college and
turned in their first draft as their final product. When they try that again in law school, the result is
disappointment because legal writing requires much more preparation and many more drafts.
When you’re learning professional skills, each new task will usually take longer to accomplish than you
might think because the complexities of the task are not immediately apparent. Later, with experience, you’ll
get much better at predicting how long it will take to get things done.
The other, and better option is to use the full three weeks to get the job done. Very few students have good
internal clocks that pace them through the work. Instead plan by creating a schedule:
1. Estimate how much time it will take you to do the research and analyze the results, to organize your
raw materials, to produce a first draft, to rewrite it through several more drafts, and to polish it; and
2. budget time so that you can do each one of these tasks well.
When you first get the assignment, it can seem huge and intimidating. But once you break it down into a
group of smaller tasks, it’s not as big and seems much more doable. Anne Lamott, a writer by profession,
remembers when her brother, who was not yet a teenager, had been assigned to write a school report on birds
—
and he was at the kitchen table close to tears, surrounded by binder paper and pencils and unopened books on birds,
immobilized by the hugeness of the task ahead. Then my father [also a writer by profession] sat down, put his arm
around my brother’s shoulder, and said, “Bird by bird, buddy. Just take it bird by bird.”1

Although you’re not writing about birds, you can use the same approach. Divide the document into parts.
Take it part by part. Write one part. Then write another. Keep going until you’ve written everything. The
prospect of writing a big legal document can seem paralyzing. But it’s manageable to write several shorter
chunks that, added together, are the document. That’s several smaller tasks, not one huge one.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

56

§5.4 Researching and Analyzing
Begin by identifying the issues. What questions about law and facts need to be resolved? As you research,
analyze, and write, you may change your
52
mind about the precise definitions of these questions. And while working you may identify subissues not
apparent at the outset. But start researching and analyzing.
Researching is finding relevant authority, such as statutes and cases. Your teacher has probably assigned a
research textbook or other materials that explain how to research. Allot plenty of time for research. It may
take more time than you realize.
Analysis is identifying the authorities on which you rely (Chapter 7), figuring out what they mean (
Chapters 8 and 9) and how they govern the client’s facts (Chapter 10). It helps to outline the rules of law (
Chapter 2).

§5.5 Organizing Raw Materials into an Outline
Good organization is crucial in legal writing. Legal writing is a highly structured form of expression
because rules of law are by nature structured ideas. The structure of a rule controls how you organize its
application to facts — and thus controls the organization of a written discussion of the rule and its
application. Good organization makes your analysis more easily understandable to the reader by leading the
reader through the steps of your reasoning.
In college, most teachers criticize organization only infrequently. But the reader of legal writing is
different from the reader for whom you might have written college essays. Legal writing is organized in
ways that reflect the way lawyers and judges analyze legal issues. Good organization puts material exactly
where the reader will need it. Unplanned writing is inefficient because it ignores the reader’s needs and
frustrates the reader’s expectations. And a reader whose needs are ignored and whose expectations are
frustrated quickly becomes an irritated reader.
Students are told to outline but often resist doing it. Outlining seems like an arbitrary and useless
requirement. If you dislike outlining, the problem might be that you were taught an outlining method that is
unnecessarily rigid. Rigid methods of outlining demand that you draw an outline tree with roman numerals,
capital letters, arabic numerals, lowercase letters, and italic numerals. That represses creativity, and it isn’t
the way effective writers plan their writing in detail.
A fluid outlining method is simpler and helps you write. A fluid outline is a flexible collection of lists.
Your raw materials (statutes, cases, facts, hypotheses, and so on) flow through it and into your first draft.
Several chapters in this book explain how to outline and how to organize. Chapter 11 sets out the most
effective methods of organizing analytical legal writing. Chapters 12 and 13 explore those methods in further
detail. And Chapter 14 explains how to make a fluid outline.
53

§5.6 Producing a First Draft
Just know that everyone’s writing is terrible. Until it’s not. No one’s stuff is right immediately. You gotta work
it. Refine it. Shape it. Spend some time with it.
— Ava DuVernay

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

57

Start by getting something — anything — down on paper. A friend of mine says that the first draft is the down
draft — you just get it down. The second draft is the up draft — you fix it up. . . . And the third draft is the
dental draft, where you check every tooth . . . .
— Anne Lamott

Many students treat the first draft as the most important part of writing. But that’s wrong. The first draft is
often the least important part. Most of the other phases contribute more to an effective final product. And
when writing on a computer, first-draft writing might not be separate from rewriting. That’s because of the
ease with which you can interrupt your first draft and go back to rewrite something you initially wrote only a
few minutes ago.
The only purpose of a first draft is to get things down on the page so you can start rewriting. The first draft
has no other value. A first draft accomplishes its entire purpose merely by existing. It can be full of errors.
That’s fine. It just needs to exist.
You don’t need to write the first draft from beginning to end. You can start with any part of the document
you feel ready to write — no matter where in the document it will finally be. You can write the middle
before you write the beginning, for example. If your mind is mulling over a certain part of the document,
start writing that part. Write the rest later.
Do your first draft as early as possible. The first draft may be the least important part of the writing
process, but you can’t start rewriting until you have a first draft. And if you leave little time for rewriting, the
document you submit will disappoint both you and your reader.

§5.7 Rewriting
There is no such thing as good writing. There is only good rewriting.
— Justice Louis Brandeis
A clear sentence is no accident. Very few sentences come out right the first time, or the third.
— William Zinsser
A scrupulous writer, in every sentence that he writes, will ask . . . : What am I trying to say? What words will
express it? What image or idiom will make it clearer? . . . Could I put it more shortly?
— George Orwell

54
A first draft is for the writer. You write to get your thoughts onto the page.
Later drafts are for the reader. In rewriting, you continue to develop your thinking, getting more thoughts
onto the page while deleting weak ideas. But your focus shifts to the reader. How much will this reader need
to be told? Will this reader understand what you say without having to read twice? Will this reader become
convinced that you’re right?
To answer these questions while you read your first and later drafts, pretend to be your reader — the one
described in Chapter 4. Will this skeptical person see issues that you haven’t addressed? Will this busy
person become impatient at having to wade through material of marginal value that got into your first draft?
Will this careful person be satisfied that you have written accurately and precisely?
You’ll do a better job of impersonating the reader if, between drafts, you stop writing for a day or two,
clear your mind by working on something else, and come back to do the next draft both “cold” and “fresh.”
Obviously, that can’t happen if you put off starting the project and later have to do the whole thing
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

58

frantically at the last minute. To make sure that you have time to rewrite, start on an assignment as soon as
you get it, and then pace yourself, working at regular intervals within the time allotted.
Most of the writing lawyers do in the practice of law can be made effective in three to six drafts. Larger
documents need more drafts than shorter ones. Beginning lawyers need to go through more drafts than
experienced lawyers do. An experienced lawyer might be able to produce a client letter with three drafts. A
first-year law student might need six or eight or even ten drafts to produce a high-quality appellate brief.
Focus on the big picture as well as individual sentences and paragraphs. Is your organization natural and
effective? As you reread and rewrite, do you have doubts about your analysis? Don’t limit yourself to
“surface-level changes,” but instead use rewriting as “an opportunity to re-see” the whole document.2
For many people, rewriting is the hardest phase in the writing process. Set aside a lot of time for it.
Sometimes you’ll get discouraged because the problems you thought you’d solved earlier really haven’t been
solved. At other times, when you piece things together well, you might experience relief (or even a little
thrill because of what you’ve accomplished).
Rewriting is hard because much of it involves reimagining your first draft and reexamining the decisions
you made there. Experienced writers say that they can enjoy rewriting because that’s where they can turn
barely adequate writing into top-quality material. “The pleasure of revision [another name for rewriting]
often arises when you refine what you intend to say and even discover that you have more to say, a new
solution, a different path, a better
55
presentation.”3 Empirical studies of the writing process have shown that experienced writers use rewriting
for deep rethinking, and usually they reorganize the earlier draft.4
Don’t be afraid to delete material from your first draft, even if it hurts to take it out. The fact that you’ve
written something doesn’t mean you have to keep it.
While rewriting, use the checklists on the inside front and back covers of this book to test your writing for
good organization, paragraphing, style, and proper use of quotations.
To experience what the reader will experience, some writers read their drafts out loud. When they hear
themselves speaking a draft’s words, they are better able to imagine how the same words will strike the
reader for whom they’re writing. Other writers can get the same effect without speaking because they’ve
developed the ability to “hear” a voice saying the words they read. Reading a draft aloud can also alert you
to wording problems. Bad phrasing often sounds terrible when you say it.
Eventually while putting the writing through several drafts, you’ll notice that after a certain point the
problems you find are mostly typographical errors and small matters of grammar, style, and citation. When
that happens, you’ve moved from rewriting into polishing (see the next section in this chapter), and the
project is nearly finished.
Don’t confuse rewriting with polishing. If all you do after the first draft is fix typographical errors,
awkward wording, grammatical errors, and errors in citation form, you’re polishing, and you’ve skipped
rewriting completely.

§5.8 Polishing
This is the last phase. Allow a day or more to pass before coming back to the writing to polish it. If you’re
away from it for at least a day, you’ll come back fresh and be able to see things you’d otherwise miss.
Read through the document differently from the way you’ve been seeing it on the screen as you wrote.
Print it out. Readers and writers often see problems on a printed page that aren’t obvious on a computer
screen. Read it aloud. If it sounds awkward, it is awkward. If you work sitting down, read it standing up or
lying down. Do something that puts you in a different frame of mind while you review your writing.
Take one last look for wording that doesn’t say clearly and unambiguously what you mean. This is the
biggest reason for waiting at least a day. When you wrote the words, they seemed clear because at that
moment you knew what
56
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

59

you were trying to say. But after some time has passed, you’re no longer in that frame of mind. If you’re
not sure what the words mean or what you intended them to mean, fix them.
And take one last look for wording to be tightened up. Can you say it equally well in fewer words? If you
can, do so.
Look for typographical errors, awkward wording, grammatical errors, and errors in citation form. Does the
formatting make the document attractive to read? If not, choose a different font (but one that looks
professional), add white space so the document doesn’t seem crowded, or find other ways to make it look
attractive. Use your word processor’s spell-check function. Make sure the pages are numbered.
Now, you’re finished.
1. Anne Lamott, Bird by Bird 19 (1994).
2. Patricia Grande Montana, Better Revision: Encouraging Students to See Through the Eyes of the Legal Reader, 14
J. Legal Writing 291, 292 (2008).
3. Christopher M. Anzidei, The Revision Process in Legal Writing: Seeing Better to Write Better, 8 J. Legal Writing
23, 44 (2002) (italics added).
4. Id. at 40.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

60

57

6

More About Writing

§6.1 Writing and Thinking Are One Process
[T]here is no better way to master an idea than to write about it.
— Robert H. Frank
I write to discover what I think.
— Daniel Boorstin
Writing is thinking.
— Deirdre McCloskey
[L]earning to write as a lawyer is another way to learn to think as a lawyer.
— Terrill Pollman

Writing and thinking are one process. Writing enriches thought. You can’t write without rethinking what
you’re trying to say. Writing and rewriting help you think.
Wherever you are in writing — the first draft, rewriting, or even polishing — don’t be afraid to change
your mind about your analysis of the law and the facts. Most writers have abandoned ideas that seemed fine
when first thought about, sounded good when spoken, but proved faulty when — in the end — they
“wouldn’t write.”
Most writers have experienced the reverse as well: sitting down to write with a single idea and finding that
the act of writing draws the idea out, fertilizes it, causes it to sprout limbs and roots, and spread into a forest
of ideas.
58
The amount of thought reflected in a final draft is many times the amount in the first draft because the
writing process and the thinking process are inseparable, each stimulating and advancing the other.

§6.2 Your Readers
You are writing mostly for professionals, who have expectations that you might not be used to.
Decisional reading and decisional writing. Your documents will be read by judges and supervising

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

61

lawyers who must make decisions based on what you have written. They won’t read out of general curiosity.
They are decisional readers and need you to be a decisional writer. Each reader will expect your document to
explain everything she needs to know in order to make a wise decision.
Skepticism. Your readers are skeptical by nature and for good reason. Skepticism helps them make better
decisions. Their job is look for weaknesses in your analysis. If they find any, your writing won’t help them,
and they will react negatively to it. A supervising lawyer might be disappointed in you and tell you to do the
work over again. A judge might reject your thinking and rule against your client. But if your readers can’t
find any weaknesses, they will rely on you, respect you as a professional, and be grateful for your guidance.
Time pressure. Your readers are busy people who work under great time pressure. Usually they have no
time to read your document twice. They need your writing to be so concise and crystal clear that they can
read it just once and, in that one reading, learn from you everything they need to know. You cannot afford to
waste their time.
Credibility and details. Your readers will expect your grammar to be perfect, your documents to have no
typographical errors, and your citations to comply with citation format rules and to have no inaccurate
volume or page numbers. Your readers are not fussbudgets. They are careful professionals who will draw
inferences about your credibility. If you aren’t careful with details, they will wonder whether you have been
careful in your legal analysis.

§6.3 Voice
Voice is a personal quality in a person’s writing, something that speaks from the page in a writer’s own
way. Most people have only a slight voice in their
59
writing — and prefer not to write in a way that’s unique. There’s nothing wrong with that.
Some students enter law school with distinctive written voices of their own. In legal writing courses, they
learn that their writing must conform to a number of professional standards. Does that mean that you can no
longer write in a voice that is yours? No, but you might need to adapt it to a professional situation. The legal
audience has a set of expectations for legal writing, and you’ll need to conform to them.
Your voice in professional documents will grow into something different from what it was before law
school. But it will still be yours and distinctive — although recognizably professional. Most people who
enter law school with distinctive written voices say later, after they have developed a professional voice, that
they are fond of the professional version.

§6.4 Overcoming Writer’s Block
Suppose you sit down to write your first draft, and nothing happens. You stare at the computer screen, and
it seems to stare right back at you. This does not mean you’re an inadequate writer. Writer’s block happens
to everybody from time to time, even to the very best writers. What can you do to overcome it? Here are
some strategies:
Do something unrelated for a while. Prepare for class, do the dishes, or jog. While you’re doing that,
your unconscious mind will continue to work on the first draft. After a while, ideas will pop unexpectedly
into your conscious mind, and you can sit down and start writing again. But be careful. In law, you’re
usually writing against a deadline, and doing something else shouldn’t go on for too long.
If writing the document’s first part is blocking you, start somewhere else. The reader starts at the
beginning, but you don’t have to. The beginning of a document is often the hardest part to write. And within
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

62

each part of the document, the first paragraph is often the hardest to write. One of the reasons is that if you
aren’t sure exactly what you are going to say, you won’t know how to introduce it. Sometimes beginnings
turn out to be better in quality — as well as easier to write — if you write them later.
If you’re not going to start writing at the beginning, where should you start? Look over your outline. Does
something in the outline reach out to you because what you want to say about it is already forming in words
in your mind? Even if it’s a tiny part of your third issue, write it now. Later, you can go back and write the
other issues. Some people write many small passages and then stitch them together to create the whole
document.
60
If a beginning already exists in your mind and wants to be written, go ahead and write it. But if you’re
blocked, work on something else until the beginning comes to you.
Use writing to reduce your fear. The most effective way to reduce anxiety is to start writing early —
long before your deadline — and to keep working steadily until you’re finished. If you start early, you’ll lose
less sleep and be a happier writer. Many students procrastinate because they worry about writing. But
procrastination increases anxiety and puts you farther and farther behind. The only way to break this cycle is
to start writing so you can bring the task under control.
Don’t expect perfection in first drafts. If you’re chronically blocked when you try to do first drafts, it
might be because you expect yourself to produce, in one draft, a polished final version. That’s expecting too
much. Even well-known novelists can’t do it. Really bad first drafts are just fine. See §5.6, especially the
Anne Lamott quote at the beginning of that section. Keep reminding yourself that the first draft is the least
important part of writing. You can afford to write horribly in the first draft because you can fix everything
during rewriting (§5.7).
Start writing while researching and analyzing. While you’re reading a case, some words of what you’d
like to say might flash through your mind. Type them or write them down. As you do, sentences might start
coming to you. You sat down to research and analyze, but now you’re writing. When you run out of steam
while writing, go back to researching and analyzing. Reading, thinking, and writing are all part of a single
process. To read is to trigger thinking, which can trigger writing. It doesn’t matter that you’re writing
without consulting your outline. You can figure out later where in the document what you’re writing goes, or
whether it goes in at all.
Separate yourself physically from distractions. If you’re distracted by roommates or by the temptation
to watch television or play computer games, leave the distractions in one place while you work in another.

§6.5 Plagiarism
Plagiarism is using other people’s words or ideas as though they are your own. You commit plagiarism if
you lift words or an idea from anywhere else and put them into your own work without quotation marks (to
avoid word plagiarism) and a citation (to avoid idea plagiarism or word plagiarism). Your law school or your
teacher might have a policy or guidelines to help you avoid plagiarism, and all teachers punish plagiarism in
one way or another.
61
You already know the ethical and moral reasons not to plagiarize. You heard them in college and earlier.
Here are three more reasons:
First, you’ll feel better about yourself if you don’t steal words or ideas from someone else. You’ll have
professional self-respect and pride in your own work only if you did the work yourself. And pride in your

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

63

own work is one of life’s pleasures.
Second, a teacher can easily catch plagiarism. You should assume you’ll be caught and punished. A
teacher can take some of your words and search for them in any legal research database to find the case or
article from which they were taken. Many teachers routinely do that. Teachers can also electronically search
other students’ papers for words like yours. A teacher who designed the assignment and grades the other
students’ papers knows where all the ideas came from. Even if you copy the detailed structure of your paper
from another student, that can be plagiarism, and a teacher who grades both papers will notice it.
Third, legal writing gains value from appropriate citation to the sources of words and ideas. Much of what
you write will have credibility only if you show exactly where words and ideas come from. Proper
attribution of ideas will allow your reader to rely on your work and to give you credit for ideas that are truly
yours.

§6.6 Professional Tone
A professional gets results for a client by acting on good judgment appropriate to the situation.
Degrees of formality. Writing tone is similar to speaking tone, with different levels of formality
depending on the audience. Documents filed in a court, such as motion memos and briefs, are probably more
formal than anything you wrote before law school. Client letters and emails to supervisors can be somewhat
informal but not chatty. Office memoranda are somewhere in the middle, although the degree of formality
can differ from firm to firm.
No contractions in formal documents. A choice related to tone is whether to use contractions
(combining two words with an apostrophe). We use contractions in this book because our audience is you,
and students tend to be comfortable with contractions. Clients, too, are comfortable with contractions, which
you can use in a client letter. Few supervisors would object to contractions in professional email.
But never use a contraction in a document filed in court. Some firms will not allow contractions in office
memos. Unless you are confident that contractions are considered acceptable by your audience, do not use
them.
62

§6.7 For All Writers — Even the Famous Ones — Writing Is Very Hard
Work
Writing is easy. You just sit at a typewriter until blood appears on your forehead.
— Red Smith

It’s not that hard. But at times it can feel that way. If you know the sensation Smith described, it doesn’t
mean that you’re a bad writer. Red Smith was the leading sports journalist of his time. Every day, millions of
people opened their newspapers to read what he had written the night before. Obviously, he wasn’t a bad
writer — but still he knew that feeling. So has nearly everybody else whose writing you’ve ever enjoyed
reading.
Learning a skill at a higher level of proficiency, with new requirements, can make you feel that the
competency you thought you had before has been taken away from you. Most students feel at least some of
that while learning to write at a professional level. Doubt is sharpest near the beginning. But gradually —
very gradually — it’s replaced with a feeling of strength. By the end of law school instruction in writing,
many students feel like much stronger writers than before because they’ve become stronger.
For now, please remember this: If in the weeks ahead you fall into doubt about your writing abilities, it’ll
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

64

be because you’re learning a lot very quickly. It doesn’t necessarily mean you’re a bad writer . You might be
learning to be a good writer. Once you absorb what you’re learning and start producing professional writing
— and that should happen — your prior confidence will return and be stronger than before because you’ll
now be reaching for mastery.
Many law students and young lawyers report that while learning legal writing they felt discouraged but
later experienced a first moment of validation. That moment might have come when a legal writing teacher
told them that they had done something really well. Or it might have come in a summer or part-time job,
when a supervising lawyer complimented them on a well-written memo. Or it might have come in court
when a judge leaned over the bench and said, “It was a pleasure to read your brief, counselor.” That first
moment of validation was the beginning of the recognition of mastery. Mastery was not yet complete. That
would take much longer. But it had begun.
Many students and young lawyers also say that they wish they had realized while they were working so
hard in a legal writing course that a moment marking the beginning of mastery could eventually arrive. For
most students, even for many who feel deeply discouraged along the way, that moment can come.
63

§6.8 Don’t Imitate Older Judicial Writing, Even If You Find It in Casebooks
Avoid the temptation to imitate unquestioningly whatever you happen to find in judicial opinions that
appear in your casebooks. Those opinions are in casebooks for what they tell you about the law — not for
what they tell you about how to write.
In the last few decades, lawyers and judges have changed the way they look at writing. Verbosity,
obscurity, arcaneness, and disorganization that were tolerated a generation ago are now viewed as
unacceptable because they make the reader’s job harder and sometimes impossible. Before you imitate
something you’ve seen in an opinion, ask yourself whether you want to do it because it will actually
accomplish your purpose or because you feel safer doing what a judge has done. The latter is not a sound
basis for a professional decision.
To get an idea of how things have changed since many of the opinions in your casebooks were written,
read the opening paragraphs below from two decisions interpreting the same statute — 18 U.S.C. § 1708,
which penalizes stealing ‘‘from or out of any mail, post office, or station thereof, letter box, mail receptacle,
or any mail route or other authorized depository for mail matter, or from a letter or mail carrier.’’ One
opinion is written in a style that was once common, while the other has the clarity and forthrightness that
supervisors and judges will expect of you.
UNITED STATES v. ASKEY

UNITED STATES v. PALMER

108 F. Supp. 408 (S.D. Tex. 1952)

864 F.2d 524 (7th Cir. 1988)

Counts 1 and 2 of the indictment charged defendant
with violating 18 U.S.C. § 1708. Counts 3 and 4
charged violation of 18 U.S.C. § 495. The court
sustained a motion to dismiss Count 2 and submitted
the remaining counts to a jury which found defendant
guilty as charged. The court had carried defendant’s
motion for judgment of acquittal on Count 1 along
with the case. After receiving the verdict, the court
announced that the verdict would be set aside as to
Count 1.
. . . There is no allegation that the letter, from which
defendant abstracted the Treasury check, was a mailed
letter or one which

About a month after settling into a house,
Mildred Palmer found in her mailbox three
envelopes addressed to Clifton Powell, Jr., the
former occupant. Instead of returning the
envelopes to the Postal Service, Palmer opened
them. She found three checks (technically,
warrants on Illinois’s treasury) — no surprise,
for the envelopes in which Illinois mails checks
are distinctive. The district court described what
happened next:
Richard Morrison was present when Palmer
brought the mail into the house and knew she
had

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

65

64
had been removed from some office, station,
letter box, receptacle or authorized depository.
The language . . . from the statute prohibits the
abstracting or removing from ‘‘such letter,’’
clearly referring back to the first part of the
statute, dealing with letters in the mails, or
taken from some post office, receptacle or
depository. In other words, it would be no
offense to remove the contents of a letter never
deposited for mailing or transmitted through
the mails. . . .

received the state warrants. Palmer and Morrison
discussed negotiating the warrants and getting the
proceeds. Someone endorsed Clifton Powell, Jr.’s
name without his authority on the reverse side of each
warrant. The warrants were then delivered by
Morrison to a man named Lawrence Armour, Sr.
Armour had something which neither Palmer nor
Morrison had: a bank account. For a fee Armour
negotiated the three state warrants through his bank
account and returned the balance of the proceeds to
Morrison who shared them with Palmer.
. . . We must decide whether converting the contents
of an envelope violates § 1708 when the envelope was
delivered to an outdated address . . .

Which opinion would you rather finish reading?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

66

65

III
GENERAL ANALYTICAL SKILLS

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

67

67

7

Selecting Authority

§7.1 Why Authority Matters
You’re in a courtroom, hoping to persuade a judge to dismiss criminal charges against your client. After
the client was arrested, police held him in an interrogation room from 1:00 A.M. until 10:00 A.M. They
refused to let him sleep or visit a restroom, and they refused to supply breakfast. Finally, after nine hours of
this, he signed a confession. You want the confession thrown out as coerced, and you want the charges
dismissed because the only evidence against him is the confession itself.
Standing before the judge, you say, “Depriving a person, for an extended period, of opportunities to fulfill
necessary bodily functions is coercion, and any resulting confession is inadmissible evidence.” That sounds
like a rule of law with elements (Chapters 2 and 4).
The judge doesn’t know for certain that what you said is law. And even if something like it is law, the
judge doesn’t know whether what you said is accurate law — whether you stated the rule exactly or whether
it’s actually a little different from what you said. For example, is the law’s time element as flexible as you
stated it (“an extended period”), or is it an inflexible bright-line test (“more than ten hours”)? You might win
if the test is flexible. Nine hours seems like an extended time under the circumstances (sleep, restroom,
breakfast). But if the test turns out to be “more than ten hours,” you will definitely lose because your client
was held for nine hours.
“What’s your authority for that, counselor?” asks the judge. She expects you to prove that the rule exists
and that you have stated it accurately. If you can’t prove that, you’ll lose. She asked for authority because
authority is the only way to prove the law.
68
If the rule is judge-made law, the authority would be judicial precedents that created the rule together with
precedents that have enforced it. While enforcing a rule, courts often refine it by working out details about
the rule’s meaning. If a legislature created the rule, the authority would be a statute as well as cases that have
interpreted the statute. Other types of authority include constitutions, court rules, administrative regulations,
restatements, scholarly law review articles, and respected treatises.
Although coerced confessions are forbidden in a general sense by the U.S. Constitution’s Fifth
Amendment,1 the specific rules on coerced confessions are in the thousands of precedents2 interpreting the
Fifth Amendment. When you answer the judge’s question, you must identify the most important and relevant
of them and explain why they support your position.
Of those thousands of precedents, which are the most authoritative? How can you identify the very few —
perhaps a dozen — that are most likely to influence the judge’s decision?
This chapter explains how to choose authority. Before reading the rest of this chapter, however, return to
Chapter 1 and review §1.3 (Where Law Comes From) and §1.4 (The Common Law).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

68

§7.2 How Courts Are Organized
Because the United States has a federal system of government, we have two types of court structures —
state and federal. Each state has its own courts, enforcing that state’s law. And the federal government has
courts throughout the country, enforcing federal law. The U.S. Constitution allocates limited responsibilities
to the federal government and reserves the rest to the states. As a result, state courts adjudicate a much wider
range of claims than federal courts. State courts, in fact, decide the overwhelming majority of cases.
Courts are either trial or appellate. A lawsuit starts in a trial court, which hears witness testimony and
examines other evidence. After the trial court decides the case, the losing party can appeal to an appellate
court, asking it to reverse the trial court’s decision. Some states have only one appellate court. In those
states, all appeals from trial courts go straight to the state’s supreme court. The federal government and most
states have two appellate levels. An appeal from a trial court goes to an intermediate appellate court. From
there an appeal goes to the highest court.
69

§7.2.1 State Courts
Every state has a trial court of general jurisdiction, which tries all cases except those that fall within the
limited jurisdiction of a specialized trial court. Court names differ from state to state. In most states the
general jurisdiction trial court is called the Circuit Court, the Superior Court, or the Court of Common Pleas.
Among the specialized courts might be a Family Court, a Juvenile Court, a Small Claims Court, and others.
In some states, such as Pennsylvania and Maryland, the intermediate appellate court hears appeals from
every part of the state. In others, such as California, New York, and Florida, the intermediate appellate court
is divided geographically into districts, departments, or the equivalent.
Court names aren’t consistent from state to state. In California and many other states, the Superior Court
is the general jurisdiction trial court. But in Pennsylvania the Superior Court is the intermediate appellate
court. In many states, the intermediate appellate court is called the Court of Appeals or a name close to that.
But in Maryland and New York, the Court of Appeals is the highest state court. In most states, the highest
state court is called the Supreme Court. But in New York, the Supreme Court is a general jurisdiction trial
court.

§7.2.2 Federal Courts
The federal court system is organized around a general trial court (the U.S. District Court), a few
specialized courts (such as the Tax Court), an intermediate appellate court (the Court of Appeals), and the
final appellate court (the U.S. Supreme Court).
The U.S. District Courts are organized into 94 districts. Where a state has only one district, the court is
referred to, for example, as the U.S. District Court for the District of Montana. Some states have more than
one district court. California has four: the District Court for the Northern District of California (at San
Francisco), the Eastern District (at Sacramento), the Central District (at Los Angeles), and the Southern
District (at San Diego).
The U.S. Courts of Appeals are organized into thirteen circuits. Eleven of the circuits include various
combinations of states. The Fifth Circuit, for example, hears appeals from the district courts in Louisiana,
Mississippi, and Texas. There’s also a U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia and another for the
Federal Circuit, which hears appeals from certain specialized lower tribunals.
The U.S. Supreme Court hears appeals from the U.S. Courts of Appeals. It also hears appeals from the
highest state courts where the state court’s decision has been based on federal law. But the U.S. Supreme
Court’s jurisdiction is discretionary. In almost all other appellate courts, the losing party below has a right to
appellate review — a right to have to the appellate court decide

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

69

70
whether the lower court’s decision should be reversed. The U.S. Supreme Court, however, has discretion
to choose which appeals it will hear, and it chooses to hear very few.

§7.3 Sources of Law
The two categories of legal resources are primary authority and secondary sources. You can follow this
discussion more easily if you visualize it this way:

§7.3.1 Primary Authority
Primary authority includes precedent, statutes, constitutions, administrative regulations, and court rules
such as the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Primary authority is created by legislatures, courts, and other
governmental entities that have the power to make law. Primary authority is either mandatory or persuasive.
Mandatory authority — which must be obeyed — is primary authority that has been created by the
government whose law controls the outcome of the dispute you are working on. For example, in a tort case
being litigated in an Ohio trial court under Ohio law, mandatory authority would include relevant Ohio
statutes and appellate court decisions (and, rarely, the state constitution). Mandatory authority and binding
authority mean the same thing.
Nonmandatory primary authority is primary authority that your court is not required to obey. It might
persuade your court even if the court isn’t

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

70

71
required to follow it. Nonmandatory authority and persuasive authority mean the same thing.
Nonmandatory precedent is precedent from courts that cannot govern the dispute you are working on. If you
represent a client litigating a question of Ohio law, a decision by an Indiana state court on Indiana law is
primary authority. But in Ohio it is nonmandatory primary authority. Indiana courts can’t create Ohio law.
How can you separate mandatory precedent from nonmandatory precedent? Look at the situation from the
perspective of the judge who will rule on the dispute you are working on. Courts to which a losing party can
appeal are courts that can reverse the judge’s decision. Precedent from those courts is mandatory authority
because, if the judge doesn’t obey it, the judge’s decision will be reversed. The Ohio Supreme Court can
reverse other Ohio courts, either directly or indirectly. But the Indiana Supreme Court has no power to
reverse an Ohio trial court.
A state’s supreme court binds all lower courts in that state. A state’s intermediate appellate court binds
trial courts under its jurisdiction. If the state has a state-wide intermediate appellate court like the
Pennsylvania Superior Court (see §7.2.1), its precedents are mandatory authority in all the state’s trial courts
because the Superior Court can reverse any of their decisions. If the state has a geographically segmented
intermediate appellate court (again see §7.2.1), each part of that court can reverse trial courts only in its part
of the state.
In federal courts, the U.S. Courts of Appeals are coordinate courts in relation to each other (see §7.2.2).
Looking at the country as a whole, one circuit’s Court of Appeals has the same rank as every other circuit’s
Court of Appeals. The Courts of Appeals do not bind each other. In fact, federal law can differ from one
circuit to another. For example, the Second and Fifth Circuits have different tests for preliminary injunctions.
Arizona is part of the Ninth Circuit. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals can reverse decisions made by a
U.S. District Court judge located in Arizona. Thus the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals’ decisions are
mandatory authority in Arizona. They are not mandatory in New Mexico, which is in the Tenth Circuit. But
if the Tenth Circuit has no precedent on a given issue, the Ninth Circuit’s decisions might help a New
Mexico federal court to fill the gap (see §7.5).

§7.3.2 Secondary Sources
Secondary sources are not law. They describe the law or explain it. Secondary sources might be
persuasive, but they are never mandatory.
Secondary sources are produced by people or organizations that might be experts about the law but have
no power to create it. The secondary sources most likely to be cited are restatements, treatises written by
scholars, and articles and similar material published in law reviews. Other types exist, but these three are the
ones you are most likely to encounter in the first year of law school.
72
A restatement is a series of black-letter common law rules organized into sections with supplemental
drafters’ comments. Restatements are commissioned by the American Law Institute to formulate a consensus
view of (restate) the common law. Restatements have an important role in first-year Torts, Contracts, and
Property courses, as well as several second- and third-year courses. When a restatement is no longer
up-to-date, it is superseded by a second or third version. Thus, the Restatement (Third) of Property replaced
the Restatement (Second) of Property.
The persuasive weight of a treatise depends on the reputation of its author and on whether the treatise has
been kept up-to-date. Some of the outstanding treatises have been written by Wigmore (evidence), Corbin
(contracts), Williston (contracts), and Prosser and Keeton (torts). Some treatises are multivolume works;
some are in a single volume; some are hardbound with pocket parts or other annual supplements; and some
are in looseleaf binders for easier updating.
Law reviews print two kinds of material: articles, which are written by scholars, judges, and practitioners,
and notes and comments, which are written by students. If an article is thorough, insightful, or authored by a
respected scholar, it may influence a court. Only in the most unusual of circumstances does a student note or
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

71

comment influence a court. But even where law review material will not be influential, it might help you
analyze an issue, and its footnotes can help you find cases, statutes, and other authority.

§7.4 The Hierarchy of Authority
Authority is ranked so that one can be chosen over another. The following are some of the basic rules:
Mandatory authority always outranks nonmandatory authority. On questions of Ohio law, for example,
Ohio statutes and Ohio Supreme Court precedents outrank Indiana precedents as well as restatements,
treatises, and law review articles.
Within the same jurisdiction, the separation and allocation of powers causes some mandatory authority to
outrank other mandatory authority. A constitution prevails over an inconsistent statute. Either a constitution
or a statute prevails over inconsistent case law, court rules, and administrative regulations.
This is basic civics. Constitutions create governments. A legislature, a court, or an administrative agency
has only the powers granted by the applicable constitution. Although a state’s courts can make common law,
the legislature
73
has a superior power to create law in statutes, and statutes outrank the common law.
Within the same jurisdiction, a decision from a higher court outranks a decision from a lower court — if
the higher court has the power to reverse the lower court. See §7.3.1.
Within the same jurisdiction, newer mandatory authority outranks inconsistent older mandatory authority.
An Ohio statute enacted last year outranks an Ohio statute fifteen years ago if the two statutes are
inconsistent with each other. The newer statute also outranks precedent interpreting the older statute.
If the Ohio Supreme Court overrules one of its own precedents — or if it decides a case in a way that’s
somehow inconsistent with one of its own precedents — the new precedent outranks the older one.

§7.5 How to Use Nonmandatory Precedent and Secondary Sources to Fill a
Gap in Local Law
A gap can exist when your jurisdiction’s case law doesn’t have all the legal rules needed to resolve your
case. Your court must decide whether to fill that gap and, if it does so, which rule to adopt. Nonmandatory
precedent and secondary sources might help your court make those decisions. But be careful. Some gaps can
be filled only by a legislature. Sections 1.3 and 1.4 in Chapter 1 explain the difference between court-made
common law and law made by legislatures. In addition, §7.1 in this chapter includes a constitutional issue
where nearly all the rules have been created through precedent. If an issue is normally reserved to
legislatures, your court won’t be able to create basic rules filling a gap. That’s the legislature’s job.
Another type of gap occurs when your jurisdiction has a rule — whether court-made or statutory — but it
isn’t clear how that rule should be applied to facts like yours. Nonmandatory precedent and secondary
sources might help a court decide how to apply the rule. But nonmandatory authority can help only if it
comes from a jurisdiction that has the same basic rule your jurisdiction has. If the other jurisdiction’s courts
enforce a different rule, those precedents won’t help your court decide how to enforce your jurisdiction’s
rule.
Fill a gap in two steps. Begin by laying a foundation that explains the gap. Then use nonmandatory
precedent or secondary sources to fill it.
74

§7.5.1 Laying the Foundation

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

72

Define the gap and specify how local law doesn’t resolve the issue. Local law means the law governing
your dispute. For example, Ohio tort law is local law if the dispute concerns an auto accident in Ohio.
A deep gap can occur where the issue is one of first impression in local law. That means that local
appellate courts have never before resolved it. If some local courts have ruled, the issue is no longer one of
first impression, but a gap would still exist if the rulings are from lower courts and the jurisdiction’s highest
court has not settled the law. Or local cases might have come close to the issue without directly resolving it.
Another kind of gap occurs where the local cases are so old or so poorly reasoned that they no longer
represent current public policy.
To lay the foundation, do three things:
1. State the issue precisely,
2. explain what local law has decided, and
3. identify what local law has not decided.
The gap is what local law hasn’t decided. But to understand the gap, the reader needs to know what local law
has decided.
The following lays a foundation concisely:
No appellate court in this state has decided whether the sale of a newly built home implies a warranty of
habitability, and the legislature has enacted no statute that would resolve the issue. However, a common law
warranty of habitability has been recognized, as a matter of common law, in a growing number of states. . . .

Here, the gap is total: there are no statutes and no case law.
Things usually aren’t that clear cut. A few local cases might have nibbled around the edges of the issue
without actually resolving it. Or some cases might have set out relevant public policy while resolving other
issues — but not your issue. In situations like these, the foundation isn’t complete until you have explained,
in as much detail as the reader would need to agree with you, why the issue is still open.
No reported decision has determined whether a violation of § 432 [a local statute] is negligence per se. But
Colorado and Arizona [neighboring states with similar conditions] have enacted similar statutes. [Here, you should
add an explanation of those statutes sufficient to convince the reader that they really are similar.] Courts in those
states have held . . . .

Here we have a statute, but the courts have not yet decided a certain aspect of its meaning (whether a
violation is negligence per se). The foundation won’t
75
be complete until you have shown that the Colorado and Arizona statutes are so similar that they should be
interpreted the same way.
The Second District Court of Appeal has permitted this type of jury instruction. But the Fourth District considers it
reversible error because it confuses juries. [Here, add explanations of the Second and Fourth District cases and
show they come to opposite results.] It is also reversible error in federal courts and in most other states that have
considered the issue . . . .

Here you have in-state cases, but they disagree with each other. To complete this foundation — and before
discussing the out-of-state authority — the Second and Fourth District cases would have to be explained.
The following is not a foundation:
Kansas [the decisional state] has not addressed this issue.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

73

The reader hasn’t been told what Kansas has done. Are there no analogous precedents? If not, say so. Is
there nothing in Kansas law that would set out local public policy on the question? If not, say so. The reader
needs to know exactly what the gap is and how deep it is.
Don’t lecture the reader on basic principles of the hierarchy of authority (“since there are no reported
decisions in this state on this issue, it is necessary to look to the law of other jurisdictions”). The reader long
ago learned that that is the standard method for filling gaps.

§7.5.2 Filling the Gap
Once you’ve laid the foundation, explain the nonmandatory precedent or secondary sources or both. Show
exactly how and why that authority provides good guidance.
If you’re using nonmandatory precedent, choose it in approximately this order of priority:
First, did the nonmandatory precedent decide the same issue that arises in your client’s case? Go back to
the confession case you were arguing at the beginning of this chapter. Your issue is whether depriving a
person, for an extended period, of opportunities to fulfill necessary bodily functions constitutes coercion. An
entirely different issue is whether threats of violence are coercion. Because threats-of-violence precedents
decide a different issue, they are barely relevant to your case and might not be relevant at all.
Second, was the nonmandatory precedent decided on facts similar or analogous to your client’s facts? If
the facts aren’t analogous, the nonmandatory precedent is distinguishable. Chapter 9 explains why.
Third, how good is the nonmandatory precedent’s reasoning? Is the logic sound? Did the court explore the
issue thoroughly? Or did it just state its conclusion without much explanation?
76
Fourth, what kind of court decided the issue? Is it the highest court in its jurisdiction? Is it a court that has
in the past influenced the courts in your jurisdiction?
Fifth, how has the precedent been treated in other cases and in secondary sources? Have other courts cited
it with approval? Or has it been criticized in other courts and in scholarly treatises?
Sixth, when was the precedent was decided? Your court might treat more recent opinions as more
authoritative than very old ones, simply because changing social conditions can make a rule obsolete. But
don’t dismiss an older opinion just because it’s old. If the relevant social conditions haven’t radically
changed, older opinions can still be excellent law. Your casebooks are filled with older opinions that are still
widely cited by courts today.
Precedent interpreting statutes in other jurisdictions is treated somewhat differently from precedent
interpreting the common law. That’s because precedent interpreting statutes is authority only for what
specific words mean in specific statutes. That precedent has no life independent of the words interpreted.
Precedent interpreting a statute from another state can be persuasive sources, but only if the other state’s
statute is similar to your statute. If the two are identical, precedent from the other state can be particularly
persuasive. Two statutes can be virtually identical even if there are minor differences in wording that do not
affect the statutes’ meaning. But where the substance of the statutes is different, precedent from the other
state has more limited value. If the two statutes take radically different approaches to solving the same
problem, precedent from the other state usually has little or no value.
If your state’s statute is based on a model statute, such as the Uniform Commercial Code, courts can easily
see the persuasiveness of precedent interpreting other states’ enactments of it. But states often make changes
in uniform statutes when enacting them. Be sure that the other state’s version of the model statute isn’t
significantly different from your statute’s version.
If you cannot fill the gap with primary authority, you will need to rely on secondary sources. Some
secondary sources are more persuasive than others. You can usually tell this by reading your state’s case law
on similar issues to discover the types of secondary sources on which the courts rely. For example, if you see
decisions that cite the Restatement of Torts, Second, that is a good indicator that in torts cases, the
Restatement is a persuasive secondary source to cite.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

74

§7.6 How Courts Use Dicta
A holding is a court’s ruling on an issue. A holding creates precedent because later courts must follow it
through the doctrine of stare decisis. Reasoning essential to a court’s holding is part of the precedent.
77
Dicta are comments in a judicial opinion that are not essential to a court’s ruling on an issue. Dicta aren’t
part of courts’ holdings and therefore aren’t precedent. Often dicta discuss facts that are not before the court.
Examples are in the next paragraph. Dicta are only nonmandatory authority and can never be mandatory
authority. (Lawyers disagree about whether and when to say dicta or dictum. The footnote explains why.3
We take no position on this, and whatever your teacher prefers is correct.)
Decisions include dicta for a variety of reasons. Sometimes dicta adds clarity. A court might want, for
example, to make clear what it is not deciding: “If the plaintiff had presented evidence of injury to his
reputation, he might be entitled to damages.” A court might add dicta to justify an apparently harsh decision:
“Although these facts might constitute a cause of action for defamation — which the plaintiff did not bring
— they do not substantiate the invasion of privacy cause of action asserted in the complaint, which we
dismiss.” Or a court might use dicta to suggest something to a lower court for action on remand: “Although
the parties have not raised on appeal the question of appropriate damages, that issue is likely to arise in the
new trial we have ordered, and we point out that . . .”).
Because dicta doesn’t create precedent, lawyers rely on dicta sparingly. But on occasion they do rely on it.
If the court that wrote dicta can reverse the court in which your case is being or could be litigated, the dicta,
though not mandatory, becomes especially influential.
It isn’t wrong to use dicta. But it is wrong to use it inappropriately. Dicta can never take the place of a
holding, and it’s wrong to treat dicta as though it could. If you do use dicta, identify it as such. Otherwise a
reader might think that what you’ve written is sloppy or an attempted deception.

§7.7 Nonprecedential Opinions
For a judicial opinion to serve as precedent, a court must designate it for publication in the official case
reporter. Sometimes courts issue opinions that they don’t intend to be used as precedent. These opinions are
called nonprecedential, or unpublished, because they aren’t published in official reporters.
While researching, you might run across these cases, because they’re often available through electronic
legal research services and court websites. If you
78
encounter a case that doesn’t have a citation to a print reporter, always check to see whether it’s
nonprecedential. If the case has only an electronic citation, it’s probably nonprecedential. If it is
nonprecedential, most electronic legal research services also note that at the top of the document. To
complicate matters further, since 2001, the federal Courts of Appeals have “published” many of their
nonprecedential opinions in a print reporter called the Federal Appendix, making “unpublished opinions” a
true misnomer. Cases in the Federal Appendix are still nonprecedential, however.
Nonprecedential judicial opinions can never be mandatory authority because, by definition, they aren’t
legal precedent. Thus, even if an opinion comes from the highest court in your jurisdiction, you cannot rely
on it or cite it as mandatory in a legal document. But lawyers do read nonprecedential opinions, which can
play a role in your legal analysis.
If you’re confused about this, you aren’t alone. There’s no widespread consensus on how and when
nonprecedential opinions can be used. Because their status is controversial, you should cite nonprecedential
opinions in writing only rarely, and even then with caution. Some courts have rules limiting the use of
nonprecedential opinions. If you are considering citing nonprecedential authority in a memo or brief to be
filed in a court, check that court’s rules first. In a brief you submit to a U.S. Court of Appeals, for example,
you can cite federal nonprecedential opinions issued after January 1, 2007.4 But even though citation is
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

75

you can cite federal nonprecedential opinions issued after January 1, 2007.4 But even though citation is
allowed, the judges can give the opinion any weight they want. Some might be persuaded by it. Others will
ignore it just because of its status as nonprecedential.
Although nonprecedential opinions aren’t mandatory authority, they can still be useful as persuasive
authority because they do reflect a court’s attempt to resolve a legal issue by applying the law to a particular
set of facts, which might be similar to yours. And in predictive writing, a nonprecedential opinion might give
you some indication of how judges tend to react to the issues and facts you are dealing with. Even if you
wouldn’t use a nonprecedential opinion in a court document, you might provide it to a supervisor in an
interoffice communication, or use it yourself to help you develop your understanding. The best practice is to
ask a supervisor whether the office has a policy regarding these opinions.
Exercise
The Hierarchy of Authority
You are working on a case that is now being litigated in the U.S. District Court for the District of Nevada.
You have been asked to find out whether a defendant who made and lost a motion to dismiss for insufficient
service of process can now subsequently move
79
to dismiss for failure to state a claim on which relief can be granted. (Don’t worry about exactly what that
means. Just know that Rule 12 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure governs motions to dismiss in federal
courts.)
You have found the following authority, all of which squarely addresses your issue. Make a preliminary
ranking of the authorities solely from the information provided below. California and Nevada are both in the
Ninth Circuit.
Catdog v. Amundsen — 4th Circuit, 2008
Great Basin Realty Co. v. Rand — Nevada Supreme Court, 2002
Matthewson’s treatise on Federal Courts (published last year)
Wilkes v. Jae Sun Trading Corp. — 9th Circuit, 1977
Pincus v. McGrath — United States Supreme Court, 1949
Rule 12 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (effective 1938)
Barking Pumpkins Records, Inc. v. Sepulveda — California Supreme Court, 2009
Garibaldi v. City of Boulder — 10th Circuit, 2003
Ott v. Frazier — 7th Circuit, 1931
1. “No person . . . shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself . . . .”
2. A Westlaw search for “coerced confession” produces almost 6,000 precedents.
3. This disagreement rests on Latin definitions, although few lawyers have studied Latin as a language. In Latin,
dictum can mean either “word” or “something said” or “statement.” See D.P. Simpson, Cassell’s New Latin Dictionary
188 (1959). The English word dictionary, a book of word definitions, is derived from dictum’s “word” meaning. The
plural is dicta (“words” or “statements”). In legal writing, dictum is short for obiter dictum, meaning “a statement made
in passing” (singular). More often you will see the plural obiter dicta, meaning “words said in passing” or “statements
made in passing.” Because in Latin dictum can mean “statement,” it is grammatically correct to use the word dictum to

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

76

refer to a statement that is made by a court in a judicial opinion but is not part of a holding. It is also grammatically
correct to use the plural dicta to refer to a single judicial statement because it takes more than one word to make a
statement.
4. Rule 32.1 of the Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

77

81

8

Working with Statutes

§8.1 Five Tools of Statutory Interpretation
If a statute has been interpreted by a court whose decisions are mandatory authority ( Chapter 7), the
statute means whatever that court says it means, and lawyers say that the statute’s meaning is settled law.
But often the meaning isn’t settled, and you’ll use the tools explained in this chapter.
Some statutes have never been interpreted by a mandatory appellate court, but that’s unusual. More often,
a mandatory appellate court has interpreted part of a statute but not all of it. If, for example, a statute has
nine sections, and a mandatory appellate court has interpreted eight of them definitively, the ninth section’s
meaning is still unsettled law. For that ninth section, you’ll need to do what some future court would do —
determine meaning using some or all of the following tools for interpreting statutes:
1. the statute’s words
2. the statute’s context, which can show what the legislature was trying to accomplish — also known as
the policy behind the statute
3. a collection of maxims known as the canons of statutory construction
4. interpretations of the statute from nonmandatory authority — lower or collateral courts,
administrative agencies, and scholars
5. the statute’s legislative history, which consists of the documents and records created by various parts
of the legislature during the course of enactment
At one time, nearly every jurisdiction in the United States strictly followed the plain meaning rule, which
permits use of other statutory interpretation
82
tools only if the statute’s words are ambiguous. In a strict plain meaning state, you are required to limit
yourself to the statute’s wording if the words have a “plain meaning,” and you are permitted to use the other
tools only if the words are ambiguous.
But lawyers and courts use the other tools frequently. First, statutes often are ambiguous. Some statutes
are magnets for ambiguity. Second, in a number of states, the courts have modified or abolished the plain
meaning rule and now search outside the statute for evidence of intent even where the statutory wording
seems clear and unambiguous.

§8.2 The Statute’s Words
Courts always begin with the statute’s words. Some statutes define their own words. The statutes in

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

78

Chapter 4 are examples. Sometimes a relatively mundane word is defined, for the purposes of the statute, in
a surprising way. And a term may have different meanings in different statutes.
For example, section 6-201 (“Franchises”) of the Administrative Code of the City of New York defines
“the streets of the city” as
streets, avenues, highways, boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, waterways,
docks, bulkheads, wharves, piers, and public grounds or waters within or belonging to the city.

while the same Code’s section 16-101(3) (“Department of Sanitation”) defines “street” to include any
street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square and place, and all parkways and through vehicular park drives except a road within any park or a
wharf, pier, bulkhead, or slip by law committed to the custody, and control of the department of ports and terminals.

Why might a wharf be a “street” in one part of a code but not in another? In section 6-201, the word
“street” stands for a place where activity might require getting a franchise from the city. In section
16-101(3), the same word stands for a place for which the Department of Sanitation has the responsibility for
cleaning, sweeping, sanding, and removing ice, snow, and garbage. Because the purposes are different, the
meaning is different. But the drafters couldn’t invent two new words — one for each meaning. They had to
use “street” in both places.
83

§8.3 The Statute’s Context
Context might reveal policy — what the legislature was trying to accomplish — and a statute is to be
interpreted consistently with its policy. Courts will not mechanically apply a statute in a literal way that
would undermine the approach the legislature has taken to solving the problem in dispute.
The statutory context can include other sections of the same statute, the heading (name) of the section at
issue, the statute’s title and preamble (if any), and other statutes addressed to the same subject matter. It can
also include statements of policy in the statute’s preamble and in the preambles of other statutes.
The social and economic context might identify the events and conditions that could have motivated the
legislature to act. But this would be limited to social and economic conditions that existed at the time of
enactment, not later.

§8.4 Canons of Statutory Construction
A canon of statutory construction is a general guideline. Here are some examples:
A statute is to be construed in light of the harm the legislature meant to remedy.
Statutes on the same subject (in Latin, in pari materia) are to be construed together.
If two statutory provisions apply, the more specific provision governs over the more general one.
Where possible, statutes are to be construed so that their constitutionality is preserved.
When a statute has been interpreted by courts and the legislature has not later amended the statute, the
legislature is presumed to have acquiesced in the court’s interpretation.
Words used in a statute are assumed to have the meaning they already have in the law generally. But if
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

79

the words are not terms of art with special meaning in the law, they are assumed to mean what ordinary
dictionaries say they mean.
Penal statutes are to be narrowly construed.
Courts can’t know whether legislators have enacted a particular statute with the canons in mind — or even
whether legislators have ever heard of the canons of construction. It is also true that canons tend to be
inconsistent with one another and that courts may invoke them to justify decisions rather
84
than to help in making decisions.1 But most canons of construction are useful concepts.
Canons are rules of a sort and must be proved with authority. Originally all canons were judge-made law.
Many state legislatures, however, have enacted statutes governing how courts must interpret the state’s
statutes, and these codify or overrule some of the canons.2 Unless the legislature has done that, the authority
for a canon is in precedents alone.

§8.5 Interpretations from Nonmandatory Authority
You might find any of the following. None are mandatory authority. Your courts might or might not be
persuaded by them.
Interpretations by lower courts or collateral courts. If the interpretive precedent is from a court that
cannot reverse the court where your issue would first be litigated, that precedent is not binding but might
persuade your court (see Chapter 7).
Interpretations of the statute by administrative agencies charged with enforcing the statute. Courts often
defer to a specialized enforcement agency, assuming that an agency that constantly deals with a statute
understands it better than judges do. For example, federal courts are strongly influenced by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency’s interpretation of the Clean Air Act.
Comparison with parallel statutes in other jurisdictions. Sometimes states enact similar statutes or even
identical ones such as the Uniform Commercial Code. If Iowa’s courts have interpreted a certain section of
the UCC and Minnesota’s courts haven’t, the Iowa cases might be persuasive in Minnesota although they
wouldn’t be binding there.
Interpretations of the statute by scholars who are recognized experts in the field. If a scholar has written
books or extensive law review articles about a statute, a court might be persuaded by the scholar’s expertise.

§8.6 Legislative History
You might think that the sensible thing would be to ask the legislature what it had in mind when it enacted
the statute. The people who enacted it ought to know what the words mean. Actually, as a group they don’t.
The collective intent of a legislature, or of any other large group of people, may simply be more a
metaphysical idea than something ever provable through evidence. Most state legislatures have between 100
and 200 voting
85
members. Congress has 100 Senators and 435 Representatives. A legislature is just too large to be able to
tell you what it — as a group — was thinking in some prior year when it enacted the statute you’re interested
in.
Legislatures consider such a staggering number of bills that most members aren’t likely to have clear
memories years later of what they thought a bill meant at the moment they voted for or against it. Many
questions of statutory interpretation arise long after enactment, when few of the enacting legislators are still
in office or even alive.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

80

The only direct evidence of legislative intent is what legislators or legislative committees said and wrote
while the statute was being drafted and enacted. This is the statute’s legislative history.
Although legislative history would seem to be the most direct evidence of the legislature’s purpose, it is
sometimes viewed with suspicion. It is often incomplete, especially with state statutes, and, because of the
chaotic nature of legislative work, it can be internally inconsistent. Parts of it can contradict other parts. It is
also vulnerable to manipulation by legislators who may not share the views of a majority of their colleagues.
Most legislators have no more understanding of a bill than they can get from a quick reading of it or — more
likely — from reading a short synopsis of it but not the statute itself.
Some portions of the typical legislative history, however, tend to be viewed by the courts as particularly
reliable. Written reports from the legislative committees that considered and drafted the statute explain to the
legislature as a whole why the statute is needed and what it is meant to accomplish. If a committee report is
thorough and well written, it might be the best evidence of legislative intent.

§8.7 An Example of Statutory Interpretation at Work
Below are two decisions during the same criminal case interpreting the National Motor Vehicle Theft Act,
enacted by Congress in 1919.
If you want to steal something, you’ll have to move it and hide it. You might be especially interested in
stealing cars and other motor vehicles because their portability makes your job easier. Their whole purpose
is to be moved. And you can move them fast across state lines. You can steal a car in Boston tonight and be
in Chicago, five states away, by tomorrow night. The Boston police can’t track you down and arrest you in
Chicago. But the federal government might. That’s why Congress passed the National Motor Vehicle Theft
Act.
Does the statute cover aircraft? William McBoyle stole an airplane and flew it to another state. He was
convicted of violating the Act and appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, arguing that
an airplane isn’t a “motor vehicle” under the statute. In the first decision below, the Tenth Circuit ruled
against him.
86
After losing in the Tenth Circuit, McBoyle appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court. In the second decision
below, you’ll learn whether he won there or lost.
McBOYLE v. UNITED STATES
43 F.2d 273 (10th Cir. 1930)

PHILLIPS, Circuit Judge.
William W. McBoyle was convicted and sentenced for an alleged violation of
the National Motor Vehicle Theft Act, section 408, title 18, U.S. Code. The
indictment charged that on October 10, 1926, McBoyle caused to be
transported in interstate commerce from Ottawa, Ill., to Guymon, Okl., one
Waco airplane, . . . which was the property of the United States Aircraft
Corporation and which had theretofore been stolen; and that McBoyle then
and there knew it had been stolen. . . .
The primary question is whether an airplane comes within the purview of
the National Motor Vehicle Theft Act. This act defines the term ‘‘motor
vehicle,’’ as follows:

In the movies, when you
hear someone say, ‘‘They’ve
crossed the state line — call
the FBI,’’ this is the kind of
statute that creates federal
jurisdiction.

The term ‘‘motor vehicle’’ when used in this section shall include an
automobile, automobile truck, automobile wagon, motor cycle, or any other
self-propelled vehicle not designed for running on rails.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

81

Counsel for McBoyle contend that the word ‘‘vehicle’’ includes only
conveyances that travel
on the ground; that an airplane is not a vehicle . . . ; and that, under the
doctrine of ejusdem generis, the phrase ‘‘any other self-propelled vehicle’’
cannot be construed to include an airplane.

[In a passage deleted here, the court traces various meanings ascribed to
the word ‘‘vehicle’’
in both legal and popular usage, quoting authorities that define a vehicle as an
object that travels and carries things or people. One of the definitions
specifies that a ship is a vehicle; according to another, a vehicle carries things
or people, ‘‘especially on land.’’]

A canon of construction:
Where general language
follows a list of specific
examples, the general
language’s meaning is
limited to the same nature (
ejusdem generis) as the
specific, unless
there are clear indications to
the contrary.
The court focuses on the
words of the statute and
considers the canon of
ejusdem generis only long
enough to decide that the
court’s interpretation of the
statute would not offend the
canon.

87
Both the derivation and the definition of the word ‘‘vehicle’’ indicate that it is
sufficiently broad to include any means or device by which persons or things are carried or
transported, and it is not limited to instrumentalities used for traveling on land, although the
latter may be the limited or special meaning of the word. We do not think it would be
inaccurate to say that a ship or vessel is a vehicle of commerce.
An airplane is self-propelled [and] is designed to carry passengers and freight from place
to place. It runs partly on the ground but principally in the air. It furnishes a rapid means
for transporation of persons and comparatively light articles of freight and express. It
therefore serves the same general purpose as an automobile, automobile truck, or
motorcycle. It is of the same general kind or class as the motor vehicles specifically
enumerated in the statutory definition and, therefore, construing an airplane to come within
the general term, ‘‘any other self-propelled vehicle,’’ does not offend against the maxim of
ejusdem generis.
Furthermore, some meaning must be ascribed to [Congress’s use of the] phrase ‘‘any
other self-propelled vehicle’’ [immediately after Congress had specifically listed] all of the
known self-propelled vehicles designed
for running on land. . . .
We conclude that the phrase, ‘‘any other self-propelled vehicle,’’ includes an airplane. . .
.
COTTERAL, Circuit Judge (dissenting). I feel bound to dissent on the ground that the
National Motor Vehicle Theft Act should not be construed as relating to the transportation
of airplanes.
A prevailing rule is that a penal statute is to be construed strictly against an offender
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Are
you
convinced by
the court’s
interpretation
of
the
statutory
wording?

Another
canon
of
construction.
The dissenter

82

and it must state clearly the persons and acts denounced. [Citations omitted.]

It would have been a simple matter in enacting the statute to insert, as descriptive words,
airplanes, aircraft, or flying machines. If they

will soon try
to link this
one up with
ejusdem
generis.
Now
the
dissenter
takes on the
words of the
statute, but in
a
way the court
did not. The
dissenter
asks
what
Congress
could have
written into
the statute
but chose not
to.

88
had been in the legislative mind, the language would not have been
expressed in such uncertainty as ‘‘any other self-propelled vehicle not
designed for running on rails.’’ The omission to definitely mention
airplanes requires a construction that they were not included.
Furthermore, by excepting vehicles running on rails, the meaning of the
act is clarified. These words indicate it was meant to be confined to
vehicles that run, but not on rails, and it did not extend to those that fly .
...
The rule of ejusdem generis has special application to this statute.
General words following a particular designation are usually presumed
to be restricted so as to include only things or persons of the same kind,
class, or nature, unless there is a clear manifestation of a contrary
purpose. [Citation omitted.] The general description in this statute refers
to vehicles of the same general class as those enumerated. We may
assume an airplane is a vehicle, in being a means of transportation. And
it has its own motive power. But is an airplane classified generally with
‘‘an automobile, automobile truck, automobile wagon, or motor cycle’’?
Are airplanes regarded as other types of automobiles and the like? A
moment’s reflection demonstrates the contrary.
Counsel for appellant have referred us to debates in Congress when
the act was pending as persuasive of an interpretation in his favor.
[Citations to the Congressional Record omitted.] . . . The discussions of
the proposed measure are enlightening . . . in showing that the theft of
automobiles was so prevalent over the land as to call for punitive
restraint, but airplanes were never even mentioned.

The dissenter turns to the canon
considered in the court’s opinion.

Because this question was not
addressed in the reports of the
committees that drafted the
statute, the only relevant
legislative history is the floor
debates. Floor debates are a
notoriously unreliable form of
legislative history because they
can include remarks by legislators
who took no part in drafting the
statute in committee, who might

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

83

It is familiar knowledge that the theft of automobiles had then become
a public menace, but that airplanes had been rarely stolen if at all, and it
is a most uncommon thing even at this date. The prevailing mischief
sought to
be corrected is an aid in the construction of a statute. [Citation omitted.]

not have thought much about it,
and
who may not even have read it.
But here the floor debates reveal
surprising evidence of legislative
intent: no legislator complained
about a need to do something
about airplane theft.
Finally, the dissenter takes up the
historical context.

89
McBOYLE v. UNITED STATES
283 U.S. 25 (1931)

Mr. Justice HOLMES delivered the opinion of the Court. . . .
The question is the meaning of the word ‘‘vehicle’’ in the phrase
‘‘any other self-propelled vehicle not designed for running on
rails.’’ No doubt etymologically it is possible to use the word to
signify a conveyance working on land, water or air, and
sometimes legislation extends the use in that
direction, e.g., land and air, water being separately provided for,
in the Tariff Act [of] 1922 [citation omitted]. But in everyday
speech ‘‘vehicle’’ calls up the picture of a thing moving on land.
Thus in Rev. Stats. § 4, intended, the Government suggests,
rather to enlarge than to restrict the definition, vehicle includes
every contrivance capable of being used ‘‘as a means of
transportation on land.’’ And this is repeated, expressly
excluding aircraft, in the Tariff Act [of] 1930 [citation omitted].
So
here, the phrase under discussion calls up the popular picture.
For after including automobile truck, automobile wagon and
motor cycle, the words ‘‘any other self-propelled vehicle not
designed for running on rails’’ still indicate that a vehicle in the
popular sense, that is a vehicle running on land, is the theme. It is
a vehicle that runs, not something, not commonly called a
vehicle, that flies. Airplanes were well known in 1919, when this
statute was passed; but it is admitted that they were not
mentioned in the reports or in the debates in Congress. It is
impossible to read words that so carefully enumerate the
different forms of motor vehicles and have no reference of any
kind to aircraft, as including airplanes under a term that usage
more and more confines to a different class. The counsel for the
petitioner have shown that the phraseology of the statute as to
motor vehicles follows that of earlier statutes of Connecticut,
Delaware, Ohio,

While dissecting the words of the statute,
Holmes considers the statutory context.

Historical context and legislative
history are considered together.

Again, Holmes simultaneously uses two
tools — this time legislative history and
comparison with parallel statutes. The
point is that Congress seems to have
modelled the Act on statutes that clearly
do not address aircraft theft. The most
telling comparison — and perhaps the
most enjoyable for its irony — is with a
city’s traffic regulations, which certainly
could not have been meant to penalize the
stealing of airplanes.

90

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

84

Michigan and Missouri, not to mention the late Regulations of
Traffic for the District of Columbia [citation omitted], none of
which can be supposed to leave the earth.
. . . When a rule of conduct is laid down in words that evoke in
the common mind only the picture of vehicles moving on land, the
statute should not be extended to aircraft, simply because it may
seem to us that a similar policy applies, or even upon the
speculation that, if the legislature had thought of it, very likely
broader words would have been used. [Citation omitted.]
Judgment reversed.

As important as policy is, it also has its
limitations. Here Holmes notes that his
court is permitted to construe the statute
only to accomplish the goal Congress
had selected for it — and not some other
goal the court might think equally valid.

Unhappy with the Supreme Court’s decision, Congress amended the statute so that it now punishes
anyone who
transports in interstate or foreign commerce a motor vehicle, vessel, or aircraft, knowing the same to have been
stolen.3

Congress later added a definition of “aircraft” so the statute could adapt to changing technology:
“Aircraft” means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used, or designed for navigation of or for flight
in the air.4

That definition was added when airplanes were still powered by piston engines and propellers rather than by
jet engines.
Would the statute today penalize knowingly moving a stolen interplanetary rocket across a state line?
Look carefully the definition quoted above. To get to Mars, the rocket would have to travel for a few
minutes through the atmosphere’s air. But for many months afterward, it would travel through a void where
there is no air (outer space). Is traveling through air the rocket’s purpose or goal — the reason it was
created? Its purpose is primarily to travel through outer space, and traveling through air is only incidental to
that purpose (months versus minutes). Remember that an airplane travels a short
91
distance on land to become airborne, but the Supreme Court held in McBoyle that an airplane is not a
motor vehicle.
There’s no case law on this. But if you would like to know the answers to all these questions, you could
steal an interplanetary rocket, move it across a state line, and appeal your conviction to the Supreme Court.
Depending on how the Justices interpret the words “invented . . . for,” you might spend many years in prison
— or you might walk freely like McBoyle. Whenever a legislature enacts a statute with wording that is less
than perfectly clear, we can’t know for certain what it means until a court tells us while deciding a case.

§8.8 How to Present Statutory Analysis in Writing
Focus on the words of the statute because the words are what you must interpret. The crucial term or
phrase should appear, inside quotation marks, when you state the issue, your conclusion, the rule on which
you rely, and the most important steps in your analysis. For example, state the issue like this:
If regularly scheduled boat service is considered one of the “streets of the city” within the meaning of section
6-201, would the Interborough Repertory Theatre need to get a franchise to offer entertainment on evening cruises
using the theater’s own boat?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

85

This is a discussion about what “streets of the city” means. Focus on those words and use the tools explained
in this chapter.
Because statutes are drafted to govern wide ranges of factual possibilities, a rule expressed entirely in
statutory language may need to be reformulated for a specific application.
Consider a bomb-disarming robot capable of moving on its own treads. A police department might own
one of these robots. If someone spots a suspicious package on a street corner, the police might clear the area,
take cover themselves, and send their robot over to investigate.
Suppose your client stole a robot and took it across a state line. It’s a small robot powered by a small
internal battery. It can’t travel very far, and it can’t do anything unless it’s in view of the police officer
holding the remote control. You’re writing a memo predicting whether your client will be convicted under
the National Motor Vehicle Theft Act. Is the robot a “motor vehicle”? Its purpose isn’t to travel. Its purpose
is to disarm bombs. It was built to move under its own power only because no one wants to lift it up, carry it
over to the bomb, and put it down. Here’s the current definition from the statute:
92
an automobile, automobile truck, automobile wagon, motorcycle, or any other self-propelled vehicle designed for
running on land but not on rails

Most of this sentence is not helpful. The words “automobile,” “automobile truck,” “automobile wagon,” and
“motorcycle” are just examples of “motor vehicles.” The issue isn’t whether a bomb-disarming robot is one
of those things.
What are the elements of the definition for “motor vehicle”? The sentence includes two of them.
Something must be “self-propelled,” and it must not be “designed for running on rails.” In McBoyle, the
Supreme Court decided that Congress meant to include a third element: something is a motor vehicle only if
it operates primarily on land. In your memo, don’t quote the entire sentence from the statute. Instead quote
the words to be interpreted and write something like this:
For the purposes of the National Motor Vehicle Theft Act, a “motor vehicle” is an object that is “self-propelled,”
that operates primarily on land, and that does not run on rails.

You’ll have to explain to the reader that two of these elements are in the Act’s words, and that the Supreme
Court has held that the third element (operates primarily on land) is implied because it’s inherent in what
Congress did.
Exercise I
Plagiarism and the Board of Bar Examiners
This exercise is in Appendix A.
Exercise II
The Ironwood Tract
This exercise is in Appendix A.
1. Karl N. Llewellyn, The Common Law Tradition: Deciding Appeals 521-35 (1960).
2. For example, Kan. Stat. Ann. § 77-109 (1997) and Tex. Gov’t Code Ann. tit. 3, subtit. B (2015)
3. 18 U.S.C. § 2312 (emphasis added).
4. 18 U.S.C. § 2311 (emphasis added).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

86

93

9

Working with Precedent

§9.1 Eight Tools for Working with Precedent
Occasionally, you might have an issue that is entirely resolved by mandatory precedent on point — a case
from the highest court in your jurisdiction deciding on facts identical to the ones presented by your client —
but that’s unusual.
More often the law is uncertain, and you must construct an answer from tangential precedent, using at
least some of the following tools:
1. ranking precedent according to the hierarchy of authority and the principles derived from it;
2. formulating rules along a continuum from the broadest to the narrowest arguable from a precedent’s
facts and wording;
3. synthesizing fragmented authority into a unified whole and reconciling conflicting or adverse
authority;
4. determining policy from precedent;
5. analogizing favorable precedent and distinguishing unfavorable precedent; and
6. testing for realism, as a judge might see your analysis.
Chapter 7 explained the first skill — ranking precedent according to the hierarchy of authority and the
principles that are derived from it. Chapter 3 (§3.2) explained the second skill — formulating rules along a
continuum from the broadest to the narrowest. This chapter explains the other four skills.
94

§9.2 Synthesis
If no single mandatory precedent settles the rule and explains how to apply it, you would need to
synthesize several precedents together to provide a unified understanding of the rule. Synthesis is the process
of finding collective meaning — what the cases as a group stand for — even though that meaning can’t be
found in any one individual case.
It’s not a synthesis to describe Case A, describe Case B, describe Case C, and then stop. That’s nothing
more than an annotated list: The raw materials have been held up to view, but they have not been sewn
together. To turn it into a synthesis, ask yourself what the cases really have in common under the surface.
Identify the threads that appear in all three cases. Then tie the threads together. And organize the analysis
around the threads themselves (rather than around the individual cases).
The reader cares more about the threads than about the cases, and an individual case is important only to
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

87

the extent that it teaches something about a thread. It may turn out that Case B sets out the most convincing
proof of whatever is in question; Cases A and D agree and are the only out-of-state cases to have decided the
issue; and Case C is a much older decision standing for the same rule but on reasoning that is less complete
than that expressed in Case B. An effective synthesis might explain Case B in full; use Cases A and D to
show that foreign authority agrees; and then not use Case C at all (or only if needed to fill in a remaining
gap). Make the synthesis clear to the reader. Begin by stating it in an opening sentence that includes the
synthesized rule or statement of policy:
Although the Supreme Court has not ruled on the question, the trend in the Courts of Appeal is to hold that such a
prosecution is dismissable where any of four kinds of government misconduct has occurred: . . .

A synthesis like this could take several pages to prove because, typically, no case will consider more than
one form of misconduct.

§9.3 Determining Policy from Precedent
Every legal rule has at least one purpose — a goal the rule is meant to accomplish. That purpose is the
rule’s policy. The policy might be to encourage something useful such as home ownership or preventative
health care. Or the policy might be to reduce or prevent something harmful such as pollution or highway
crashes.
A rule without policy is pointless. It accomplishes nothing useful. “It is revolting,” Justice Holmes wrote,
“to have no better reason for a rule of law than that so it was laid down in the time of Henry IV. It is still
more revolting
95
if the grounds upon which it was laid down have vanished long since, and the rule simply persists from
blind imitation of the past.”1
Once you know a rule’s policy, you can argue that when the rule is applied to your facts, the outcome
should be consistent with the policy. Sometimes a court will tell you plainly what the policy is. But more
often the policy will be implied in the court’s reasoning rather than openly stated. What results does the rule
generally cause — directly or indirectly? Does the court seem to treat those results as worthwhile?

§9.4 Analogizing and Distinguishing
An analogy shows that two situations are so parallel that the reasoning that justified the decision in one
should do the same in the other. When a court is persuaded by an analogy to precedent, the court is said to
‘‘follow’’ the precedent. To construct an analogy, do the following:
First, be sure that the issue in the precedent is the same one you are trying to resolve.
Second, identify the precedent’s determinative facts. Don’t look for mere coincidences between the
precedent and your facts. Instead identify the facts that the court treated as crucial and on which it truly
relied.
Third, compare the precedent’s determinative facts to your facts. If your facts are equivalent to the
precedent’s facts, you have an analogy. The facts don’t need to be identical, but they must be equivalent. If
one bank robber waved a gun and another waved a knife, the weapons aren’t identical, but they are
equivalent. They’re both deadly weapons.
Distinguishing is the opposite of analogy. To distinguish a precedent is to show that two situations are so
different that they need not be decided the same way. To distinguish a precedent, go through the same three
steps as when analogizing, except that in the third step you would show that the facts are fundamentally
dissimilar.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

88

§9.5 Testing for Realism
The last skill is that of testing the result of your reasoning for its realism and reasonableness, looking at
your analysis the way a judge would.
Experience on the bench creates what Roscoe Pound called ‘‘the trained intuition of the judge’’ 2 — an
instinct for how the law ought to treat each case to do justice to the parties and the situation. If your analysis
seems unrealistic to a judge’s intuition, the judge will reject what you have done, using the same
96
analytical tools explained in this chapter. Karl Llewellyn wrote that ‘‘rules guide, but they do not control
decision. There is no precedent that the judge may not at his need either file down to razor thinness or
expand into a bludgeon.’’3 Because the law is hardly ever certain, a judge can always fold back your
reasoning and make other analogies, build other syntheses, and so forth — or, worse, adopt the analogies,
syntheses, and other constructs proposed by your adversary.
Step back from what you are doing and ask yourself whether the result will seem reasonable and just to
the typical judge. Testing for realism requires that you have some understanding of how the judicial mind
operates. That may take a long time to come to know fully, but you are learning some of it now through the
decisions you read in casebooks and through the writing you do in this course.

§9.6 An Example of the Precedent Skills at Work
In this example, first we describe the facts as your client has told them to you. Then we provide four
precedents. And finally we explain how you can analyze the precedents.

§9.6.1 The Client’s Story
Megan and Troy Hartley married 14 years ago when both were sophomores in college. Megan dropped
out of school and worked for four years at various jobs as a receptionist, a delivery truck driver, and a
cashier. She earned the couple’s only income while Troy finished college and earned a masters degree in
business finance. They have two children, twins born eight years ago and named Ariel and Jason.
Troy now earns $475,000 a year as an investment banker. Megan has a part-time job as a salesperson in an
art gallery and earns, on average, about $35,000 a year. Early in the marriage, Megan asked Troy to work
less and spend more time with the children so she could find a full-time job and build a career, but he
refused.
For the past two years, Megan and Troy have bickered often, and she cannot stand it when the bickering
turns into shouting. On three occasions during those two years, Troy struck her, once on each occasion, in
the face, at the end of a shouting match.
A few years ago, Troy bought a German shepherd, which he named Debenture. Although Debenture has
never, to Megan’s knowledge, bitten anyone, he bares his teeth and growls when Troy shouts, and this
makes Megan and the children nervous.
97
Last Sunday evening, after a weekend of bitter arguing, Troy announced that he had had enough and was
leaving. He packed a bag and left.
The art gallery where Megan works laid off half its staff on Monday morning. Megan was able to keep her
job, but when she came home from work at six o’clock, she was depressed and worried about whether the
gallery would close, throwing her out of work. The children were with Megan’s parents.
Troy returned around eight o’clock and told Megan that he had consulted a lawyer and that the lawyer had
drafted a separation agreement, which Troy had already signed. The agreement provided that Troy and

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

89

Megan would live apart, beginning immediately, that they would have joint custody of the children, and that
a divorce would be obtained as soon as possible. It provided that Megan get six months of alimony and about
ten percent of the value of the couple’s property.
Troy put the agreement on the kitchen table and angrily demanded that Megan sign it. Debenture was
sitting in the corner, and Megan could see him perk up and become more attentive as Troy’s voice became
louder.
Troy told Megan that if she did not sign the agreement, he would tell the court that her “artsy friends do
drugs in front of Ariel and Jason.” Troy added that no one would believe her if she were to deny these
accusations because it would be her word against his and he would make a much better witness than she
would. Angrily and in a loud voice, Troy said that the court would therefore take the children away from her
and give her none of their property. At this point, Troy was pounding the coffee table, and Debenture was on
his feet, staring at Megan attentively. She expected Debenture to start growling if Troy began yelling.
Megan signed the agreement and asked Troy to leave immediately and to take Debenture with him. Troy
did so. Megan’s friends do not “do drugs.”
Megan knows nothing about divorce law. At the time she signed the agreement, she had no idea whether
Troy’s predictions about divorce and the courts were accurate.
She consulted you a few days after signing the agreement. You believe that if there were no valid
separation agreement, a court would probably award Megan sole custody of the children, child support, three
to five years of alimony, and about fifty percent of the couple’s property.

§9.6.2 Four Precedents
Prenuptial agreements and separation agreements are contracts. Duress is grounds for voiding a contract.
If a court voids a contract, the contract ceases to exist.
Your state’s highest court has decided the following cases.4
98
RASCHI v. RASCHI
(2006)

Mary Raschi argues that her prenuptial agreement with Timothy Raschi is voidable because of duress.
At the time the parties began dating in mid-1991, Timothy was a physician, and Mary was a home
economics teacher. Mary had a child by an earlier marriage. In October 1992, Mary learned that she was
pregnant with Timothy’s child, and shortly afterward she informed Timothy of the pregnancy. He told Mary
that he would not marry her unless she signed an prenuptial agreement, which Timothy’s lawyer drafted.
Mary consulted her own lawyer, who advised her not to sign it.
She signed it anyway in December 1992. At that time, Timothy’s assets were worth $986,000, and Mary’s
assets were worth about $100,000. Timothy’s income was $332,800 per year, and Mary’s income was
$87,100 per year. The agreement provided that the individual property of each party remain the party’s sole
and exclusive property, and that neither party would have a claim to alimony from the other.
Mary and Timothy’s child was born in May 1993. During the marriage, Mary was an unemployed
stay-at-home mother and the primary caretaker of both children while Timothy ran his medical practice.
In November 2001, Timothy sued for divorce, asking the trial court to enforce the terms of the prenuptial
agreement. Mary argued that she was coerced into signing it due to the circumstances in which she found
herself: a pregnant single mother, presented with an agreement shortly before her wedding date and being
told that if she did not sign the agreement there would be no wedding.
A person who enters into a contract under the influence of such fear as precludes him from exercising free
will and judgment may avoid the contract on the grounds of duress. Coercion sufficient to avoid a contract
need not, of course, consist of physical force or threats of it. Social or economic pressure illegally or
immorally applied may be sufficient.
Mary’s signing the agreement was not the product of coercion or duress. Although the circumstances
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

90

presented Mary with a difficult choice, those circumstances did not divest Mary of her free will.
QUISENBERRY v. QUISENBERRY
(2015)

Michael Quisenberry argues that a written agreement between him and Susan Quisenberry is voidable
because he signed it under duress.
Michael and Susan married in March 2004. A few weeks later, he was arrested for burglary. In September
2004, he was convicted and sentenced to four years’ imprisonment. In December 2004, Susan visited him in
prison and told him that she intended to divorce him. Michael
99
begged her not to and offered to sign an agreement giving Susan financial protection if they divorced after
he was released from prison.
Susan drafted the agreement herself, copying it from form agreements she found online. She mailed it to
Michael, and he signed it and mailed it back to her, after which she signed it.
Michael was released in 2008 and returned to live with Susan. The parties separated October 2013. Susan
sued for divorce in November 2013 and moved to enforce the agreement. Michael argues that he was under
duress because he signed the agreement while incarcerated without access to legal counsel and because
Susan threatened to divorce him while he was in prison if he did not sign the agreement.
Duress invalidates a contract if improper external pressure or influence deprived a party of free will so
that the party formed the contract involuntarily. Duress does not occur if the victim has a reasonable
alternative to succumbing and fails to take advantage of that alternative.
Michael was not under duress when he signed the agreement. The only way to get what he wanted —
avoiding a divorce while in prison — was to sign the agreement. But a bargaining disadvantage is not the
same thing as duress. He was not deprived of free will.
FIDRYCH v. SPRINGFIELD MANUFACTURING CO.
(1985)

Joan Fidrych argues that contractual documents she signed are voidable because she signed them under
duress.
Robert Fidrych, her husband, was employed by the Springfield Manufacturing Co. as its assistant
controller. He embezzled $327,011 from the company. On May 21, 1982, the company discovered the
embezzlement and fired him. Joan testified at trial that when he told her of this, her “whole world fell apart.”
On May 25, Peter Kulaski, an employee of the company’s insurer, came to the Fidrych’s house and spent
a half-hour with them. He showed them two judgment notes, which are contractual documents, and
demanded that both of the Fidrychs sign both notes. Because she had done nothing wrong, Joan was
surprised to see her name on the documents. She asked Kulaski if she and her husband would need an
attorney. Kulaski said that if the Fidrychs cooperated, there would be no need for an attorney and Robert
would not be prosecuted. Joan signed both notes.
A threat to start a criminal prosecution amounts to duress. “Experience indicates that the threat of a
well-founded prosecution, likely to result in imprisonment, is usually sufficient to coerce even a brave man.”
13 Samuel Williston, Williston on Contracts § 1613 (3d ed. 1970).
Kulaski included Joan’s name on the judgment notes but did not tell her that he was doing so until minutes
before he asked her to sign them.
100
Joan had already been in a weakened mental state as the result of a recent miscarriage, and was visibly
upset during the meeting, having learned of her husband’s embezzlement. At the meeting, she was told that
if she cooperated, she would have no need for legal counsel. She understood this to mean that if she signed
the notes, her husband would not go to jail. She had no reasonable alternative but to sign. Her signature was
thus obtained by duress.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

91

GRANT v. GRANT
(2012)

Alonzo Grant is a U.S. citizen and has always lived in the United States. Ludmila Grant is from Bulgaria.
In 2006, the parties met online through social media. They conversed electronically and by phone and on
Sept. 5, 2007, Ludmila traveled to the United States to live with Alonzo. Before that date, Ludmila had never
been outside Bulgaria. She had almost no money and relied on Alonzo for financial support.
In November 2007, Ludmila became pregnant with Alonzo’s child. Her visa would expire on Dec. 4,
2007, and she believed she would have to leave the country unless she married Alonzo. Alonzo showed
Ludmila a premarital agreement and said he would marry her only if she signed it. Before signing it,
Ludmila attempted to translate it from English into Bulgarian, but was unable to do so because, as she later
testified, it “had strange technical language.” She made notes while trying to translate, and her notes list
words for which she could not find a translation, including “undivided,” “equitable,” and “pro rata.” Ludmila
did not hire a lawyer because she had no money to pay for one.
Ludmila signed the agreement on Nov. 25, 2007. The parties were married on December 1, 2007, three
days before Ludmila’s visa was to expire. The parties separated on Feb. 13, 2010. Ludmila then sued for
divorce. Alonzo moved to dismiss her claims for alimony and equitable distribution, claiming they were
precluded by the premarital agreement.
The central question with respect to whether a contract was executed under duress is whether, considering
all the surrounding circumstances, one party to the transaction was prevented from exercising his free will by
threats or the wrongful conduct of another. Whether or not duress exists in a particular case is a question of
fact to be determined according to the circumstances of each case, such as the strength or weakness and age
and capacity of the party threatened.
Alonzo knew that Ludmila’s visa would soon expire, that she was pregnant with his child, and that she
relied completely on him for financial support. We hold that Ludmila signed the agreement under duress and
that it is voidable.
101

§9.6.3 Using the Precedent Analysis Tools
Below is a discussion of how the tools in this chapter might be used in the Hartleys’ situation. At the end
of the chapter is an exercise in which you will bring everything together.
Ranking precedent. Each case was decided by the highest court in your state and is thus mandatory
authority. None of these cases expressly overrules another one. And no case is so inconsistent with an earlier
one that the earlier case has been impliedly overruled. The cases come to different results, but that is because
some of the facts differ and are distinguishable. The cases enforce rules that are either identical or at least
consistent (see synthesizing and reconciling below). No case contains dicta.
Formulating rules along a continuum from the broadest to the narrowest interpretations. All the
cases enforce a general three-element test for voiding a contract on the ground of duress (see synthesizing
and reconciling below). For each case, it’s also possible to express instead a narrow version of that rule. For
example, Fidrych can be cited for the proposition that a contract is voidable for duress if one party threatens
another with criminal prosecution.
Synthesizing and reconciling. All the cases expressly state or impliedly use the following three-element
test:
A contract is voidable for duress if

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

92

1. one party threatened or pressured the other
2. the threat or pressure was wrongful
Raschi: “pressure illegally or immorally applied”
Quisenberry: “improper external pressure or influence”
Grant: “by threats or the wrongful conduct”
3. the threatened party was thus deprived of free will
Raschi: “under the influence of such fear as precludes him from exercising free will and
judgment”
Quisenberry: “deprived a party of free will so that the party formed the contract
involuntarily”
Fidrych: the Williston quote, “the threat of a well-founded prosecution, likely to result in
imprisonment, is usually sufficient to coerce even a brave man”
Grant: “prevented from exercising his free will”
Grant expressly holds that this test is to be applied to the circumstances as a whole (“to be determined
according to the circumstances of each case, such as the strength or weakness and age and capacity of the
party threatened”). The other cases imply the same thing by the way they explain and analyze the facts.
102
Quisenberry holds that a weak bargaining position — without wrongful threats — does not equal duress
(“a bargaining disadvantage is not the same thing as duress” and “Duress does not occur if the victim has a
reasonable alternative to succumbing and fails to take advantage of that alternative”). None of the other
cases is inconsistent with this.
Determining policy. None of the cases expressly states a policy, but you can deduce it from each case’s
reasoning. You already know from the offer-and-acceptance part of your Contracts course that a contract is
formed by a free agreement — a meeting of the minds — between the parties.
Usually one party is stronger than the other. Your cell phone company, for example, has a stronger
bargaining position than you do. Unequal bargaining shouldn’t prevent enforceable contracts. If it did, few
contracts would be enforceable. But in an extreme situation the inequality could become unacceptable if the
stronger party has turned the weaker party into a victim unable to exercise free will.
Where the problem is created by threats or pressure, the three-element duress test identifies victims in a
way that’s consistent with the general policies of contract law. The threatening party must have behaved
reprehensibly. The cases say “wrongfully,” “illegally,” “improperly,” or “immorally.” And the threat must
have prevented a true agreement — a genuine meeting of the minds — by depriving the threatened party of
free will.
Analogizing and distinguishing. Three facts occur in all the cases and in Megan’s story. First, a party or
the party’s lawyer drafted a contract. Second, that party demanded that the other party sign it. And third, the
other party felt under pressure to sign. Beyond that, there are factual differences, which might be analogous
to or distinguishable from your client Megan’s story. Here they are:
The threat

Raschi:
Quisenberry:
Fidrych:
Grant:

Timothy threatened not to marry Mary.
Susan threatened to divorce Michael.
Kulaski threatened to prosecute Joan’s husband.
Alonzo threatened not to marry Ludmila.

How would you describe the threat Troy made to Megan? Compared to each of the cases, is Troy’s threat
analogous or distinguishable?
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

93

Circumstances in which the threat was delivered

Raschi:
Quisenberry
:
Fidrych:

Mary was pregnant with Timothy’s child.
Michael had just begun serving a four-year prison sentence.
Kulaski demanded that Joan immediately sign documents that she had never seen
before. She was already distraught

103

Grant
:

because her husband had been fired for committing a crime and because of a recent
miscarriage.
Ludmila was pregnant with Alonzo’s child. She believed that if he didn’t marry her, she would
be deported back to Bulgaria. She had limited knowledge of English. She had been in the U.S.
for only two months and had never before been outside her home country.

Compare Megan’s circumstances with those in each case, as described above. Are her circumstances
analogous or distinguishable?
Economic disparity between the parties

Raschi:
Quisenberry
: Fidrych:
Grant:

Timothy was in a much better position financially, but at the time Mary signed the
agreement, she was capable of working at a job and supporting herself.
Not an issue. Not treated as an issue. But the company is obviously in a better position
financially than a fired employee.
Ludmila “relied completely on [Alonzo] for financial support.”

Compare Megan and Troy’s finances with each case. Is their situation analogous or distinguishable?
Opportunity to consult a lawyer

Raschi:
Quisenberry
:
Fidrych:
Grant:

“Mary consulted her own lawyer, who advised her not to sign it.”
The court ignored the fact that Michael was “incarcerated without access to legal
counsel.”
Kulaski told Joan that if she and Robert signed the notes, Robert wouldn’t be
prosecuted, and they wouldn’t need a lawyer.
Ludmila had no money to pay a lawyer. She actually tried diligently to translate the
agreement into her native language and failed because of the technical terminology.

Obviously Megan had enough money to consult a lawyer. She hired you shortly after signing the agreement.
But did any pressure attributable to Troy discourage her from consulting with you before signing? If so, was
that pressure as bad as what happened in Fidrych and Grant?
To help you keep track of all this, you might make a matrix so you can visualize the comparisons and
contrasts.
104

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

94

Threat

Threat
Circumstances

Economic
Disparity

Opportunity
to Consult
Lawyer

Case
Outcome

Raschi
Quisenberry
Fidrych
Grant
When you fill in the facts, the patterns become obvious. (If you do this on a computer, set up the page in
landscape mode because matrices can be wide.)
Testing for realism. Based on the cases and Megan’s story, you might have developed a tentative theory,
based on logic, about whether the Hartleys’ separation agreement is voidable for duress.
If you litigate this issue, the trial court’s decision could be appealed to the same court that decided Raschi,
Quisenberry, Fidrych, and Grant. Reading four cases from that court should give you some sense for how its
judges instinctively feel — on a human level — about duress in family situations. Will those judges be
receptive to your tentative theory? Or will they reject it as unrealistic?
Exercise I
Duress
In §9.6.2, is the Hartleys’ separation agreement voidable for duress? Why or why not? Explain your
reasoning in detail.
Exercise II
Emil Risberg’s Diary
This exercise is in Appendix B.
1. O. W. Holmes, The Path of the Law, 10 Harv. L. Rev. 457, 469 (1897).
2. Roscoe Pound, The Theory of Judicial Decision, 36 Harv. L. Rev. 940, 951 (1923).
3. K. N. Llewellyn, The Bramble Bush 180 (1930).
4. The cases are based on Biliouris v. Biliouris, 852 N.E.2d 687 (Mass. App. 2006); Blejski v. Blejski, 480 S.E.2d 462
(S.C. 1997); Germantown Manufacturing Co. v. Rawlinson, 491 A.2d 138 (Pa. Super. 1985); Hall v. Hall, 27 N.E.3d 281
(Ind. Ct. App. 2015); Hamilton v. Hamilton, 591 A.2d 720 (Pa. Super. 1991); and Holler v. Holler, 612 S.E.2d 469 (S.C.
2005).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 1:45 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

95

105

Copyright 2021. Aspen Publishing.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

10

Working with Facts

§10.1 What Is a Fact?
Consider the following statements:
1. The plaintiff’s complaint alleges that, at a certain time and place, the defendant struck the plaintiff
from behind with a stick.
2. At trial, the plaintiff’s principal witness testified that, at the time and place specified in the
complaint, the defendant struck the plaintiff from behind with a stick.
3. At the conclusion of the trial, the jury found that, at the time and place specified in the complaint, the
defendant struck the plaintiff from behind with a stick.
4. At the time and place specified in the complaint, the defendant struck the plaintiff from behind with
a stick.
5. At the time and place specified in the complaint, the defendant brutally struck the plaintiff from
behind with a stick.
6. At the time and place specified in the complaint, the defendant accidentally struck the plaintiff from
behind with a stick.
7. At the time and place specified in the complaint, the defendant committed a battery on the plaintiff.
Which of these statements expresses a fact?
Statement 1 is an allegation of a fact. Statement 2 is evidence offered in proof of the allegation. Statement
3 is a procedural decision that the evidence proves the allegation. Statement 4 is the fact itself.
106
This sequence is inherent in litigation. Statements 1 through 3 are actually procedural events like those
mentioned at the beginning of Chapter 3. The party seeking a remedy first alleges, in a pleading, facts that, if
proved, would merit that remedy (Statement 1). At trial, that party submits evidence — -testimony (Statement
2), documents, and other tangible evidence — to persuade the fact finder that the allegations are true. If the
fact finder, in this case a jury, is persuaded, the allegations are proved (Statement 3) and become facts
(Statement 4).
Statement 5 contains the word brutally, which is a subjective characterization. Two people might see the
same action, both of them disliking it, but they might characterize it differently. One might consider it brutal.
The other might consider it bad behavior but not brutal. If you haven’t seen the incident yourself, you should
wonder whether the word brutally accurately summarizes what happened, or whether it instead reflects the
value judgments and preferences of the person who has characterized the incident as brutal. A
characterization is not a fact. It’s only an opinion about a fact.
Statement 6 includes the word accidentally. The defendant might have wanted to cause violence, or he
EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN
AN: 2750409 ; Richard K. Neumann Jr, Ellie Margolis, Kathryn M. Stanchi.; Legal Reasoning and Legal Writing
Account: s2953473.main.ehost

96

might have struck the plaintiff only inadvertently and without any desire to do harm. With both possibilities,
an observer might see pretty much the same actions: the stick being raised, the stick being lowered, the
collision with the back. The difference between the two possibilities is in what the defendant might have
been thinking or feeling when he struck the plaintiff. If you say that the defendant struck the plaintiff
“accidentally,” you’ve inferred what the defendant was thinking at the time. That’s a factual inference, a
conclusion derived from facts. A factual inference isn’t a fact. It’s the product of reasoning in which a fact is
one of the raw materials.
Statement 7 is a conclusion of law and is not a fact at all. Battery is a concept defined by the law, and you
can discover whether a battery occurred only by consulting one or more rules of law. A conclusion of law is
the result of applying law to facts. A factual inference (Statement 6) is based on purely factual reasoning
without applying law to facts. “Accidentally” is a factual inference because no rule of law defines an
accident. Battery is a conclusion of law because battery is a tort with elements.
The nonexistence of a fact can itself be a fact. For example:
8. At trial, no witness has testified that the defendant struck the plaintiff deliberately or that the plaintiff
suffered any physical or psychological injury or even any indignity.
Here, the absence of certain evidence is itself a fact. Consequently, the defendant might be entitled to a
directed verdict because some things have not been proved.
At first, you may have difficulties with four fact skills: (1) separating facts from other things; (2)
separating determinative facts from other kinds of facts;
107
(3) building inferences from facts; and (4) purging your analysis of hidden and unsupportable factual
assumptions. When you have mastered these skills, you will be able to make reasoned decisions about
selecting and using facts. This section has explained the first skill, and the exercise at the end of this chapter
develops it further. The remainder of this chapter considers each of the other skills in turn.

§10.2 Identifying Determinative Facts
Facts can be divided into three categories. The first is made up of facts that are essential to a controversy
because they will determine the court’s decision: if a change in a fact would have caused the court to come
to a different decision, that fact is determinative. The second is a category of explanatory facts that, while
not determinative, are nevertheless useful because they help make sense out of a situation that would
otherwise seem disjointed. The third category includes coincidental facts that have no relevance or
usefulness at all: they merely happened. In life’s randomness, all three categories of facts occur mixed up
together in a disorderly mess. But lawyers have to separate out the determinative facts and treat them as
determinative.
You have already started learning how to do that in this and other courses, mostly through the analysis of
precedent. When, for example, you’re asked to formulate the rule of a case, you’ve begun to develop the
habit of isolating the facts the court considered determinative and then reformulating those facts into a list of
generalities that — when they occur together again in the future — will produce the same result that
happened in the reported opinion. But when you look at a given litigation through the lens of an opinion,
you’re looking at it after a court has already decided which facts are determinative: you are explicating the
text of the opinion to learn what the court thought about the facts. We’re concerned here with another skill:
looking at the facts at the beginning of the case, before they are even put to a court, and predicting which the
court will consider determinative.

§10.3 Building Inferences from Facts

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

97

The main part of intellectual education is . . . learning how to make facts live.
— Oliver Wendell Holmes

Let’s return for a moment to Welty and Lutz from Chapter 4 (§4.3).
One of the elements of burglary is the intent to commit a felony within the dwelling. In the jurisdiction
where Welty and Lutz live, that element can be satisfied only if a defendant had that intent at the time that
any breaking and
108
entering might have occurred. If the defendant formed the intent for the first time after entering the
dwelling, the element isn’t satisfied. Assume that Welty broke and entered Lutz’s apartment when she
opened the door further and walked in. Did she — at the instant she stepped inside — intend to commit a
felony there?
Your response may be ‘‘Well, let’s ask Welty — she’s the one who would really know.’’ But things aren’t
so easy. If you’re the prosecutor, you may find that the police have already asked her that question and that
she has refused to answer or has given an answer that the police consider self-serving. In fact, you will rarely
have direct evidence of a person’s state of mind. People don’t carry electronic signboards on their foreheads
on which their thoughts can be read at moments the law considers important. Instead, as the prosecutor you
would have to prove Welty’s state of mind through the surrounding circumstances — for example, through
the things she did or didn’t do, as well as the things she knew other people had or hadn’t done. Although her
state of mind would be easier to determine if she had appeared at Lutz’s door with weapons — or, in another
situation, with safecracking tools — inferences can be built from circumstances even without such dramatic
displays of intent.
Even if you’re Welty’s defense lawyer and can freely ask her when she formed an intent to hit Lutz, you
might not be much better off than the prosecutor. She might tell you something like the following:
I don’t know when I decided to punch him. I had to listen to his loud music on his four-foot concert speakers for
two or three hours while I was trying to study for Civil Procedure. At least once or twice during that time, I thought
that it might be nice to punch his lights out, but I don’t know that I had decided then to do it. When I knocked on his
door, I thought, ‘‘This guy had better be reasonable, or else’’ — but at that instant I don’t know whether I was
committed to punching him. When I pushed the door open and stepped inside, I thought that he might learn a little
respect for the rest of us if something very emphatic happened to him — something that might help him remember
in the future that other people have needs and that he shouldn’t be so self-centered. Even then, I wasn’t certain that I
was going to do anything except try to reason with him. But when he ordered me out, I decked him. Nobody ever
told me that I was supposed to make sure that my thoughts fit into this ‘‘state of mind’’ thing you’re telling me
about. I have no idea when I ‘‘formed an intent’’ to hit him. I can only tell you what my thoughts were at each step
in the story. You’re the lawyer. You tell me when I ‘‘formed an intent.’’

Now the problem is something else: a party’s thoughts don’t mesh nicely with the law’s categories of states
of mind. Welty’s sequence of emotions somehow culminated in an action, but there seems to have been no
magical moment at which anger crystallized into a decision that the law might recognize as ‘‘intent.’’ A
defense lawyer handles this problem in the same way that a prosecutor deals with the absence of direct
evidence. Each lawyer will build inferences from
109
the circumstances surrounding Welty’s actions. As Welty sees the arguments unfold, she might conclude that
the law is doing strange and perhaps arbitrary things in categorizing her thoughts. But the law must have a
way of judging states of mind, and it relies heavily on circumstances.

§10.4 Identifying Hidden and Unsupportable Factual Assumptions
David Binder and Paul Bergman have pointed out that, ‘‘[i]f in medieval times there was ‘trial by
combat,’ then today we have ‘trial by inference.’”1 Your adversary and the court will mercilessly challenge
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

98

combat,’ then today we have ‘trial by inference.’”1 Your adversary and the court will mercilessly challenge
your inferential streams, looking for weaknesses in the way they were put together. You must purge your
analysis of hidden assumptions that won’t stand up to scrutiny when exposed. Consider the following:
Detective Fenton Tracem rushes breathlessly into the office of the local prosecutor, Les Gettem, eager to
persuade Les to issue an indictment. Fenton describes the evidence he has uncovered:
Les, we’ve got a good case for bank robbery against Clyde. The gun the robber used and dropped at the door
was originally purchased by Clyde. The owner of A-1 Guns can definitely identify Clyde as the purchaser and
the teller can identify the gun. . . . Two days after the robbery Clyde moves out without giving Ness, his
landlord, his two neighbors, Capone and Siegel, or the post office his new address. . . .
The detective has disgorged a mass of circumstantial evidence which appears in the aggregate to be quite
convincing. The prosecutor cannot, however, be content to rely on this presentation. In order to analyze the
probative value of the evidence, Gettem must first expressly articulate the generalization which links each item of
evidence to an element.
[E]xpressly articulating generalizations is the key to determining just how strong a piece of evidence is.
Consider, therefore, the generalization the prosecutor might articulate for the first piece of evidence, that the gun
used and dropped by the robber was originally purchased by Clyde. The generalization might be something like,
‘‘People who have purchased a gun subsequently used in a robbery are more likely to have participated in the
robbery than people who have not.’’2

How accurate is this generalization? See what happens when you compare it with either of two other strings
of generalizations. Here’s the first one: ‘‘Robbers don’t feel morally compelled to pay for what they acquire.
Because guns can be stolen, a robber has no need to pay for a gun.’’ Here’s the second
110
string: ‘‘Robbers plan their crimes. A robber can foresee the possibility of losing control of a gun during the
robbery. A robber can also foresee that a gun legally purchased from a merchant might be traced back to the
robber. Clyde is bright enough to have realized this.’’ Both strings seem more believable than ‘‘People who
have purchased a gun subsequently used in a robbery are more likely to have participated in the robbery than
people who have not’’ — and either string might overcome and negate the generalization on which the
detective relies.
In the beginning years of practice, one must force oneself to articulate explicitly the generalizations on which one
relies, for it is not a skill practiced in everyday life. In fact, there is a word for people who state the generalizations
underlying all inferences they make: bores. But in the privacy of one’s office, one should expressly identify the
premises on which one relies [because] by articulating the underlying generalization one can consciously consider
the question of how strongly it is supported by common experience. . . .
[A]rticulating generalizations . . . may bring to mind potential exceptions. . . . [O]ne method of testing the degree
to which common experience uniformly supports a generalization is to add ‘‘except when’’ to a generalization, and
see how many reasonable exceptions one can identify. . . .
[For example, consider] a generalization that one might make in Clyde’s case: ‘‘People who move without
leaving a forwarding address are usually trying to avoid detection.’’ By adding ‘‘except when,’’ one sees that this
generalization is subject to many exceptions and is therefore less likely to be persuasive. People may be trying to
avoid detection, except when they simply forget to leave a forwarding address, or except when they do not yet know
the permanent address to which they will be moving, or except when they will be moving around for a time and will
not have a permanent address.3

When you build and test your own inferences, don’t commit to paper much of the analysis Binder and
Bergman describe. It’s thinking reserved for the privacy of your own office.
But things are different when you attack your adversary’s inferences. If Clyde becomes your client, you
might argue that a directed verdict should be — or, on appeal, should have been — granted because a
rational jury would not be able to find guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. In a supporting memorandum or in
an appellate brief, you might write, ‘‘The evidence that he moved without leaving a forwarding address does
not tend to prove guilty flight. It could just as easily prove that he forgot to leave a forwarding address, or
that he did not yet know his new permanent address when he moved, or that he would be moving around for
a time without a permanent address.’’

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

99

111
Exercise
The Menu at the Courthouse Cafe
The following items appear on the menu at the Courthouse Cafe. Decide what is a fact, what is a
characterization, and what is a conclusion of fact. (If part of an item is factual and part is not, decide exactly
where the fact ends and the non-fact begins.)
Hot, steaming coffee
Healthful oat bran muffins
Pure beef hot dogs
Garden-fresh vegetables
Hand-picked huckleberries
Home-made huckleberry pie
Delicious peanut butter ice cream
1. David A. Binder & Paul Bergman, Fact Investigation: From Hypothesis to Proof 82 (1984).
2. Id. at 92-93.
3. Id. at 93-96.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

100

113

IV
ORGANIZING PROOF OF A CONCLUSION OF
LAW

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

101

115

11

A Paradigm for Organizing Proof of a

Conclusion of Law
§11.1 Why We Need to Organize Proof of a Conclusion of Law
Medwick is a first-year law student and a talented computer programmer. He is particularly good at
creating web robots, which are also called bots.
A bot is software that searches for certain kinds of websites and then automatically does something —
good or bad — on each site. Google uses bots to search and index websites. Every website owner welcomes
this because Google’s indexing brings visitors to the site. A different bot, however, might be used to attack
websites. For example, sites that sell concert tickets must defend themselves against bots attempting to buy
up all the best seats.
In August, just before the start of the fall semester, Medwick created a bot that finds websites that allow
people to post comments. Wherever it could, the bot would post a comment that was really an advertisement
for a business that paid Medwick. The ads offered to sell things like out-of-print CD’s, spare parts for
vintage cars, or cheap vacations in Tahiti. The bot did everything automatically. Medwick activated it from
his keyboard and studied Torts or Property for hours while the bot did its work. He planned to use the
income to support himself while in law school.
Many websites require a visitor to agree to “Terms & Conditions,’’ that typically appear in a little window
or can be accessed through a link. Clicking on a button labeled “I Agree’’ or “I Accept’’ allows the visitor to
use the site. Almost everyone clicks “I Agree’’ or “I Accept’’ without bothering to read the terms and
conditions. A website’s terms and conditions are a contract if a person using the website agrees to them.
These are called clickwrap or click-through
116
contracts. Clicking on “I Agree’’ or “I Accept’’ is the electronic equivalent of a signature on the last page
of a contract.
In September, a process server walked into Medwick’s Civil Procedure class and silently handed him
some documents that looked like they had been drafted by a lawyer. This disrupted the class. After the
process server left, the Civil Procedure teacher asked to see the documents. After looking at them for a few
moments, she told the class that Medwick had been served with a summons and complaint and that lawsuits
begin that way. Medwick was stunned.
He is being sued by ExitRow.com, Inc., which operates a travel planning website. One part of the site has
data on airlines, from which people can learn which airlines provide the most reliable service between any
two cities. Another part has electronic bulletin boards where people can comment on travel issues such as
improving security procedures and permitting cell phone calls during a flight.
The following sentence appears near the beginning of ExitRow.com’s terms and conditions: “The User
promises not to post advertising on this website or use the website for commercial purposes in any way.’’

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

102

The terms and conditions can be viewed through a little window on ExitRow.com’s home page. The only
way into the site is through the home page, and the website blocks access to the rest of the site unless the
user clicks on an “I Agree’’ button on the home page. Medwick had programmed his bot to click on every “I
Agree’’ button it encountered. The bot cannot read or interpret contract language.
In its complaint, ExitRow.com requests damages for breach of contract and alleges that Medwick’s bot
posted hundreds of ads on its website. Medwick has hired your law firm to defend him. Your research shows
that this dispute is governed by California law.
“I didn’t agree to anything,’’ Medwick told you. “I’ve never even seen their contract. I never promised not
to advertise on their site. How could I agree to a contract I’ve never seen?’’
Is Medwick bound to ExitRow.com’s terms and conditions?1
Suppose you need to write out your legal analysis so that it could be read by another lawyer, either a
supervising lawyer in your firm or a judge to whom you would argue this case. What will you say first?
What will you say after that? How will you organize everything? And how much detail will you provide?
Those questions are answered in this chapter and in Chapter 12.

§11.2 A Paradigm for Structuring Proof
A conclusion of law is a determination of how the law treats certain facts. In predictive writing, it can be
expressed as a present statement (“Medwick is
117
contractually bound by ExitRow.com’s Terms and Conditions’’) or as a prediction (“A court will probably
hold that Medwick is contractually bound . . .’’). In persuasive writing, it can be expressed as a present
statement or as a recommendation to the court.
In both predictive and persuasive writing (Chapter 4), you prove a conclusion of law by explaining the law
and the facts in ways that convince the reader that your conclusion is the right one. Organizing what you say
is essential to convincing the reader. This chapter and Chapters 12-14 explain how to organize.
A supervising lawyer who reads a predictive Discussion in an office memorandum (Chapters 4 and 16)
does so in preparation for making a decision. So does a judge who reads persuasive writing in a motion
memorandum or appellate brief. They will make different kinds of decisions. The lawyer will decide what to
advise the client or how to handle the client’s case. The judge will decide how to rule on a motion or appeal.
Both look for a tightly structured analysis that makes your conclusion seem inevitable.
To the reader who must make a decision, analysis is most easily understood if it is organized into the
following paradigm formula — or into some variation of it.
To prove a conclusion of law:
1. State your conclusion.
2. State the primary rule that supports the conclusion.
3. Prove and explain the rule through citation to authority, description of how the authority stands
for the rule, discussion of subsidiary rules, analyses of policy, and counter-analyses.
4. Apply the rule to the facts with the aid of subsidiary rules, supporting authority, policy
considerations, and counter-analyses.
5. If steps 1 through 4 are complicated, sum up by restating your conclusion.
Acronyms have been used to help students remember this kind of formula. For example, CREAC stands
for Conclusion, Rule, rule Explanation, rule Application, and restated Conclusion. Another acronym is CRAC
: Conclusion, Rule, Application, and Conclusion. A third acronym is CRuPAC: Conclusion, Rule, Proof of
Rule, Application, and Conclusion.
What do the ingredients in this formula mean?
Your conclusion is the one you are trying to prove. Some examples are in the first paragraph of this
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

103

section.
The rule is the principal rule on which you rely in reaching your conclusion. Other rules might also be
involved, but this is the main one on which your analysis rests.
118
Rule proof and explanation is a demonstration that the main rule on which you rely really is the law in
the jurisdiction involved. The reader needs to know for certain that the rule exists in the jurisdiction, and that
you have expressed it accurately. Both can be done through citations to authority, such as statutes and
precedent, together with explanations of how that authority stands for the rule as you have stated it,
explanations of policy, and counter-analyses. (This chapter and Chapters 12 and 13 explain how to do all
that.) Subsidiary rules sometimes help explain the main rule.
Rule application is a demonstration that the rule + the facts = your conclusion. Explain your logic and
use authority to show that your result is what the law has in mind. (This chapter and Chapters 12 and 13
explain how.)
Sometimes authority that you use in rule proof might reappear in rule application, but for a different
purpose. For example, suppose that Alger v. Rittenhouse held that a boat crew that caught a shark became its
owner to the exclusion of the fisherman who hooked but lost the shark an hour before. (In your client’s case,
neighboring ranchers trapped in their corral a wild mustang that immediately jumped over the fence and ran
onto your client’s land, where it was captured by your client.) In rule proof, you can use Alger to prove that
your jurisdiction has adopted the rule that wild animals become the property of the first person to reduce
them to possession. In rule application, you can use Alger again — this time to show that your client satisfies
that rule because her position is analogous to that of the boat crew.
A subsidiary rule is one that guides application of the main rule or works together with it in some way
necessary to your analysis. In a criminal case, the main rule would set out the elements of the crime. Among
the subsidiary rules would be the one that permits conviction of any crime only on evidence that establishes
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
A rule’s policy is the rule’s reason for being. The law doesn’t create rules for the fun of it. Each rule is
designed to accomplish a purpose (such as preventing a particular type of harm). When courts are unsure of
what a rule means or how to apply it, they interpret the rule in the way that would be most consistent with
the policy behind it. Thus, policy can be used to show what the rule is (in rule proof) and how to apply it (in
rule application).
Counter-analysis is a term used by law teachers, but not by many practicing lawyers. A counter-analysis
evaluates the arguments that could reasonably be made against your conclusion. Don’t waste the reader’s
time by evaluating marginal or far-fetched arguments. In predictive writing, the counter-analysis is an
objective evaluation of each reasonable contrary argument, with an honest report of its strengths and
weaknesses. You must report whether your conclusion can withstand attack. And you must consider the
possibility that other analyses might be better than the one you have selected. Like authority and policy,
counter-analyses can appear both in rule proof and in rule application — but for different purposes. (In
persuasive writing in a motion memo or appellate brief, a counter-analysis is called a counter-argument. It
doesn’t
119
objectively consider contrary points of view. It argues against them, stressing their weaknesses and
showing their strengths to be unconvincing.)
The paradigm formula is a tool to help you organize. It can be varied in many ways, although you should
do so only for good reasons. This chapter explains why readers prefer that you organize your analysis this
way. Chapters 12 and 13 explain how to vary the formula to suit your needs. Chapter 14 explains how to
start using the formula and how to check your writing to see whether it is organized effectively.

§11.3 Why Readers Prefer This Type of Organization
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

104

Remember that all of your readers will be practical and skeptical people and will be reading your memo or
brief because they must make a decision.
State your conclusion first because a practical and busy reader needs to know what you’re trying to
support before you start supporting it. If your conclusion is mentioned for the first time after your analysis
(or in the middle of that analysis), some or all your reasoning seems pointless to the reader who doesn’t yet
know what your reasoning is supposed to prove. Effective legal writers usually state their conclusions boldly
at the beginning of a Discussion or Argument (“The plaintiff has a cause of action because . . .’’). This may
take some getting used to. It’s contrary to the way writing is often done in college. And most of us have been
socialized since childhood to state a conclusion only after a proof — even in the most informal situations —
to avoid appearing opinionated or confrontational.
Far from being offended, however, the reader who has to make a decision is grateful not to be kept in
suspense. That kind of reader becomes frustrated and annoyed while struggling through sentences the
relevance of which cannot be understood because the writer has not yet stated the proposition the sentences
are intended to prove.
State the rule next because, after reading a conclusion of law, the skeptical law-trained mind instinctively
wants to know what principles of law require that conclusion instead of others. After all, the whole idea of
law is that things are to be done according to the rules.
Then prove and explain the rule because the reader will refuse to follow you further until you’ve
established that the rule is what you say it is and until you’ve educated the reader somewhat on how the rule
works. The skeptical law-trained mind won’t accept a rule statement as genuine unless it has been proved
with authority. And you can’t apply a rule that the reader has not yet accepted and understood.
Apply the rule last because that’s the only thing left. When you apply the rule to the facts, you complete
the proof of a conclusion of law.
Along the way, counter-analyze opposing arguments because the skeptical law-trained mind will be able
to think up many of those arguments and will want
120
them evaluated. Almost every train of reasoning can be challenged with reasonable arguments. If you
don’t account for them, the reader will doubt you because it will look as though you’re avoiding problems
rather than solving them.

§11.4 Varying the Paradigm Formula to Suit Your Needs
The formula set out in §11.2 can be varied in three ways.
First, you can vary the sequence in which the components appear. (See §11.4.1.)
Second, in rule proof and in rule application, you can vary the depth of your explanation to suit the
amount of skepticism you expect from the reader. (See §11.4.2 and Chapter 12.)
Third, you can combine separately paradigmed analyses into a unified explanation of several issues and
sub-issues. (See §11.4.3 and Chapter 13.)

§11.4.1 Varying the Sequence
In some situations, you might vary the sequence of the paradigm formula’s components — for example,
by stating the rule first and the conclusion second — although the order should not be illogical or confusing.
Think long and hard before deciding to vary the sequence in the box in §11.2, and, if you do vary it, you
should be able, if your teacher asks, to give a good reason for doing so. In particular, rule proof should be
completed before rule application begins. Variations in sequence usually don’t work well in office memos.
They are more likely to be useful in persuasive writing in motion memoranda and appellate briefs.

§11.4.2 Varying the Depth
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

105

In rule proof and explanation, some statements about the law are complicated and others aren’t. You
might need many pages to explain a particular rule because many people would be skeptical about it (“
Pennoyer v. Neff is still good law’’). Or you might need only a few pages because what you say will easily
be accepted.
The same is true about rule application. You need to write more analysis if the reader will be skeptical that
the rule should be applied as you say and less if the reader will easily see the point.
Chapter 13 explains how to expand or contract analysis and how to decide when to expand or contract it.
121

§11.4.3 Combining Separately Structured Analyses
If you reach several conclusions or sub-conclusions, the reader will need a separately structured proof for
each one.
For example, suppose you represent the plaintiff in a negligence lawsuit. Negligence has four elements:
(1) a duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff, (2) the defendant’s breach of that duty, (3) an injury
suffered by the plaintiff (4) proximately caused by the breach. To succeed at trial, you’ll need to prove all of
the elements. If you’re writing an office memo in which you predict success at trial, you’ll make four
separate predictions, one for each element:
1. We can prove a duty owed by the defendant to the plaintiff.
2. We can prove a breach of that duty.
3. We can prove that the plaintiff suffered an injury.
4. We can prove that the breach proximately caused the injury.
In the memo, you’ll say these more concisely, for example: “The breach proximately caused the injury.’’
Each of these predictions is a separate conclusion of law. Each will require its own separately paradigmed
proof.
You can combine separately structured proofs like these into a single unified presentation that supports an
overall conclusion (“The plaintiff has a cause of action for negligence’’). Chapter 12 explains how.
Exercise
Changing Planes in Little Rock
Wong sued Keating in an Arkansas state court. Wong has never lived in Arkansas, and none of the events
that led to Wong v. Keating happened in Arkansas. The only time Keating has ever set foot on the ground in
Arkansas was for 45 minutes while changing planes at the Little Rock airport. The only way for Keating to
get to Shreveport, Louisiana, where she had a job interview, was to fly into Little Rock on one flight and
then fly from Little Rock to Shreveport on another. During those 45 minutes, while Keating was walking in
the airport from her incoming gate to her outgoing gate, a process server, acting on Wong’s behalf, served
Keating with a summons and complaint in Wong v. Keating. Keating moved to dismiss on the ground that
Arkansas has no personal jurisdiction over her. Wong claims that service in Arkansas alone gives Arkansas
personal jurisdiction over Keating.
Below is an analysis of this issue. Find the components of the paradigm for organizing proof of a
conclusion of law. Find the writer’s conclusion; the primary rule that supports that conclusion; proof and
explanation of that rule; and application of that rule to the facts. Mark up the passage below to show where
each of the components occurs. If you can find any counter-analyses or policy discussions, mark them, too.
Finally, for each component, ask yourself whether the writer has told you enough. Are you confident that the
writer is correct? If not, what kinds of additional information would you need?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

106

122
Arkansas has personal jurisdiction over Keating. Under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment, a state is authorized to exercise personal jurisdiction over a defendant who is served with a
summons while the defendant is voluntarily inside the state. Burnham v. Superior Court, 495 U.S. 604
(1990). That is true even if service of the summons is the only connection between the state and the plaintiff,
the defendant, or the plaintiff’s claim. It is true where the defendant does not reside in the state, is only
traveling through the state, and has no connection to the state except for the trip during which the defendant
was served. Id. It is also true where none of the events or circumstances alleged in the plaintiff’s complaint
happened in the state. Id.
The defendant in Burnham was a New Jersey resident who had traveled on business to southern California
and then to northern California to visit his children. The plaintiff was the defendant’s wife, who had him
served in a divorce action while he was in northern California. Four justices of the Supreme Court joined in
an opinion by Justice Scalia and held that, under precedent going back two centuries, a state has “the power
to hale before its courts any individual who could be found within its borders.’’ Id. at 610. Another four
justices joined in an opinion by Justice Brennan and held that the defendant’s presence in the state at the
time of service was a purposeful availment that satisfies the minimum contacts requirements of International
Shoe, 326 U.S. 310 (1945). The ninth justice (Stevens) concurred separately on the ground that both
rationales are correct. Because there was no majority opinion, it is not settled which rationale supports the
rule, although the rule had the unanimous support of all nine justices.
Regardless of the rationale, the effect here is that service on Keating in the Little Rock airport created
personal jurisdiction in Arkansas. Keating was present in Arkansas at the moment of service. The process
server’s affidavit is evidence of that, and Keating concedes it. Moreover, she does not claim that she did not
know she was in Arkansas or that she was in the state under duress. She bought her airline ticket knowing
she would have to change planes in Little Rock, and her presence was therefore voluntary.
Keating argues, however, that she was not in Arkansas long enough to be subject to the state’s
jurisdiction, even if she was served in Arkansas. She points out that the Burnham defendant had traveled to
California to conduct business there and visit his children, spending nights in hotels and purposely availing
himself of the benefits of the state. Keating contends that this case is distinguishable from Burnham because
her destination was Louisiana rather than Arkansas, and because she was on the ground in Arkansas for less
than an hour and only for the purpose of getting to Louisiana.
This case cannot be distinguished from Burnham. The Scalia opinion stressed that the state’s jurisdiction
extends to any visitor, “no matter how fleeting his visit.’’ Id. at 610. And the Brennan rationale would treat
using the Little Rock airport for a connecting flight as purposeful availment supporting minimum contacts
because Keating gained a benefit from Arkansas. Any other result would represent unsupportable policy in
an era of modern travel. There is no practical way
123
to craft a rule that would clearly distinguish between a presence in the state that is too short for
jurisdiction and a presence that is long enough, which is why the Supreme Court held in Burnham that any
presence is enough, if the defendant is served while present.
Moreover, Keating’s presence in Arkansas was not limited to her 45 minutes inside the airport. She could
have been validly served while either of the airplanes on which she flew was on the tarmac or even in the air
over Arkansas. Service of process on a passenger in an airplane that flew over Arkansas but never landed in
the state has been sustained because at the moment of service the passenger was inside Arkansas, even
though the passenger was not on the ground. Grace v. MacArthur, 170 F. Supp. 442 (E.D. Ark. 1959). The
Grace court reasoned that there is no real difference between a passenger on an airplane that passes through
Arkansas airspace and a passenger who travels through the state by train or bus without disembarking. Id. at
447.
Thus, Arkansas has jurisdiction over Keating, and her motion to dismiss should be denied.
1. This fact pattern benefitted from suggestions by Kenneth Chestek and David Thomson.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

107

125

12

Varying the Depth of Rule Proof and Rule

Application
§12.1 Introduction
Chapter 11 explained a paradigm for structuring proof of a conclusion of law. This chapter explains how
to vary two parts of that paradigm — rule proof and rule application — in terms of depth.
Depending on the situation, rule proof and rule application can be very short, very long, or somewhere in
between. In one instance, rule proof might need only a sentence, while rule application might require three
pages. In another instance, the reverse might be true. Or each of them might be four or five pages long — or
four or five sentences long. How can you tell how much depth is needed? Ask yourself three questions:
First, how much explanation will convince the reader that the conclusion is correct? That depends on the
reader’s level of skepticism, which in turn depends on how important the issue is to the decision the reader
must make, and on how complicated the reader will think the issue to be.
Second, how much explanation will prevent the reader from studying independently the authorities you
rely on? The second question poses what might be called the need-to-read test: you haven’t explained
enough if your reader would find it hard to agree with you without actually studying the authorities you’ve
cited. A reader’s need to go to the authorities is predicated on the context. A reader is more likely to feel that
need with a critical, difficult, or obscure point than with a simple, peripheral, or routine one. A reader’s need
to know more is particularly great for authority that is the only support or the central basis for your
conclusion.
126
Third, how much explanation would tell the reader those things needed to make an informed decision? Put
another way, if the reader were to go to the authorities, would the reader be startled to find the things you’ve
left out? Part of your job is to leave things out. The reader is counting on you to cut out the things that don’t
matter. But don’t leave out so much that the reader is deprived of some of the information on which a
decision would have to be based.
Don’t explore an issue in more depth than a reader would need. Remember that the reader is a busy
person, almost as intolerant of too much explanation as of too little. If you include much detail about
peripheral issues or about routine propositions with which the reader will easily agree, the reader feels stuck
in quicksand.
Be careful. Most students underestimate the skepticism of readers. If you have no idea how much to
explain, err on the side of making a more complete explanation until you have gained a better sense of what
must be fully proven and where proof can be at least partially implied.
Rule proof and rule application can each be explored in a way that’s conclusory, substantiating, or
comprehensive. The rest of this chapter explains how.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

108

§12.2 Conclusory Explanations
A conclusory explanation does no more than allude to some basis for the deduction made by the writer.
Here’s an example from the facts in Chapter 11:
Medwick is contractually bound to ExitRow.com’s Terms and Conditions because he programmed his bot to
click on the “I Agree’’ button on ExitRow. com’s website. A contract is formed by an objective manifestation of
agreement, even if a party does not read the contract before agreeing to it. Marin Storage & Trucking, Inc. v. Benco
Contracting & Eng’g, Inc., 107 Cal. Rptr. 2d 645, 651 (Ct. App. 2001). Programming a bot to click on an “I
Agree’’ button is analogous to signing a contract without reading it.

Here the rule is clearly set out, but the only proof of it is a citation to a decision, without any explanation of
the court’s reasoning or of the facts there adjudicated. The conclusion is also plainly stated, but the only rule
application is an allusion to a single fact: Medwick programmed his bot to click on the “I Agree’’ button on
ExitRow.com’s website. There are no counter-analyses and no discussion of policy.
A conclusory explanation is appropriate only where the reader will easily agree with you, or where the
point isn’t important to your analysis. In those situations, a detailed analysis would seem tedious to the
reader. Elsewhere, however, a conclusory explanation would deprive the reader of information
127
essential to the decision the reader must make. For example, from the example above, a supervising
lawyer cannot decide how to advise Medwick. At the very least, the lawyer would want to know the facts of
Marin Storage & Trucking, how they’re analogous to website clickwrap agreements, the court’s reasoning in
Marin, and whether any cases decide whether bots can create contracts.

§12.3 Substantiating Explanations
A substantiating explanation goes more deeply into the writer’s reasoning but still doesn’t state the
analysis completely:
Medwick is contractually bound to ExitRow.com’s Terms and Conditions. A contract is formed by an objective
manifestation of agreement, even if a party does not read the contract before agreeing to it. Marin Storage &
Trucking, Inc. v. Benco Contracting & Eng’g, Inc., 107 Cal. Rptr. 2d 645, 651 (Ct. App. 2001). In Marin, a party
was bound when its employees signed contractual documents without reading them. In website clickwrap
contracting, a person agrees to a website’s terms and conditions if he programs a bot to do something that he knows
the website will interpret as agreement. Register.com, Inc. v. Verio, Inc., 356 F.3d 393 (2d Cir. 2004). Medwick
programmed his bot to click on “I Agree’’ and “I Accept’’ buttons automatically wherever the bot found them,
which is what the bot did on ExitRow.com’s website. That is analogous to signing a contract without reading it.

This passage provides more rule proof and more rule application. But it’s not comprehensive.
A substantiating explanation is appropriate where the reader needs more than a conclusory explanation,
but where the point being made isn’t really central to your analysis. It isn’t appropriate where the reader will
probably be aggressively skeptical. The substantiating passage above would not satisfy the lawyer who must
make difficult decisions about how to handle Medwick’s case.

§12.4 Comprehensive Explanations
A comprehensive explanation includes whatever analyses are necessary to satisfy an aggressive
skepticism. Rule proof and rule application can be augmented with further detail about the law and the facts,
with added or expanded counter-analyses, and with policy discussions sufficient to give the skeptical reader
confidence that the law’s goals would be achieved through your conclusion:
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

109

128
Medwick is contractually bound to ExitRow. com’s Terms and Conditions because he
programmed his bot to agree to them.
A contract is formed by an objective man-ifestation of agreement, even if a party does not
read the contract before agreeing to it.
Marin Storage & Trucking, Inc. v. Benco Contracting & Eng’g, Inc., 107 Cal. Rptr. 2d 645,
651 (Ct. App. 2001). Marin often supplied construction cranes to Benco at building sites.
After each day, Marin’s crane operator wrote the number of crane-usage hours on a form and
handed it to a Benco employee, who confirmed the hours and signed the form. At the top of
the form were the words “Work Authorization and Contract,’’ and at the bottom was the
sentence “This is a contract which includes all terms and conditions stated on the reverse
side.’’ There was no evidence that any of the Benco employees who signed the form ever
read the reverse side. Id. at 649-50. The court held that Benco’s employees objectively
manifested agreement when they signed a document with words warning that it was
contractual. Id. at 651. Whether they read the terms of the contract was irrelevant. Id.
The Restatement takes the same position: “where an offer is contained in a writing either
the offeror or the offeree may, without reading the writing, manifest assent to it and bind
himself without knowing its terms.’’ Restatement (Second) of Contracts, § 23, cmt.
b (1979). The policy behind this rule is to protect a party who relies on the agreement from a
later argument by the other party that no contract exists because the other party had not read
or understood it. Id. cmt. e.
Medwick is an experienced programmer and knows that websites often require users to
agree contractually to terms and conditions. He could have visited ExitRow.com’s website
personally and read ExitRow.com’s Terms and Conditions. Instead, he programmed his bot

The
writer’s
conclusion.
The main
rule.
Rule proof
and
explanation
begin.

Policy is
introduced.
Rule
application
begins.

129
to click on “I Agree’’ and “I Accept’’ buttons automatically wherever the bot found
them, which is analogous to signing a contract without reading it.
No California court has decided a contract case involving a bot. But in a diversity case
applying California law, the Second Circuit held that a website visitor is not bound to a
contract the visitor has not read unless the website informs the visitor that a particular
action constitutes agreement to that contract and the website allows the visitor to read the
contract before agreeing to it. Specht v. Netscape Communications Corp., 306 F.3d 17
(2d Cir. 2002). Netscape claimed that the plaintiffs had agreed to all of its contract by
downloading Netscape’s software. Id. at 23. Although the website gave. notice of some
contract terms, a visitor would have had to search the site exhaustively to discover
others, including the ones at issue in the lawsuit. Id. at 23-24. The Second Circuit held
that the plaintiffs were not bound by the additional terms because “a reasonably prudent
Internet user in circumstances such as these would not have known or learned of [their]
existence.’’ Id. at 20.
In a later diversity case also applying California law, the Second Circuit held that a
person agrees to a website’s terms and conditions if he programs a bot to do something
that he knows the website will interpret as agreement. Register.com, Inc. v. Verio, Inc.,
356 F.3d 393 (2d Cir. 2004). Verio programmed its bot to visit Register.com’s website
several times a day and collect web addresses, to which Verio then sent marketing
solicitations. Id. at 396-97. Register.com’s website contained this notice: “By submitting

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

A
counter-analysis
begins.

To show why
Specht does not
control,
the
writer explains
the
most
analogous case.

110

a . . . query, you agree that . . . under no circumstances will you use this data to . . .
support the transmission of mass unsolicited, commercial advertising or solicitation via
email.’’ Id. at 396. The court
130
held that because Verio’s bot had been programmed to collect web addresses despite the
notice, Verio was contractually obligated not to use them for email marketing. Id. at 404. The
court distinguished its earlier decision in Sprecht on the ground that in that case Netscape had
designed its website so that visitors would not have known they were agreeing to additional
terms. Id. at 402.
Register.com is the only case that applies California contract law to bots. Like Verio,
Medwick programmed his bot to behave in a way that a website would interpret as agreement
to the site’s terms and conditions. He thus agreed to and is bound by those terms and
conditions.

A wrap-up
restating
the
conclusion.

§12.5 Cryptic Explanations
Beginners sometimes write explanations so cryptic as to be less than conclusory. The writer of a passage
like the following has tried to put too much into a small bottle:
Medwick is contractually bound to ExitRow.com’s Terms and Conditions. Marin Storage & Trucking, Inc. v.
Benco Contracting & Eng’g, Inc., 107 Cal. Rptr. 2d 645, 651 (Ct. App. 2001).

A cryptic explanation is never enough — even in a situation where a conclusory explanation would suffice
— because a cryptic explanation omits any statement of the rule on which the conclusion is based.
Exercise
Punitive Damages and Bedbugs
This Exercise is divided into Exercise A and Exercise B, below. To do each exercise, you’ll need the facts
in Matthias v. Accor Economy Lodging, 347 F.3d 672 (7th Cir. 2003). Here they are, in the court’s words:
. . . The plaintiffs . . . were guests [in the defendant’s Motel 6] and were bitten by bedbugs, which are
making a comeback in the U.S. as a consequence of more conservative use of pesticides. . . . The jury . .
. awarded each plaintiff $186,000 in punitive damages though only $5,000 in compensatory damages. . .
.
131
. . . In 1998, EcoLab, the extermination service that the motel used, discovered bedbugs in several
rooms in the motel and recommended that it be hired to spray every room, for which it would charge
the motel only $500; the motel refused. . . . By the spring of 2000, the motel’s manager “started
noticing that there were refunds being given by my desk clerks and reports coming back from the guests
that there were ticks in the rooms and bugs in the rooms that were biting.’’ She looked in some of the
rooms and discovered bedbugs. . . .
Further incidents of guests being bitten by insects and demanding and receiving refunds led the
manager to recommend to her superior in the company that the motel be closed while every room was
sprayed, but this was refused. . . .
. . . By July, the motel’s management was acknowledging to EcoLab that there was a “major problem
with bed bugs’’ and that all that was being done about it was “chasing them from room to room.’’ . . .
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

111

Rooms that the motel had placed on “Do not rent, bugs in room’’ status nevertheless were rented.
It was in November that the plaintiffs checked into the motel. They were given Room 504, even
though the motel had classified the room as “DO NOT RENT UNTIL TREATED,’’ and it had not been
treated. . . .
Although bedbug bites are not as serious as the bites of some other insects, they are painful and
unsightly. Motel 6 could not have rented any rooms at the prices it charged had it informed guests that
the risk of being bitten by bedbugs was appreciable. . . .
Exercise A: Below is the court’s explanation for its conclusion that Motel 6 is liable for an intentional
tort. Is the court’s explanation conclusory, substantiating, comprehensive, or cryptic? Did the court choose
an appropriate level of explanation? (Should it have explained less or more or neither?) To answer these
questions, you need to know why the court reached this conclusion. A plaintiff who has proved that a
defendant has committed an intentional tort, such as fraud or battery, is eligible for punitive damages. In this
appeal, the defendant raised two punitive damages issues. The first is this one (was the plaintiff eligible for
punitive damages?). The second, which you’ll reach in Exercise B, is whether the trial court’s punitive
damage award was too large.
[Motel 6’s] failure either to warn guests or to take effective measures to eliminate the bedbugs
amounted to fraud and probably to battery as well (compare Campbell Iv. A.C. Equipment Services
Corp., 242 Ill. App. 3d 707, 610 N.E.2d 745, 748-49, 182 Ill. Dec. 876 (Ill. App. 1993); see
Restatement (Second) of Torts, supra, § 18, comment c and e), as in the famous case of Garratt v.
Dailey, 46 Wn.2d 197, 279 P.2d 1091, 1093 — 94 (1955), appeal after remand, 49 Wn.2d 499, 304
P.2d 681 (Wash. 1956), which held that the defendant would be guilty of battery if he knew with
substantial certainty that when he moved a chair the plaintiff would try to sit down where the chair had
been and would land on the floor instead. See also Massachusetts v. Stratton, 114 Mass. 303 (Mass.
1873). There was, in short, sufficient evidence of “willful and wanton conduct’’ within the meaning
132
that the Illinois courts assign to the term to permit an award of punitive damages in this case.
Exercise B: Below is the court’s explanation for its conclusion that the trial court did not award excessive
punitive damages. Is the court’s explanation conclusory, substantiating, comprehensive, or cryptic? Did the
court choose an appropriate level of explanation? (Should it have explained less or more or neither?) Does
the court rely on policy? Does it use counter-analyses?
. . . In arguing that $20,000 was the maximum amount of punitive damages that a jury could
constitutionally have awarded each plaintiff, the defendant points to the U.S. Supreme Court’s recent
statement that “few awards [of punitive damages] exceeding a single-digit ratio between punitive and
compensatory damages, to a significant degree, will satisfy due process.’’ State Farm Mutual
Automobile Ins. Co. v. Campbell, 538 U.S. 408 (2003). The Court went on to suggest that “four times
the amount of compensatory damages might be close to the line of constitutional impropriety.’’ Id. . . .
Hence the defendant’s proposed ceiling in this case of $20,000, four times the compensatory damages
awarded to each plaintiff. The ratio of punitive to compensatory damages determined by the jury was,
in contrast, 37.2 to 1.
The Supreme Court did not, however, lay down a 4-to-1 or single-digit-ratio rule — it said merely
that “there is a presumption against an award that has a 145-to-1 ratio,’’ . . . and it would be
unreasonable to do so. We must consider why punitive damages are awarded and why the Court has
decided that due process requires that such awards be limited. The second question is easier to answer
than the first. The term “punitive damages’’ implies punishment, and a standard principle of penal
theory is that “the punishment should fit the crime’’ in the sense of being proportional to the
wrongfulness of the defendant’s action, though the principle is modified when the probability of
detection is very low (a familiar example is the heavy fines for littering) or the crime is potentially
lucrative (as in the case of trafficking in illegal drugs). Hence, with these qualifications, which in fact

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

112

will figure in our analysis of this case, punitive damages should be proportional to the wrongfulness of
the defendant’s actions. . . .
[O]ne function of punitive-damages awards is to relieve the pressures on an overloaded system of
criminal justice by providing a civil alternative to criminal prosecution of minor crimes. An example is
deliberately spitting in a person’s face, a criminal assault but because minor readily deterrable by the
levying of what amounts to a civil fine through a suit for damages for the tort of battery. Compensatory
damages would not do the trick in such a case, and this for three reasons: because they are difficult to
determine in the case of acts that inflict largely dignatory harms; because in the spitting case they would
be too slight to give the victim an incentive to sue, and he might decide instead to respond with
violence — and an age-old purpose of the law of torts is to provide a substitute for violent retaliation
against wrongful injury — and because to limit the plaintiff to
133
compensatory damages would enable the defendant to commit the offensive act with impunity
provided that he was willing to pay, and again there would be a danger that his act would incite a
breach of the peace by his victim.
When punitive damages are sought for billion-dollar oil spills and other huge economic injuries, the
considerations that we have just canvassed fade. As the Court emphasized in Campbell, the fact that the
plaintiffs in that case had been awarded very substantial compensatory damages — $1 million for a
dispute over insurance coverage — greatly reduced the need for giving them a huge award of punitive
damages ($145 million) as well in order to provide an effective remedy. Our case is closer to the
spitting case. The defendant’s behavior was outrageous but the compensable harm done was slight and
at the same time difficult to quantify because a large element of it was emotional. And the defendant
may well have profited from its misconduct because by concealing the infestation it was able to keep
renting rooms. Refunds were frequent but may have cost less than the cost of closing the hotel for a
thorough fumigation. The hotel’s attempt to pass off the bedbugs as ticks, which some guests might
ignorantly have thought less unhealthful, may have postponed the instituting of litigation to rectify the
hotel’s misconduct. The award of punitive damages in this case thus serves the additional purpose of
limiting the defendant’s ability to profit from its fraud by escaping detection and (private) prosecution.
If a tortfeasor is “caught’’ only half the time he commits torts, then when he is caught he should be
punished twice as heavily in order to make up for the times he gets away. . . .
All things considered, we cannot say that the award of punitive damages was excessive. . . . The
judicial function is to police a range, not a point. . . .

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

113

135

13

Combining Proofs of Separate Conclusions

of Law
§13.1 Introduction
If you reach several conclusions or sub-conclusions, the reader will need a separately structured proof for
each one. You can combine separately structured proofs for several conclusions or sub-conclusions into a
single unified presentation.
You’ll need to do this in four situations: where more than one element of a rule is in dispute (see §13.2);
where more than one claim or defense is at issue (§13.3); where you have alternative ways of proving a
single conclusion (§13.4); or where you’re writing about separate but related issues (§13.5).

§13.2 How to Organize Where More Than One Element Is at Issue
If you must resolve all the elements of a rule, you’ll have an ultimate conclusion for the rule as a whole,
together with a sub-conclusion for each element:
Ultimate
Conclusion on the
Ultimate Issue

“The client has a cause of action for negligence because Bevens injured the client by
driving while talking on a hand-held cell phone.’’
Element #1:

“As a driver, Bevens owed a duty of care to others on the
road, including the client.’’

Element #2:

“Bevens breached that duty by talking on a hand-held cell
phone while driving.’’
“The client suffered injuries in an auto accident.’’
“The accident and the injuries were proximately caused by
Bevens’s breach of the duty of care.’’

136
Sub-Conclusions
on Sub-Issues

Element #3:
Element #4:

If this analysis were to be written out, the opening or umbrella passage would state the conclusion (“The
client has a cause of action for negligence’’) and the essence of the reason (“because Bevens injured the
client by driving while talking on a hand-held cell phone’’). The opening paragraph would also recite the
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

114

rule on which it is based (the elements of negligence). If the rule is settled law, it might be proved in the
opening paragraph with little more than a citation to authority. Otherwise, rule proof would supply whatever
else is needed to show that the underlying rule is law (and perhaps to show generally how the rule is
expected to work, if that would help).
Then would follow separate, paradigm-structured discussions for the elements. Each element is a
sub-issue for which you have a sub-conclusion (shown above). Each element would have to be defined
through a rule that provides a definition (a declaratory or definitional rule); the definition would have to be
proved through authority (rule proof); and the facts would have to be analyzed in light of the definition (rule
application).
The umbrella passage would be a single paragraph in a simple situation and a few paragraphs in a
complicated one (for example, if the underlying rule is hard to prove). The umbrella passage would at first
seem to be an incomplete paradigm structure because it would not include rule application and definitions of
the elements. But this paragraph or these paragraphs actually function as an umbrella paradigm structure that
covers, organizes, or incorporates the subordinate, structured proofs of each of the elements. (For
illustrations, see the Discussion in the office memo in Appendix C.)
The umbrella passage also sets out a roadmap for what follows. It at least implies to the reader what issues
you’ll consider, their relative importance or unimportance, and sometimes the order in which you’ll consider
them.
After the umbrella passage, the most dispositive issues or sub-issues usually — but not always — should
be addressed first. Here, if you were to determine that the client has no cause of action because talking on a
hand-held cell phone did not proximately cause the accident, you could analyze the fourth element
(proximate cause) before you analyze the others. The fourth element would be the most important one
because it would resolve the ultimate issue (whether the client has a cause of action).
137
If you believe, however, that all the elements can be proved, you could instead analyze them in the order
in which they appear in the rule. That might be easier for the reader to follow if no element takes vastly more
space than another to explain. But the situation might be different if one element were to consume, for
example, three-quarters of the Discussion. There, the reader might be able to follow the analysis more easily
if you were to dispose of the other elements first to set up the context.
You might be tempted to focus on one element, conclude that it isn’t satisfied in the facts, and then ignore
the other elements as moot on the theory that the one you’ve analyzed disposes of the whole controversy.
That won’t work because it might turn out that you’re wrong about the element you believe to be dispositive.
Here, for example, you cannot ignore the other elements of negligence just because you believe that the
fourth element (proximate cause) isn’t satisfied. If you turn out to be wrong, the reader of predictive writing
is entitled to know what will happen with the other elements.
The difference between a procedural rule and a substantive rule: Substantive rules create rights and
liabilities from events that occur in everyday life. You’ve been studying substantive rules in Contracts, Torts,
Property, and Criminal Law. Procedural tests govern how lawyers work in litigation and how judges and
juries make decisions. You’re studying some procedural rules in Civil Procedure and will study others later
in Evidence and Criminal Procedure.
The two most frequent ways in which procedural and substantive rules interact are where the application
of a substantive rule is governed by a procedural test and where a procedural test incorporates a substantive
rule.
Where the application of a substantive rule is governed by a procedural test: When a procedural test
and a substantive test are used together, the procedural test shows how to apply the substantive test to the
facts.
An example happens in every criminal case: the defendant is guilty only if the prosecution proves each
element of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. The umbrella is the rule defining the crime, and the
sub-issues are the elements of the crime. The procedural rule (requiring proof beyond a reasonable doubt) is
not part of this structure. But, inside each issue, you use it to measure whether the substantive element has
been satisfied. For example, if the issue is whether the defendant is guilty of common law burglary, the
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

115

sub-issues are, “Is there proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant broke a building?’’ and “Is there
proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant entered a building?’’ and “Is there proof beyond a
reasonable doubt that the building was a dwelling?’’ and so on (see Chapter 4).
Where a procedural test incorporates a substantive rule: For example, in federal courts a party is
entitled to summary judgment if (1) there is no genuine issue of material fact and (2) the party is entitled to
judgment as
138
a matter of law.1 The second element incorporates all substantive rules on which a judgment would rest —
such as the rule defining the cause of action. These two elements would be separate issues under the
umbrella of the test for summary judgment. The elements of the substantive rules would be sub-issues under
the second element of the test for summary judgment (“entitled to judgment as a matter of law’’). There
would be an umbrella (the second element, covering the elements of the substantive tests) within an umbrella
(the procedural test as a whole). This happens only where a procedural rule incorporates a substantive test,
most often with a summary judgment or a preliminary injunction.

§13.3 How to Organize Where More Than One Claim or Defense Is at Issue
Suppose your supervising attorney wants to know whether the client will be awarded damages in a tort
case. You need to figure out whether the client has a cause of action (one issue or collection of issues). And
you anticipate that the defendant will raise the affirmative defenses of comparative negligence (another issue
or collection of issues) and sovereign immunity (yet another). Although this is a more complex situation than
the one where several elements of a single rule are in dispute, it’s handled in the same way (see §13.2). You
build an umbrella paradigm structure, and underneath it you prove the sub-conclusions through separate,
subordinate paradigm-structured analyses. For example, the ultimate conclusion might be that the client will
be awarded damages because she has a cause of action (the first sub-conclusion); was not comparatively
negligent (the second sub-conclusion); and the claim doesn’t fall within the defendant’s sovereign immunity
(the third sub-conclusion). Thus:
Ultimate
Conclusion on the
Ultimate Issue

The client should be awarded damages.

139
Sub-Conclusions
on Sub-Issues

Sub-Issue #1:
Sub-Issue #2:
Sub-Issue #3:

The client has a cause of action for negligence.
She committed no comparative negligence (an affirmative
defense).
Sovereign immunity does not prevent recovery here (another
affirmative defense).

Because negligence has four elements, the first sub-issue could be divided further into separate proofs of
each of those four elements.

§13.4 How to Organize Alternative Ways of Proving a Single Conclusion
In the first year of law school, this typically occurs in an appellate advocacy assignment where the

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

116

jurisdiction has no rule on point, where it could choose between or among competing rules, and where you
could argue that either of two or more competing rules will — independently of one another — justify the
conclusion. It, too, is handled through the umbrella paradigm structure explained in §13.2:
Ultimate
Conclusion on the
Ultimate Issue
Sub-Conclusions
on Sub-Issues

The judgment below should be reversed.

Sub-Issue #1:
Sub-Issue #2:
Sub-Issue #3:

This court should adopt rule X.
Under rule X, the judgment should be reversed.
Even under rule Y (the competing rule), the judgment should
be reversed.

§13.5 How to Organize When You’re Writing About Separate but Related
Issues
There are still other ways in which separate issues might need to be resolved to support a single
conclusion. Suppose someone sues your client, and your supervising attorney wants to know whether that
lawsuit can be dismissed on forum selection grounds (on grounds that it was brought in the wrong court).
You’ll have to resolve some or all of the following issues: Does
140
this court have subject matter jurisdiction over this kind of case? Does this court have personal jurisdiction
over our client? Is this court the right venue for this lawsuit?
If your conclusion is that the lawsuit was brought in the right court, you’ll have to show that the court has
subject matter and personal jurisdiction and that venue is proper. To do that, you’ll use the same umbrella
paradigm structure explained in §13.2:
Ultimate
Conclusion on the
Ultimate Issue
Sub-Conclusions
on Sub-Issues

This lawsuit is not dismissible on forum selection grounds.

Sub-Issue #1:
Sub-Issue #2:
Sub-Issue #3:

This court has subject matter jurisdiction.
This court has personal jurisdiction over
our client. Venue is proper in this court.

§13.6 How to Start Working with Multi-Issue Situations
All these different ways to organize can seem confusing when you first think about them. But with some
practice, they’ll become second nature. Many students feel confused at this point, but within a few weeks,
they begin to gain confidence in organizing this way. And within a year or two, most students instinctively
think in structured proofs. This section provides some suggestions for getting to that point.
While researching and planning your writing, ask yourself how many issues you have. If you have a hard
time identifying issues, ask yourself how many conclusions of law a court would need to make to rule in
your favor. Then ask how many conclusions of law a court would need to make to rule in the other side’s
favor. Now consolidate those two lists to produce a list of issues. When you had two lists (before
consolidating them), many issues will have been listed twice because they were flip sides of each other.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

117

When you consolidate, you’ll often merge two issues into one. The advantage of making two lists is that it
helps you avoid overlooking an issue. When you look at only your side of the case, you sometimes miss an
issue that the other side will raise.
Now, figure out what kind of issues you have. Is an issue part of the cause of action, part of a defense, part
of a procedural requirement, or something else? This will help you figure out which of the structures
described in §§13.2 through 13.5 to use.
Choose one of the multi-issue structures explained in this chapter, and adapt it to your case. Start a
document on your computer and type a list of every
141
conclusion of law you’ll make in your memo or brief, like the lists in §§13.2 through 13.5. Organize the
conclusions logically — for example, elements of a cause of action first, then defenses. Treat this as the
beginning of an outline. In the next chapter, §14.1 explains how to complete this outline and turn it into a
memo or brief.
Use introductory or roadmap paragraphs to explain your umbrella paradigm to the reader. A roadmap
paragraph lists the conclusions you’ll reach. It maps out your discussion so the reader knows what to expect.
If the document is a long one (such as an appellate brief), the roadmap paragraph tells the reader where to
find the analysis supporting each conclusion. In a shorter document, your headings inside the document will
do that. In a roadmap paragraph, state your ultimate conclusion (“The client should be awarded damages,’’
for example) and then state the sub-conclusions that support that ultimate conclusion. If some elements of a
test are at issue and others are not, the roadmap paragraph is the place to make that clear. Most judges say
that a well-written roadmap paragraph is very important or essential in helping them understand what you
are trying to say.2 Here is a typical roadmap paragraph, which you might use to introduce the discussion
outlined in §13.3:
The plaintiff should be awarded damages. The evidence supports all four of the elements of negligence. The
defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff to keep the loading dock clear and breached that duty by leaving explosive
materials on the loading dock overnight. The plaintiff’s injury, destruction of the warehouse, is uncontested. It was
proximately caused by the breach when the materials exploded. Although the defendant pleaded the defense of
comparative negligence, no evidence supports it. And sovereign immunity has been waived by § 419 of the
Highways Code.

Use headings to show your reader where your analysis of each issue begins. Lawyers and judges won’t
read your work from beginning to end. They’ll read parts of it at a time, and headings help them find the
parts they need. If you’re writing a predictive memo, look at the way headings are used in Appendix C. If
you are writing a persuasive memo or a brief, you will write point headings, which are explained in Chapter
26.
1. Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
2. Kristen K. Robbins-Tiscione, The Inside Scoop: What Federal Judges Really Think about the Way Lawyers Write,
8 J. Legal Writing Inst. 257, 273 (2002).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

118

143

14

Working with the Paradigm

§14.1 Using the Paradigm Formula to Outline and to Begin Your First Draft
Think of the paradigm formula for organizing proof of a conclusion of law (from Chapters 11, 12, and 13)
as a tool to help you organize. It will also keep your material from getting out of control. Here it is again:
To prove a conclusion of law:
1. State your conclusion.
2. State the primary rule that supports the conclusion.
3. Prove and explain the rule through citation to authority, description of how the authority stands
for the rule, discussion of subsidiary rules, analyses of policy, and counter-analyses. (This is rule
proof and explanation, or simply rule proof.)
4. Apply the rule to the facts with the aid of subsidiary rules, supporting authority, policy
considerations, and counter-analyses. (This is rule application.)
5. If steps 1 through 4 are complicated, sum up by restating your conclusion.
This section describes one method of starting to work with the formula. It’s only a suggestion for the first
time you write. If you develop a different procedure that works better for you, use that instead.
144
In the method described here, label everything so that you know where it goes. Then just plug it into
whatever variant of the formula best fits your situation. The first time you try this, it might seem a little
awkward if you’ve never done anything like it before. But the second or third time it will feel more natural
because it fits the way people instinctively work and because it takes less effort than other methods of
organizing.
Begin by figuring out how many issues and sub-issues you have. Each one will be analyzed through a
separate paradigm structure.
For each issue or sub-issue, identify the rule that’s central to and governs the answer. (You might also use
other rules, but for the moment focus on the rule that — more than any other — compels your answer.)
Now, inventory your raw materials. For each issue or sub-issue, sort everything you have into two
categories: rule proof and rule application. Some methods of sorting seem to work better than others.
Dividing your notes into two piles, for example, doesn’t seem to work very well — nor does copying and
pasting all your research into one big document.
A better method is to go through your notes and write “RP’’ in the margin next to everything that you
might use to prove your rule and explain it and “RA’’ next to everything that might help the reader
understand how to apply the rule. Some ideas or authorities might do both and get a notation of “RP/ RA.’’
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

119

If you have several issues or sub-issues, you can work out a method of marking them separately, such as
“#3RP’’ for “rule proof on issue 3’’ or “#1RA’’ for “rule application on issue 1.’’ If you have printed the
cases, write these notations next to each part of the case that you’ll use. Go through your facts, too, marking
the ones that are important enough to talk about during rule application. If you’ve been thinking about ideas
that aren’t in your notes, write them down and note where they go.
Now, think about how all these things add up. If you haven’t yet drawn a conclusion, do it now. If you
decided previously on a conclusion, check it against your raw materials to see whether it still seems like the
best conclusion.
Ask yourself whether a reasonable argument could be made against any part of your analysis. If so, make
a note of it and of where it goes. Decide whether that argument is so attractive that it would probably
persuade a judge. And decide exactly why a judge would — or would not — be persuaded. If you decide that
the argument is likely to persuade, modify your analysis accordingly. (If you can’t find any arguments at all
that might work against your analysis, you may be avoiding problems that your reader will later see.)
Your notes are now complete enough to be organized into an outline based on some variation of the
paradigm formula.
To make a fluid outline, just assemble everything. For each issue or sub-issue, take a piece of paper and
write four abbreviated headings on it (for example: “concl’’ or “sub-concl,’’ “rule,’’ “RP,’’ and “RA’’).
(You can do this on a computer instead, if you feel more comfortable typing than writing.) Some
145
students find it helpful to lay out this information in a chart or diagram. Under “concl’’ or “sub-concl,’’
write your conclusion or sub-conclusion for that issue in whatever shorthand will remind you later of what
your thinking is (for example: “no diversity — Wharton/citizen of Maine’’). Under “rule,’’ do something
similar. Under “RP,’’ list your raw materials for rule proof. For each item listed, don’t write a lot — just
enough so that later you’ll be able to see at a glance everything you have. If you’re listing something found
in a case, a catch-phrase and a reference to a page in the case might be enough (for example: “intent to return
— Wiggins p.352’’). Under “RA,’’ do the same for rule application. Make sure that everything you have on
that issue is listed in an appropriate place on that page.
Assume that for rule proof on a certain issue you’ve listed six resources (cases, facts, and so on). You
haven’ t yet decided the order in which you will discuss them when you prove the rule. In most situations,
the decision will be easier and more apt if you do not make it while outlining. The best time to decide is just
before you write that issue’s rule proof in your first draft. (You don’t need to know exactly where everything
will go before you start the first draft.) When you decide, just write a number next to each item (“1’’ next to
the first one you’ll discuss, and so on).
When you write the first draft (Chapter 5), you probably won’t use everything that you previously marked
into one category or another. Inevitably, some material won’t seem as useful while you’re writing as it did
when you were sorting, and you will discard it.
Keep track of what you’re doing by checking off or crossing out each item in the outline as you put it into
the first draft. When everything has been checked off or crossed out, you have completed the first draft of
your Discussion in an office memo (or Argument if you’re writing a motion memo or appellate brief).
So far, you have concentrated on making sure that all worthwhile raw materials get into your first draft.
During rewriting, your focus will change. While you rewrite (Chapter 5), look to see where things are. If you
find conclusions at the end of analysis, for example, move them to the beginning. While rewriting, ask
yourself the questions in §14.2 below.

§14.2 Rewriting: How to Test Your Writing for Effective Organization
A well-organized presentation of analysis is immediately recognizable. Issues and sub-issues are handled
separately, and each issue is clearly resolved before the next is taken up. Inside each issue and each
sub-issue, the material is organized around the elements of the controlling rule or rules, and not around
individual court decisions. Rule proof is always completed before

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

120

146
rule application begins. Each issue and each sub-issue is explored through a well-chosen variation of the
formula explained in this chapter. The reader is given neither too little nor too much explanation, but instead
is able to read quickly and finish confident that the writer’s conclusion is correct. Authority is discussed in
the order of its logical importance, not necessarily in the chronological order in which it developed. Finally,
the writer’s organization is apparent throughout: the reader always knows where she is and how everything
fits together. These things all come from sound architecture: from a wisely chosen building plan that the
writer can explain and justify if asked to do so.
To figure out whether you have accomplished these things, ask yourself the following questions after you
have written a first draft.1
Have you stated your conclusion for each issue? If so, where? State it precisely, succinctly, and

14-A in such a way that the reader knows from the very beginning what you intend to demonstrate. Some

lawyers express a prediction openly (“Kolchak will not be convicted of robbery’’), while others imply the
prediction by stating the conclusion on which it is based (“The evidence does not establish beyond a
reasonable doubt that Kolchak is guilty of robbery’’).
Have you stated the rule or rules on which your conclusion is based? If so, where? If the cases

14-B on which you rely haven’t formulated an explicit statement of the rule, you might be tempted just to
describe the cases and let the reader decide what rule they stand for. If you feel that temptation, you probably
haven’t yet figured out exactly what the rule is. And if you haven’t done it, the reader won’t do it for you.
Formulate a credible rule, and prove it by analyzing the authority at hand.

For each issue, have you proved and explained the rule in an appropriate amount of depth? Is

14-C your rule proof conclusory, substantiating, or comprehensive? How did you decide how much depth

to use? If you were in the decision-maker’s position, would you need more rule proof? Less? Is policy
accounted for? If the rule seems arbitrary, the reader will resist agreeing that it’s the correct one to use. The
reader will more easily agree if you at least allude to the policy behind the rule and the social benefits the
rule causes. Have you counter-analyzed attractive arguments that might challenge your choice or formulation
of the rule?
For each issue, have you applied the rule to the facts in an appropriate amount of depth? Have

14-D you relied, where possible,
147

on analogies to cases with favorable outcomes? Have you distinguished factually similar cases with
unfavorable outcomes?
Is your rule application conclusory, substantiating, or comprehensive? How did you decide how much
depth to use? If you were in the decision-maker’s position, would you need more rule application? Less?
Have you accounted for policy? Have you counter-analyzed attractive arguments that might challenge your
application of the rule?
Have you completed rule proof and explanation before starting rule application? If you let the

14-E material get out of control, the result may be a little rule proof, followed by a little rule application,

followed by a little more rule proof, followed by a little more rule application — and so on, back and forth
and back and forth. Finish proving the rule before you start applying it. If you start to apply a rule before you
have finished proving it, the reader will refuse to agree with what you’re doing.
Have you varied the paradigm formula’s sequence only where truly necessary? If you have

14-F varied the sequence of the components of the formula, why? Was your goal more valuable than any

clarity you might have sacrificed by varying the sequence? (It might have been, but your decision should be
a conscious one.)

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

121

14-G Have you organized a multi-issue presentation so the reader understands how everything fits

together? If you have combined separately structured explanations, did you identify separate
sub-conclusions? Are the combined paradigms covered by an umbrella paradigm? Is the result crystal-clear
to the reader? If not, how could it be made so?
Have you organized around tests and elements rather than around cases? Your goal isn’t to

14-H dump before the reader the cases you found doing research. The law is the rules themselves. A case

merely proves a rule’s existence and accuracy. The cases are raw materials, and your job isn’t complete until
you have built them into a coherent discussion organized around the applicable tests and their elements. A
mere list of relevant cases, with discussion of each, isn’t helpful to a decision-maker, who needs to
understand how the rules affect the facts. This fault is called case-by-case-itis. It’s easy to spot in a student’s
paper: the reader sees an unconnected series of paragraphs, each of which is devoted to discussion of a single
case. The impression made is sometimes called “show-and-tell’’ because the writer seems to be doing
nothing more than holding up newly found possessions. A student not making this mistake might use five
cases to analyze the first element of a
148
test, one case — if it’s dispositive — to analyze the second, three for the third, and so on, deploying cases
where they will do what is needed.
Have you avoided presenting authority in chronological order unless you have a special need to

14-I do so? The reader wants to know what the current law is and how it governs the facts at hand. A little

history might be useful somewhere in the discussion. But you’ll waste the reader’s time if you begin with the
kind of historical background typical of a college essay. Unless there’s some special need to do otherwise,
present authority in the order of its logical importance, not the order in which it came to be.
Have you collected closely related ideas rather than scattering them? If there are three reasons

14-J why the defendant will not be convicted, list them and then explain each in turn. The reader looking

for the big picture can’t follow you if you introduce the first reason on page 1; mention the second for the
first time on page 4; and surprise the reader with the third on page 6. If you have more than one item or idea,
listing them at the beginning helps the reader keep things in perspective. It also forces you to organize and
evaluate your thoughts. Sometimes, in the act of listing, you may find that there are really fewer or more
reasons — or whatever else you are listing — than you had originally thought.
Exercise
Teddy Washburn’s Gun
This exercise takes you through the ground work needed to make a prediction and helps you organize raw
materials — rules, facts, statutes, cases — into an outline that tracks the components of the paradigm. After
the fact narrative below, you’ll find two statutes and three cases, followed by questions for you to answer.
Facts
In his prime, Gorilla Morrell was often on the bill at Friday Night Wrestling. Now he is reduced to
hanging around Washburn’s Weights Room & Gym, which is next door to Washburn’s Bar & Grill. Gorilla
is good for Teddy Washburn’s business because customers in the Weights Room try to take Gorilla on.
When this happens, customers from the Bar wander into the Weights Room to watch. There they order more
drinks, which Washburn passes through a hole he has cut through the wall. Afterward, Gorilla, his adversary,
and the spectators tend to adjourn back to the Bar, where the spirit of conviviality usually leads to games of
billiards accompanied by further orders of food and drink.
Washburn has let Gorilla build up a bill of $283.62, dating back over several weeks. Last night, they had
words over the matter. Gorilla took a swing at Washburn, who
149
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

122

came out from behind the bar and chased Gorilla out into the street. There Gorilla took another swing at
Washburn, and Washburn, demanding his money, pulled out a gun (which he bought and for which he has a
license).
Gorilla grabbed for the gun, but it fell out of Washburn’s hand, sliding five or six feet along the sidewalk
and coming to rest at the feet of Snare Drum Bennett, a mechanic who was returning from work. Bennett
happened onto this scene only in time to hear Washburn demand money and to see him pull out the gun and
have it knocked from his hand.
Bennett, Washburn, and Gorilla looked at the gun, then at each other, and then at the gun again. Finally,
Bennett crouched down, picked up the gun, checked to make sure the safety was on, and put it in her coat
pocket. “Washburn,’’ she said, “you haven’t paid me yet for the front end work I did on your car.’’
“I will,’’ said Washburn.
“It’s $575,’’ said Bennett, “and it’s been three weeks. I think you should go back inside. You ought to pay
your own debts before you accuse other people of welshing out on you.’’
“How can I pay you,’’ exclaimed Washburn, “if he won’t pay me?’’
“That’s your problem,’’ said Bennett, “I’m holding onto the gun. You can’t seem to handle it right now,
and I want my money.’’
At that point, Gorilla clobbered Washburn in the face and sent him staggering. Bennett turned around,
walked a half-dozen steps, and began to turn into a dark alley. Washburn started to get up, called out “Hey,
you!’’ and took a step in Bennett’s direction. Bennett took the gun from her coat, pointed it at Washburn,
smiled, and said, “Back off, bucko.’’
Washburn froze, and Bennett walked into the alley. As soon as she was out of sight, she dropped the gun
into an open but full trash dumpster. The dumpster belongs to a grocery store and is about five feet inside the
alley, which in turn is about twenty feet from the front door of Washburn’s bar.
An hour or so later, the police came to Bennett’s home and arrested her for robbing Washburn of his gun.
Bennett told them where she had dropped it. The police went straight to the dumpster but found nothing
inside, not even the trash that had muffled the gun’s fall.
Statutes
Criminal Code § 10: No person shall be convicted of a crime except on evidence proving guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt.
Criminal Code § 302: A person commits robbery by taking, with the intent to steal, the property of
another, from the other’s person or in the other’s presence, and through violence or intimidation. A person
does not commit robbery if the intent to steal was formed after the taking.
150
Cases
BUTTS v. STATE
The defendant had worked for the Royal Guano company for two and a half days when he was fired. He
demanded his wages but was told that he would have to wait until Saturday, which was payday. He was
ordered off the premises and left. After a few hours, he returned with a gun, found the shift foreman, and
demanded his wages again. The foreman told him to come back on Saturday. (The company agrees that it
owed the defendant wages, but insists that he wait until payday to receive them.) When the foreman refused,
the defendant showed the gun and demanded again. The foreman then paid the amount the defendant
requested.
An intent to steal is an intent to deprive the owner permanently of his property. There is no intent to steal
if the defendant in good faith believes that the property taken is the defendant’s own property and not the
property of somebody else.
The defendant could reasonably have supposed that he was entitled to his pay when his connection with
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

123

the company was severed. He was wrong because the money was the property of the company until the
company paid it to him. But he acted in good faith and therefore did not have the intent to steal (although he
may be guilty of crimes other than robbery).
GREEN v. STATE
We reverse the defendant’s conviction for robbing Mrs. Lillie Priddy.
Although there was evidence that the defendant assaulted Mrs. Priddy, that alone does not prove robbery.
Mrs. Priddy testified as follows: She was walking along a road and came upon the defendant, who struck her
so that she lost consciousness. After a minute or two, her mind cleared, and she saw the defendant standing
in the road and her purse on the ground about five feet from each of them. The contents of the purse were
spilled out on the ground. She kicked him and ran, never seeing her purse again.
The issue is whether there was a “taking’’ sufficient to support a charge of robbery. A taking is the
securing dominion over or absolute control of the property. Absolute control must exist at some time, even if
only for a moment.
If Mrs. Priddy was unconscious, she could not know whether the defendant ever had control of her purse,
or whether it simply fell to the ground and was later taken away by someone else. None of its contents were
found in the defendant’s home. The testimony showed a very violent assault and battery upon her by the
defendant, but does not establish a robbery.
151
STATE v. SMITH & JORDAN
The defendants overpowered and disarmed the complainant of his knife. He had surprised them after they
broke into his gas station. With the complainant’s knife (but not the complainant), they got into their car and
drove off. Later, the police found the defendants standing by their wrecked car. The complainant’s knife was
on the ground nearby. The defendants were convicted of robbery.
To convict for robbery, the defendant must have intended permanently to deprive the complainant of the
taken property. If a defendant takes another’s property for the taker’s immediate and temporary use with no
intent permanently to deprive the owner of his property, he is not guilty of robbery.
It would be unreasonable to assume that the defendants, fleeing from arrest for the crime of breaking into
the gas station, had any expectation of returning the knife. They would have been captured if they had tried.
For the purpose of decision here, we assume that defendant took the knife “for temporary use’’ and that after
it had served the purpose of escape, they intended to abandon it at the first opportunity lest it lead to their
detection. That, however, would leave the complainant’s recovery of his knife to mere chance and thus
constitute a reckless exposure to loss that is consistent with an intent permanently to deprive the owner of his
property. In abandoning it, the defendants put it beyond their power to return the knife. When, in order to
serve a temporary purpose of one’s own, one takes property (1) with the specific intent wholly and
permanently to deprive the owner of it, or (2) under circumstances which render it unlikely that the owner
will ever recover his property and which disclose the taker’s total indifference to his rights, one takes with
the intent to steal.
Analyzing and Organizing
Exercise II-A: You have been asked to determine whether Bennett is likely to be convicted of robbing
Washburn of his gun. Make a list of the issues.
Exercise II-B: For each issue, take a separate piece of paper and, using the process described in §14.1,
answer the following questions:
1. What rule from the cases above disposes of the issue? (If you can’t find a rule that would dispose of
the issue, say so. If that’s true, it means that additional authority is needed.)
2. What passages from these authorities prove the rule?
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

124

3. What facts in Bennett’s story would be determinative for the issue?
4. What passages from these authorities would guide you in applying the rule to those determinative
facts? (If you find none for a given issue, say so. Again, if you’re right, more authority is needed.)
5. What cases would you analogize to or need to distinguish? Why? How would you do it?
Exercise II-C: In Exercise II-B, you started creating an outline from which to write. If there are any holes
in this outline, list them. How will you fill them in?
1. When marking up your work, your teacher might refer to these questions by using the number-letter codes that
appear next to each question here.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

125

153

V
PREDICTIVE ANALYSIS DOCUMENTS

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

126

155

15

Interviewing the Client

Client representation starts with an interview. A person who wants a lawyer’s help calls to make an
appointment. The secretary finds a convenient time and asks what the subject of the interview will be. The
person calling says, “I’ve just been charged with a crime” or “I signed a contract to buy a house and now the
owner won’t sell.” At the time of the appointment, that person and the lawyer sit down and talk. If the visitor
has confidence in the lawyer, the visitor may become a client.
During that conversation, the lawyer learns what problem the prospective client wants solved, the client’s
goals in getting it solved, and what the client knows factually about the problem. The lawyer also learns
about the client as a person and gives the client a reciprocal opportunity to learn about the lawyer. Then or
later, the lawyer and client also negotiate the contract through which the client hires the lawyer, but here we
focus on the main parts of the interview: building a relationship with the client and fact-gathering.

§15.1 Clients and Lawyers
Most clients are not really interested in hiring ‘‘a lawyer.’’ They want to hire a genuine and caring human
being who can do lawyer work well.
You probably dislike it when a doctor treats you as a case of flu, rather than as a person who has the flu.
The problem is more than unpleasantness. A doctor who treats you as a human being with flu-like symptoms
might spend enough time with you to learn that you also have other symptoms inconsistent with the flu, and
that you have a different disease, which should be treated differently. If you have not yourself been a client,
you can imagine what clients
156
experience during lawyer interviews simply by remembering how you have experienced contact with
professionals such as doctors.
Treating the client as a person is called “client-centered lawyering,”1 which means focusing your efforts
around what the client wants rather than what you assume the client should want. Your client has hired you
to accomplish the client’s goal. And many clients can collaborate actively with you along the way,
brainstorming with you how to solve problems.
You are obligated to keep secret whatever the client tells you in private, which is the lawyer’s duty of
confidentiality.2 There are exceptions. For example, a lawyer may reveal the client’s confidences to other
people with the client’s permission. And a lawyer may reveal the client’s confidences to prevent the client
from committing a serious crime. States differ in how they define these and other exceptions to the duty of
confidentiality.

§15.2 The Interview
After the sort of pleasantries that people exchange when meeting each other, the lawyer says something
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

127

like, “How can I help you?” or “Let’s talk about what brings you here today” or “My secretary tells me the
bank has threatened to foreclose on your mortgage. You’re probably worried. Where shall we begin?”

§15.2.1 Learning What the Client Knows
Do not label the problem in your own mind until you have heard most of the facts. A client who starts by
telling you about a dispute with a landlord might have defamation and assault claims rather than breach of a
lease obligation.
Do not leap in with questions as soon as the client has told you the nature of the problem. Give the client a
full opportunity to tell you whatever the client wants to talk about before you intervene. Many clients want
to make sure from the beginning that you hear certain things about which the client feels deeply. If you
obstruct this, you will seem remote, even bureaucratic, to the client. And if you listen to what the client
wants to tell you, you may learn a lot about the client as a person and about how the client views the
problem.
In the beginning, encourage the client to present the facts in the way the client thinks best. After a while
(sometimes pretty quickly), the client will want you to take the lead.
Most clients will not mind your taking notes on a pad of paper, if you first explain that you want to be sure
to remember everything the client tells you. But keep listening while you write, and make eye contact often.
You might feel
157
comfortable taking notes on your laptop, but consider whether your client would feel comfortable as well.
The screen places a barrier between you and your client at a time when you want to encourage interaction.

§15.2.2 Questions
Explore the various aspects of the problem in detail. On each topic, start with broad questions (“Tell me
what happened the night the nuclear reactor melted down”) and gradually work your way toward narrow
ones (“Just before you ran from the control panel, what number on that dial was the needle pointing to?”).
But do this gradually. If you jump too quickly to the narrow questions, you will miss a lot of information
because the broad questions show you what to explore. Ask broad questions until you are not getting useful
information anymore. Then go back and ask narrow questions about the facts the client did not cover. While
the client is answering the broad questions, you can note on a pad the topics you will need to explore later
using narrow questions.
When you start exploring various aspects of the problem in detail, try to take up each topic separately. Too
much skipping around confuses you and the client.
Word your questions carefully. How you ask them has a lot to do with the quality and quantity of the
information you get. A good question does not confuse, does not provoke resistance, and does not distort
memory. One of the marks of an effective lawyer is the ability to ask the right questions in the most
productive way.
What makes a question work well? First, it seeks information that really does need to be known. Second, a
good question is phrased in a way most likely to produce valuable information. Some words help find
information and encourage answers, while other words confuse, cloud memory, or provoke resistance. Third,
a good question is asked in a useful sequence with other questions. Sometimes other questions have to be
asked and answered first. And ask one question at a time. If you ask two at a time, only one of them will be
answered.
Keep asking questions until you have all the details: when, where, who, how, and why. Get them
precisely. “Last week” is not good enough. You need “Thursday, at about 11 A.M., in the truckstop parking
lot.” If the client tells you about a conversation, ask who else was present, what else was discussed, how
long the conversation lasted, how it started, how it ended, what words each participant used, and so on. You

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

128

are going to need these details to analyze the situation. In nonprofessional life, vagueness and approximation
are usually enough in conversations. But experienced lawyers know that, in representing clients, only
precision works.
Before the interview ends, make sure you understand the timeline of events from beginning to end: What
happened first, what happened next, what happened just after that, and so on.
158

§15.2.3 Listening and Talking
The ability to listen well is as important in the practice of law as the ability to talk well. The popular
image of a lawyer is of a person talking — to juries, to judges, to adversaries, to reporters. But in the end, the
lawyer who succeeds is the one who also knows how to listen. If you do not listen carefully, you might as
well not have asked the question, and you will not know what to ask about next. Knowledge is strength, and
in the practice of law one of the most important means of gaining knowledge is to listen carefully.
When communicating with clients, talk and write in plain English. If you have to use a term of art, explain
its meaning in an uncondescending way. Use concrete, precise language and not vague generalities. Behave
in ways that encourage clients to tell you things that you need to know and to ask questions about things that
make the client anxious.

§15.2.4 How to Conclude
Clients often want the lawyer to predict immediately whether the client will win or lose. Do not even try
to make that prediction. You must first research the law. The client might need to supply information or
documents that were not brought to the interview. Nearly always, the client does not know all the facts, and
you and the client will need to investigate them further. And you need to think about it. Hasty predictions are
often inaccurate.
But clients want assurance. What can you give them? Usually, it is enough to explain what work you will
do. A client might not realize that lawyers do not know all the answers right away. But we do know how to
find the answers. You can convey to your client that you take the problem very seriously and want to do
something about the issues. You can also explain specifically what you will do next.
As a client leaves your office, two questions are typically running through the client’s mind: Will this
lawyer be able to accomplish what I want? And did this lawyer truly hear me and understand me? The law
and the facts might prevent you from accomplishing what the client wants. But nothing should prevent you
from hearing the client deeply and understanding the client as a person.
1. David A. Binder, Paul Bergman, Susan C. Price & Paul R. Tremblay, Lawyers as Counselors: A Client-Centered
Approach (2d ed. 2004).
2. ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct, Rule 1.6.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

129

159

16

Office Memoranda

§16.1 Office Memorandum Format
Form follows function.
— motto of the Bauhaus school of architecture

An office memorandum predicts how the law will treat the client. Chapter 4, which you should review
now, explains predictive analysis.
The memo might be read many times over a period of months or years by several different lawyers,
including the one who wrote the memo. It might be used as a resource long after it was written. For example,
a memo might be written after a client asks whether it would be worthwhile to start a lawsuit. If the answer
is yes, and the client decides to sue, the memo might be used again to help a lawyer — perhaps you or your
supervisor — draft the complaint. It might be used a third time when the lawyer responds to a motion to
dismiss, and so on.
Writing predictive memos can make your predictions, on average, more accurate. That’s because writing
is thinking. When you start writing a memo, you might believe that this particular client has a cause of
action. But as you try to explain that, you might discover that the explanations don’t hold water and that the
client actually has no cause of action. Writers often change their mind while writing because writing causes
them to rethink what they thought they knew.
Who should you imagine your reader to be? When you start working at a job, there will be nothing to
imagine because most of the time your reader will be your supervisor. But in law school, your assignments
are hypothetical. Imagine that you’re writing to the typical partner or supervising lawyer
160
described in §6.2. This person will be busy and by nature skeptical and careful. She will be reading your
memo for the purpose of making a decision and will probably be under some kind of pressure (especially
time pressure) while reading.
Format varies from law office to law office and from case to case, but a typical office memo includes
some combination of the following:
1. A memorandum heading
2. The Issue or Issues
3. A Brief Answer
4. The Facts
5. A Discussion
6. A Conclusion

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

130

In some offices and for some purposes, the Brief Answer might be combined with the Issue or Issues. In a
relatively uncomplicated situation, the Brief Answer or the Conclusion (but not both) might be omitted.
Think of memos as manuals to guide the reader’s decision-making. They aren’t necessarily read from
beginning to end. The reader might open up a particular memo or brief on several different occasions, and
the reader’s purpose at any given time determines the portions of the document that will be read and the
order in which they’ll be read. These documents are very much like your car’s owner’s manual. The reader’s
need at the moment may be limited (“How do I change this flat tire?”), and it can be satisfied without
having to read the entire document.
The rest of this chapter is easier to follow if you look to the memo in Appendix C for illustration as you
read the description below of each of these components.
The memorandum heading simply identifies the writer, the recipient, the date on which the memo is
completed, and the subject.
To:
From:
Date:
Re:

[supervising lawyer]
[you]
[today]
[subject, including client’s name]

The “Re:” line should specify enough context that the reader knows what aspect of the client’s representation
the memo addresses. For example:
To:
From:
Date:
Re:

Theresa Wycoff
Christine Chopin
March 1, 2021
Eli Goslin’s Claim for a Constructive Trust

161
Another method would be to use a separate line for identifying the client:
To:
From:
Date:
Client:
Re:

Theresa Wycoff
Christine Chopin
March 1, 2021
Eli Goslin
Claim for a Constructive Trust

The Issue (or Issues) states the question (or questions) that the memo resolves. The Issue also itemizes the
inner core of facts that you think crucial to the answer. You can phrase the Issue as a question about whether
a legal test has been satisfied or how the law treats a particular problem (“Does driving at twice the speed
limit constitute reckless endangerment under Penal Code § 786?” ). Or you can ask a question about how
the courts would rule in a particular dispute (“Is Mr. Maglie likely to be convicted of reckless endangerment
under Penal Code § 786 for driving at twice the speed limit?” ).
Notice how the examples in the preceding paragraph ask for the prediction — one explicitly and the other
implicitly:
implicitly
predictive Issue:
explicitly
predictive Issue:

Does driving at twice the speed limit constitute reckless endangerment under
Penal Code § 786?
Is Mr. Maglie likely to be convicted of reckless endangerment under Penal Code
§ 786 for driving at twice the speed limit?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

131

These are essentially the same question. Answering yes to one of them is the same as answering yes to the
other.
Which version should you use? Choose the one that works better for the circumstances. In one memo, the
implicit version might be more appropriate, and in another the explicit one might work better. And in the
office where you work, local custom might favor one over the other.
An Issue includes its context — both the governing body of law and the crucial facts.
If the issue is statutory, refer to the statute. In the examples above, Penal Code § 786 governs. If the issue
is one of common law, refer to the jurisdiction and the common law doctrine (“negligence under Wyoming
law” ). The Appendix C memo’s Issue refers to New York’s version of the common law constructive trust.
The Issue also refers the essential facts. In the examples above, only one fact is essential: the client drove
at twice the posted speed limit. The Appendix C memo addresses a more complicated factual situation.
The Brief Answer states the writer’s prediction and summarizes concisely why it’s likely to happen. This
usually involves at least an allusion to the
162
determinative facts and rules, together with some expression of how the facts and rules come together to
cause the predicted result. The complete analysis occurs in the Discussion.
For the reader in a hurry, the Brief Answer should set out the bottom-line response in the most accessible
way. Compare two Brief Answers, both of which respond to the following Issue:
Issue
Did the District Attorney act unethically in announcing an indictment at a press conference where
the defendant’s criminal record was recited, an alleged tape-recorded confession was played,
ballistics tests on an alleged murder weapon were described, and the defendant was produced for
photographers without the knowledge of her lawyer?
Brief Answer
(Example 1)
Under Rule 3.6 of the Rules of Professional Conduct, it is unethical for a prosecutor before trial to
publicize, among other things, any criminal record the defendant might have, any confession she
might allegedly have made, or the results of any tests the government might have undertaken. Under
Rule 8.4(d), it is also unethical to engage in conduct “prejudicial to the administration of justice.”
That has occurred here if the press conference — and particularly the presentation of the defendant
for photographers — created so much pretrial publicity that the jury pool has been prejudiced.
Therefore, the District Attorney violated Rule 3.6 and may have violated Rule 8.4(d).
Brief Answer
(Example 2)
Yes. Except for the production of the defendant for photographers, all the actions listed in the Issue
are prohibited by Rule 3.6 of the Rules of Professional Conduct. In addition, if producing the
defendant for photographers tainted the jury pool, it was unethical under Rule 8.4(d), which prohibits
conduct “prejudicial to the administration of justice.”
Example 1 is closer to the way you might think through the Brief Answer in a first draft. But to make it
useful to the reader you would rewrite it to be something like Example 2, which can be more quickly read
and understood.
The Facts set out the events and circumstances on which the prediction is based. Usually, the Facts are a
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

132

story narrative, but sometimes organizing them by topic works better — for example if different things
happened in different places at the same time. Include dates only if they are determinative or needed
163
to avoid confusion. A date could be determinative if the issue is based on time, such as a statute of
limitations.
One way to begin the fact statement is to introduce the most important character or characters, as in the
Appendix C memo. Another is to summarize the most important event or events (“Mr. Goslin deeded his
home to his nephew, assuming he would be able to continue living there, and now the nephew is trying to
force him to leave” ). A third way of beginning is to state why the memo is being written ( “Mr. Goslin
wants to know whether he can regain ownership, or at least exclusive possession, of his home” ). Choose the
method that would be most helpful in the case at hand to the reader who will probably make the most use of
the memo.
Include all facts you consider determinative, together with any explanatory facts needed to help the story
make sense. If your reader is already familiar with the factual background, this part of the memo might be
abruptly short — much shorter than the fact statement in Appendix C— because your purpose will be to
remind the reader about the essential facts, rather than to make a detailed record of them, which already be in
your office’s file for this client.
For example, if over the past few days you and your supervisor have spent several hours working together
on the Appendix C case — and your supervisor therefore is already familiar with the facts — you might use
a condensed fact statement something like this:
The client is elderly, retired, arthritic, and a widower. His only asset is his home, and he has no other place to
live. His only income is from social security.
Last year, when the client could no longer pay his mortgage, his nephew offered to make the remaining $11,500
in payments as they became due. Seventeen years ago, the client contributed $3,200 to the nephew’s college tuition,
but the nephew did not say he was now reciprocating.
The client, without stating his purpose to anyone, then gave a deed to the house to the nephew. The client has told
us, “At the time, it seemed like the right thing to do. He was going to pay the mortgage, and after a certain point —
maybe after I’m gone — the place would become his. I didn’t think it would end up like this.” The nephew did not
ask for a deed.
A few weeks ago, the nephew unexpectedly moved into the house and ordered the client to move out. The client
refused, and the nephew has become verbally and physically abusive.

Compare this condensed version with the one in the Appendix C memo, where the writer knows that the
reader is less familiar with the factual details.
The Discussion is the largest and most complex part of the memo. It proves the conclusion set out in the
Brief Answer. If the discussion is highly detailed or analyzes several issues, it can be broken up with
subheadings to help the reader locate the portions that might be needed at any given time.
164
When writing a Discussion, you will use rules to predict what a court will do; organize proof of your
conclusion; select authority to back up your conclusion; and work with precedent, statutes, and facts.
The Conclusion summarizes the discussion in a bit more detail than the Brief Answer does. The Brief
Answer is for the reader who needs to know the bottom line but has no time to read more. The Conclusion is
for the reader who needs and has time for more detail, but not as much as the Discussion offers. The
Conclusion or Brief Answer can also provide an overview for the reader about to plunge into the Discussion.
Here and in the Brief Answer, carefully choose the words that will tell the reader how much confidence to
ascribe to your predictions. Attached to many of your predictions will be the words “probably,” “probably
not,” “likely,” or “unlikely.” If you think the odds are very high that you are right, you can say something
like “almost certainly.” If the Issue is framed as a question about whether a test has been satisfied (“Did the
District Attorney act unethically . . . ?”), a simple “yes” or “no” will be understood as the equivalent of
“almost certainly yes” or “almost certainly no,” and you do not need to add the extra words.
Prediction can be expressed (“the client will almost certainly lose a lawsuit”) or implied (“the client does
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

133

not have a cause of action” ). But make a prediction, not a guess. When you make a prediction conditioned
on a fact not yet known, specify the condition (“if producing the defendant for television cameras tainted the
jury pool, it was unethical” ).
Although the Brief Answer is limited to responding to the Issue, the Conclusion is an appropriate place to
explain what lawyering tasks need to be done, to suggest methods of solving the client’s problem, or to
evaluate options already under consideration. If any of these things would be complicated, they can be
accomplished in a Recommendations section added after the Conclusion.

§16.2 Writing an Office Memo
Some lawyers tend to write the Discussion before writing anything else because the other components of
the memo will be shaped in part by insights gained while putting the Discussion together. Other lawyers start
by writing the Facts because those seem easier to describe. (Lawyers who write the Discussion first would
say that they cannot start by writing the Facts because, until they have worked out the Discussion, they don’t
know which facts are determinative.) Other lawyers are flexible. They start with whatever component begins
to “jell” first, and they often draft two or more components simultaneously.
165

§16.3 How to Test Your Writing for Predictiveness
After you have written a first draft — and before you start on later drafts — ask yourself the following
questions.
Have you edited out waffling? Vague waffling, using words like “seems to,” “appears,” and their

16-A synonyms, makes your advice less useful to clients and supervising lawyers. If it happens that
someone disagrees with you, lightning will not strike you down on the spot. On the contrary, supervisors and
judges are grateful for forthrightness and are impatient with hedging. But it’s not waffling to say that “the
plaintiff probably will win an appeal” or “is likely to win an appeal.” No prediction can be a certainty.
Have you said or implied whether your prediction is qualified? Is the law unsettled because

16-B courts disagree with each other or because a statute is so new that it hasn’t yet been interpreted by

courts? If so, make sure the reader understands that. Overt qualifications of accuracy are usually not
necessary, since the prediction can be stated in a way that implies your degree of confidence in it. The
implication comes not from “weasel words” like “seems to” or “perhaps” (see item 16-A), but instead from a
precise statement of the variables on which the prediction is based (“The defendant will probably prevail
unless . . .”).
Have you accounted for gaps in the law? Sometimes the law has gaps — holes that have not yet

16-C been filled in by legislation or by precedent (see §7.5 in Chapter 7). If the law you’re dealing with is
unsettled or incomplete, have you identified the gaps for the reader? And have you predicted how the courts
will fill them?
Have you solved a problem rather than written a college essay? A college essay is a forum for

16-D academic analysis — analysis to satisfy curiosity — rather than for practical problem-solving. In a

college essay, you can reason in any logical manner toward any sensible goal you select, even at whim. But
legal writing is practical work. Your Discussion should focus on resolving specific questions. Sentences not
helpful in resolving those questions should be cut.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

134

167

17

Email Communication

Lawyers write a lot of email. They write to coworkers, clients, opposing counsel, courts, and many others.
They send email to set up meetings, ask and answer questions, attach documents, communicate legal
analysis, and for other reasons. A lawyer with a busy practice sends and receives a high volume of email
every day.
As a new lawyer, your goal should be to ensure that you use email professionally and effectively.
Experienced lawyers frequently complain that recent law school graduates don’t know how to use email
appropriately. Although you may have been writing email nearly all your life, you probably haven’t done so
in a professional context.
Writing professional email is a skill. This chapter explains how to ensure that your email has the proper
form, tone, appearance, and content.

§17.1 Professional Tone and Appearance
When writing email in a law practice context, your primary goal should be to meet the needs of your
reader (as in all legal writing). You can accomplish this by being mindful of both maintaining a professional
tone and making your writing easy to read on a screen. Although you may not have previously thought about
these issues when writing email, as a lawyer, they should become second nature to you. As you read through
this section, refer to Appendix D, which provides an example of a professional email.
168

§17.1.1 Keeping It Professional
Being professional in email does not mean being stiff and overly formal. Email tends to be more informal
than memoranda of law (Chapter 16) and letters (Chapter 19). In an email, it is acceptable to be
conversational, as long as you remember that this is a professional communication and not a quick note to a
friend. Each component of the email should be clear, direct, and focused, without extraneous information.
When you start a new job, ask to see a sample or two of email that would illustrate that office’s expectations
concerning form and tone.
Subject line. Assume that your reader is busy, with an inbox full of messages. The subject line should
clearly communicate the purpose of the email so the recipient doesn’t overlook it. If the email refers to a
client or a case, include the name but also the email’s specific subject. For example, “A v. B” provides much
less informative than “A v. B., custody hearing.” If you are replying to a message, don’t change the subject
line unless the topic of the message has shifted to something different. Think about how your reader might
search for the message, and use language that is distinct and easy to find.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

135

Salutation. In most cases, begin the email with a salutation. If the email is part of a back-and-forth
exchange, use your judgment about whether a salutation is necessary every time. Starting with a greeting lets
your reader know that the message is intended for them, and helps you to maintain a professional approach
to the email. How you begin depends on the relationship you have with your reader and the environment in
which you are writing. In a very formal law firm, you might be expected to start an email to a partner with
“Dear Ms. Khan,” whereas in a more casual environment you might write “Hi, Sofia.” First names may or
may not be appropriate, depending on how well you know the person to whom you are writing and the
nature of the relationship.
Body of the message. The content of the message obviously depends on its purpose. Regardless of the
content, however, the principles of good legal writing apply. You don’t need to be overly formal in your use
of language, but your writing should be clear, concise, and direct. Look back at what you have written and
edit it. Don’t assume that you can use sloppy or wordy language just because you are sending an informal
email. Decide on an appropriate level of detail and omit anything extra.
Get to the point quickly. Although a greeting is important, spending too much time on pleasantries may
irritate a busy reader. In addition, keep the email focused on one subject. Don’t mix personal business, such
as making plans for lunch, with answering a legal question.
169
Signature. Signatures are expected in professional communications. They reinforce that you are attaching
your name to your message and stand behind what you have said. In addition, you should have an automatic
signature block that makes it easy for your reader to get in touch with you for follow-up questions. The
signature block should include your position — Are you an intern? An associate? A staff attorney? — as
well as your firm or organization, a street address, a phone number, and a clickable email address.

§17.1.2 Writing the Email
You’ll find it easier to do the writing in a separate document and then paste your work into the email,
especially for longer emails. Writing in a separate document ensures you won’t send the email before you
have had time to reflect and edit.
If you have included formatting such as headings or bullet points, be sure the formatting is accurate before
hitting Send, especially if you have copied and pasted from another document. Read your work one last time
to be sure the headings are where you want them and, if you numbered paragraphs, that the numbers
survived the journey from copying to pasting.
The last thing to do before sending is typing the recipient’s name in the To field. If you do that earlier, and
you accidentally hit Send before finishing the message or adding any attachments, the recipient will receive
an unfinished message. Although you’ll realize your mistake and send a corrected message soon after, the
recipient will have an overloaded inbox, will probably confuse the two messages, and will be puzzled about
what you’re communicating — to your embarrassment.

§17.1.3 Making the Email Easy to Read
In addition to adopting a professional tone, your email should be professional in appearance and easy for
your reader to follow. It is as likely that your email will be viewed on a mobile device, such as a phone or
tablet, as on the larger screen of a laptop or desktop computer. It’s difficult to read large blocks of text on a
small screen. What looks like a few lines on a laptop screen may make for a lot of scrolling on a phone. One
good way to get a sense of how easy your email is to read would be to send it to yourself and view it on
different devices.
How do you deal with the problem of endless scrolling when you have to write a legal analysis of a

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

136

complex question? You can use several techniques. First, write as concisely as possible, and do not include
extraneous information. Second, break the text up into smaller units, using headings, subheadings, and bullet
points to make it easier for the reader to follow your organization and not get lost. You can also use different
systems of headings, numbering, and bullets
170
to indicate the hierarchy of information in an email, and to communicate the relationship among concepts.
Be aware of font and typeface. You might not have control over how your email is viewed. Thus, use with
caution techniques such as varying the font type, size, and color. Changing font color could also be
perceived as unprofessional, and some colors may be hard to read. Steer away from these methods of
differentiating text unless you are very confident that you know how your email will be viewed.

§17.2 Email and Confidentiality Problems
A lawyer’s work is governed by a number of ethics rules, which you will learn in detail in your second- or
third-year course in Professional Responsibility. One of a lawyer’s ethical duties is to keep confidential
everything the lawyer knows about the client and the client’s situation unless the client authorizes the lawyer
to reveal those confidences. (There are other exceptions, but they aren’t relevant here.)
Nearly all states have adopted the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct. Here are excerpts from the
rule on confidentiality:
Rule 1.6 Confidentiality of Information
(a) A lawyer shall not reveal information relating to the representation of a client unless the client
gives informed consent, the disclosure is impliedly authorized in order to carry out the representation or
the disclosure is permitted by paragraph (b).
[Paragraph (b) lists various exceptions to the duty.]
(c) A lawyer shall make reasonable efforts to prevent the inadvertent or unauthorized disclosure of,
or unauthorized access to, information relating to the representation of a client.
Official Comments 5 and 19 relate to email even though they don’t mention email:
Comment 5
. . . Lawyers in a firm may, in the course of the firm’s practice, disclose to each other information
relating to a client of the firm, unless the client has instructed that particular information be confined to
specified lawyers.
Comment 19
When transmitting a communication that includes information relating to the representation of a
client, the lawyer must take reasonable
171
precautions to prevent the information from coming into the hands of unintended recipients.
Much of your email will include confidential information. Much of it will contain attorney work product,
which is covered in the discovery part of your course on Civil Procedure. And much of it can affect the
attorney-client privilege, which you will learn about in your second- or third-year course on Evidence.
You can cause a lot of damage if your email ends up on the wrong person’s computer screen. You might
breach your ethical duty of confidentiality; create work product and discovery issues; inadvertently waive
your client’s attorney-client privilege; or do two or even all three of these. Be sure to carefully address your

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

137

email to the correct recipient; and be careful with email programs that autocomplete or autofill addresses.
Autocomplete might be your friend because it saves keystrokes, but it’s also your enemy. Unless you pay
careful attention to what it puts into your email’s To field, your email could be delivered to the wrong
person. Also, be sure you haven’t inadvertently chosen the Reply All option when you mean to reply to the
sender alone and not to the people whom the sender cc’d. If you have attached a document, double-check to
be sure it’s the one you intend to send.
If you accidentally send an email or an attachment with confidential information to someone who
shouldn’t see it, you are required to notify your superiors and, in some instances, your client. You are also
required to do your best to mitigate any damage that is caused. Although it might be unpleasant or
embarrassing, you should address the issue as soon as possible.
Many lawyers and law firms include boilerplate language at the end of every email, stating that the
email’s contents are confidential. But that wording is not sufficient to protect the email’s confidentiality. If
the wrong person has seen an email, the boilerplate language can’t erase information from that person’s
memory.

§17.3 Email Pitfalls
Used properly, email enhances law practice by facilitating quick and easy communication. But if not used
carefully, email can embarrass you and, worse, adversely affect clients and other lawyers. When preparing to
write an email, start by asking yourself whether an email is appropriate. Is this a matter better handled with a
phone conversation? Is what you are going to say too complicated for the short email format? Do you really
need to contact your recipient at all, or is it an issue you can resolve yourself?
Lawyers are critical readers with high standards. Experienced lawyers often complain that recent law
school graduates are too informal in their use
172
of email, showing a lack of professionalism. To avoid embarrassment, spell everything perfectly and use
proper grammar. Write complete sentences, not fragments. Avoid slang. Address your reader with respect.
Although email is more informal than other types of legal writing, it is still a professional communication
and requires a professional tone. Assume that every email you write might later appear as an exhibit in a
lawsuit and be read by a judge and jury. Write your emails so carefully and professionally that you wouldn’t
be embarrassed if that were to happen.
Experienced lawyers complain about the frequency and timeliness of emails written by new lawyers.
Because email transmits immediately, other lawyers and your clients will expect prompt replies. Try to
respond to every email within 24 hours, even if just to acknowledge the message and say you are working on
the answer. Don’t send hasty or thoughtless messages. Busy lawyers are flooded with email and don’t want
to see any more than is necessary. Because email is easy to send, junior lawyers tend to send frequent and
multiple emails to supervisors. Stop and think before sending. Have you gathered all of your questions and
comments into a single message, rather than sending multiple messages? Have you paused and reflected
rather than sent an email in haste or anger? These are common mistakes to avoid.
Email can easily lead to misunderstandings because the recipient sees only your words on a screen with
none of the clues — voice tone and body language — that communicate nonverbal meaning. Suppose you
and another lawyer are negotiating a contract. You represent the buyer; the other lawyer represents the seller.
You telephone the other lawyer and speak these words:
My client needs the contract signed by Thursday. Will you be able to do it by then?

Say these two sentences — out loud — in the tone you would use if you were asking the other lawyer, as a
favor to you and your client, to speed things up even though you know that will be inconvenient for the other
lawyer and her client.
Now say them again. But this time you aren’t asking a favor. You’re demanding something. The second

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

138

sentence communicates that you want the other lawyer to concede that she must do what the first sentence
requires. When you speak the words, use your voice tone to communicate that you expect to be obeyed.
Email is a cold medium. Words you intend to be friendly can often look unfriendly. If you were to put
those two sentences in an email, many lawyers would assume that you’re making a demand. To prevent
misunderstanding, sometimes you’ll need to express in words the things that in conversation you would
communicate by voice tone. For example, if in an email you mean to ask a favor, you might need to write
something like this:
173
My client needs the contract signed by Thursday. I realize that this might be a problem for you and your client.
But is there any way you can do it by then?

To the other lawyer, there’s a big difference between this and the original version.

§17.4 Communicating Legal Analysis in an Email Memo
Often you’ll be asked to answer a legal question and to deliver your answer and reasoning in an email.
You will write an email memo — an email that functions somewhat like an office memorandum, but scaled
down drastically to email proportions. The chief differences between an email memo and a formal, full-scale
memorandum are that (1) no standard format exists for communicating legal analysis in email and (2) the
analysis will likely be simple and straightforward. Email usually isn’t the appropriate vehicle for long and
complex legal analysis.
Writing a “memo-like email” is challenging because you must compress sophisticated legal analysis into
the body of an email. And it’s challenging because you must do everything quickly. Your supervisor asked
for an email because she needs your answer fast.
Once you have determined that you fully understand the legal question or questions you are addressing
and have all of the relevant facts, go about the analysis in much the same way you would if you were writing
a formal full-scale memorandum of law.
Organization. Although an email has a much less formal structure than a memorandum of law and
doesn’t typically have separate sections for issues presented, brief answer, statement of facts, etc., you
should still analyze your issue and organize your response using the paradigm outlined in Chapter 11.
Although the level of depth may vary in an email, the basic principles of stating your conclusion, explaining
and citing your legal authority, and applying that authority to the facts are important in any kind of legal
analysis.
You don’t need a formal question presented, but you should start the email with a quick review of the
issue you are addressing together with your bottom-line answer. This quick overview will help to focus the
email and let your reader know what to expect.
To figure out how much detail to include in the paradigm rule explanation and application ( Chapter 11),
first go through all the analytical steps yourself to ensure you fully understand the issues. Then make
decisions about what to highlight and how much to include for your reader (see Chapter 12). If an issue is
clear and not complicated, you can be more conclusory. If an issue is
174
complex and confusing, provide more depth. You might decide to simplify the rule explanation by
providing less detail about a judicial opinion. Consider using parenthetical explanations with case citations
as a means of efficiently explaining precedent. Or you might present a more conclusory application of law to
fact, highlighting the outcome more than the reasoning. You can’t make those decisions until you have fully
thought out the analysis for yourself, however, and determined how much will be lost if you cut down on the
detailed explanation. If you decide the analysis is too long and complex to be easily read in an email, you

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

139

might make the choice to write a longer document and attach it to the email, providing your reader with just
a summary in the email itself.
You don’t need to end the email with a reiteration of your conclusion. In an email, this should be obvious
and unnecessary. If your analysis has revealed further questions to explore or next steps that should be taken,
identify them and ask your supervisor whether you should proceed. Otherwise, just wrap up and sign off.
Citation to legal authority. Remember that you are writing to a legal reader, who will want to know how
you supported your analysis, even in an email. That means providing your reader with easy access to the
legal authority upon which you relied. This is particularly important if you have presented the highlights of a
case holding without an in-depth discussion of the reasoning. It is good practice, if you are writing to a
supervisor, to ask, before writing the email, about her preferences regarding how to provide authority. Some
lawyers might be satisfied with a citation they can look up. Others might want hyperlinks, although if you
use this option, be sure you are clear on what source to link — a commercial service or a free website.
Another good option, which many lawyers prefer, is attaching PDF files of the cases and other authorities on
which you have relied. Your goal should be to provide your busy reader with the easiest and most efficient
way to check on the authority on which you have relied.

§17.5 How to Test Your Emails for Professional Effectiveness
Before hitting Send, ask yourself the following questions:1
Is your email addressed to the right person? Have you checked to make sure you haven’t hit reply-all

17-A or that your email system hasn’t autofilled the wrong address?
175

17-B
17-C

Is the subject line clear, so the reader can easily identify your email’s purpose?
Have you included an appropriate greeting and signature?
Is the email clear and concise, with a professional but not overly formal tone, so that a busy reader

17-D can quickly and easily read through it?

Have you used headings, bullet points, and other devices to make the organization easy to see and to

17-E keep the email readable on small screens?

Have you clearly organized the legal analysis in enough depth for the reader to feel confident in your

17-F analysis without being overwhelmed?
17-G

Have you asked for information or identified next steps, where appropriate?
Have you included attachments or links, or otherwise provided access to the information upon which

17-H you relied to develop your answer?
17-I

Have you proofread for errors and clarity?

1. When marking up your work, your teacher might refer to these questions by using the number-letter codes that
appear next to each question here.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

140

177

18

Oral Presentations to Your Supervising

Lawyer
For lawyers, time is quite literally money. In addition to busy law work, a lawyer must cultivate clients,
and those clients are cost-conscious. For these reasons, as well as for convenience and the advantages of
personal interaction, the modern practice of law increasingly requires junior lawyers to report their research
results orally. For many issues, a full, formal memorandum would not be efficient or necessary. And an oral
presentation gives the supervising lawyer an opportunity to discuss the issue with the junior lawyer and ask
questions so that both lawyers, talking together, can test ideas and brainstorm.
The junior lawyer may meet with the senior lawyer in person, or the “meeting” may occur by telephone or
on Zoom or Webex. Whatever the format, the junior lawyer should prepare carefully and treat the telephone
or online meeting as professionally as she would an in-person meeting. The first important part of the
meeting is the initial summary. The junior lawyer’s initial summary should be as brief as possible given the
complexity of the legal problem. The summary should get immediately to the most important point. You
might start by saying something along the lines of “you asked this question; the answer is this; here is why.”
This chapter lays out the best practices for giving an oral presentation of research. In sum: (1) Prepare a
short overall presentation of the conclusion and analysis, akin to the brief answer in the memorandum or the
short email answer; and (2) prepare to answer key questions about the analysis and authorities, as well as the
path of your research.
178

§18.1 Preparing
§18.1.1 Getting the Assignment
As a preliminary matter, be sure you and your supervisor are on the same page in terms of what she wants
you to do. With any assignment, show up with something that allows you to take notes. Although this can be
a legal pad, tablet, or laptop, just be sure it is something that allows you to write quickly. The important
thing is that you write down the issue or assignment as explained by the supervisor, and then before leaving,
read it back to your supervisor. You can say, “I just want to be certain that I’m supposed to research whether
our client has a reasonable expectation of privacy while he’s in his business office,” or the like. Be sure you
understand which jurisdiction’s law governs. And ask approximately how much time you should spend on
the assignment. Time is a budgeted resource.

§18.1.2 Researching
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

141

While doing your research, keep your focus on the precise question so you don’t waste your time (and
anyone’s money) digging up law that will ultimately not be relevant. A useful technique is to have a research
“bull’s-eye” or target that you keep written down, near you while you research so that you can periodically
remind yourself. Start with a narrow target and move away from it in small steps only to the extent you
determine that there is no law on the initial target. Especially with online research, which allows you to
follow link after link, it is too easy to lose your way and go far from your original target.
Secondary sources are a useful place to start your research for many reasons. They can give you a
comprehensive “big picture” understanding of the issue, and that will help in all phases of the presentation:
making a conclusion, analyzing difficult law, and answering questions from your supervisor.

§18.1.3 Writing Out Your Analysis
Before the meeting you should read and synthesize the law. Organize this synthesis, as you would any
legal analysis, using the paradigm (Chapter 11) and a level of depth appropriate to the situation (Chapter 12).
Begin with your conclusion, briefly summarize the key law or rules on which you rely, note your key
authority, and then apply the law to your client’s facts.
Prepare for the oral presentation by drafting something in writing. This is the best way to prepare to speak
cogently and effectively. It will help you organize your thoughts and work out any problem areas ahead of
time. You do not want to go into the presentation without a fully formed idea of your answer and your
reasoning. Approach the presentation just as you would the
179
discussion of authority in a formal memorandum, without the added step of having to polish your writing.
Writing your analysis in advance will prevent you from floundering about or rambling during the meeting
— both of which are real dangers with this type of report and are irritating to a busy senior lawyer. You
might also find that your analysis changes or evolves as you write. It’s best for this kind of evolution to
happen before the meeting with your supervisor rather than in front of her. It’s dangerous to go into a
meeting with a stack of cases and no idea what to make of all of them. It’s like bringing a bag of puzzle
pieces to your boss and asking her to assemble the puzzle. That’s not her job. It’s your job.

§18.1.4 Whittling Down the Analysis to the Initial Summary
When you have reached a conclusion and analysis in which you are fairly confident, then you can start
whittling your analysis down to its essentials. The essentials will be your initial summary. Two good starting
points for organizing and compiling the initial summary are the “brief answer” for an office memo (Chapter
16) or an email answer (Chapter 17). As always, you should start with your conclusion, summarize the
relevant rules on which you rely, and apply it to the client’s facts. But the “rule explanation” part will be
quite abbreviated, expanding or contracting as necessary depending on the complexity of the issue. Think of
describing your authority in terms of quick explanatory parentheticals as opposed to paragraph-long
descriptions. Again, the key here is to be as direct and brief as possible given the nature of the issue. Your
initial summary is really an entrée into the real purpose of the meeting, which is the discussion led by
questions from your supervisor.

§18.2 Questions from Your Supervisor During the Meeting
After you finish stating your summary, you should expect questions from your supervisor. Lawyers are
skeptical and probing by training. They are excellent at finding weaknesses and holes in a legal analysis.
One lawyer we know says that the toughest oral argument she ever did wasn’t in any courtroom — it was in

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

142

the office of a senior partner at her law firm. The questions may be tough, but try to look at them as an
important step in the collaborative brainstorming process. You are both on the same side and are trying to do
the best work for the client.
Because you will likely get questions, particularly about your legal authority, it is very important that you
go into the presentation with materials that will help you answer the questions quickly and accurately. First,
have clear, easy-to-follow notes about your research path. This is especially important if you
180
have little or no “on point” authority and if your reasoning is built on analogies and other statute and
precedent analysis tools (Chapters 8 and 9). Your supervisor will want to ensure that you checked all
potential avenues for authority. You should be able to explain your research path in a coherent, organized
way. Be prepared to discuss not only where you looked, but what searches you used and what results they
achieved. If you chose not to look at certain authorities, be prepared to say why.
Second, be prepared to discuss the substance of the authority. It’s a good idea to have copies of the key
cases with important language highlighted (either electronic or hard copy). You may want to ask your
supervisor ahead of time whether she wants the key authority sent to her in advance by email or instead
provided at the meeting in hard copy (or both). If you provide hard copy, highlight and annotate the essential
parts to make it easier for her to find the key language when you refer to it.
But you will need more than copies of the cases. No one expects you to have memorized the case law, but
you don’t want to be flipping through stacks of cases searching for the answer. This is anxiety-producing,
embarrassing, and inefficient. Instead, find a way to organize a “cheat sheet” of your cases that you can refer
to quickly and easily. One way is a case chart or matrix. This can be done in a Word table or in Excel or
another charting program. The left column is your list of cases and other columns are for key facts, holdings,
and relevant reasoning. Try to keep this chart to one page, or perhaps two in very complicated cases. A
simple one looks something like this:
Case

Facts

Holding

State v. Brown
, 660 A.2d
1221 (N.J.
Super. App.
Div. 1995)

Police found evidence of a murder in
4th
defendant’s duffel bag hidden in storage room Amendment
in basement of apartment building. Other
did not bar
tenants of the building and super had keys to search.
room.

Defendant had no reasonable
expectation of privacy in
duffel bag stored in storage
room to which others had
keys.

People v.
Duvall, 428
N.W.2d 746
(Mich. App.
1988).

Police searched desk of sheriff’s deputy and
found evidence of a crime. Sheriff’s deputy
shared desk with others.

Defendant had no reasonable
expectation of privacy in
desk others shared.

Sheriff’s
deputy had
no standing
to object to
search.

Reasoning

181

§18.3 Typical Questions
A supervisor’s questions will vary with the legal issue, of course. Try to anticipate questions ahead of time
and prepare answers to them. Look for holes or weaknesses in your analysis and identify the reasons why
they don’t change your conclusion. Distinguish or otherwise address adverse law or facts. Here are some
typical questions supervising lawyers may ask:
•

What is our best authority? Why is it the best? Is it mandatory or non-mandatory? If nonmandatory,
why do you think the court in our case will follow it? Are there any distinguishing facts that the

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

143

other side could use to diminish the value of the case? What are they and how would we handle that
argument?
• What authority hurts us the most? Why is it the worst? Why doesn’t it change your conclusion?
How can we handle it?
You might not be able to answer every question definitively, but that’s okay. Again, you and your
supervisor are on the same side, and this is a discussion. Be forthright about weaknesses in the client’s
position. Don’t sugarcoat weakness or try to hide it. If your conclusion is that the client probably won’t
prevail, be clear about that.
If you find that you cannot answer a question, be honest about that, too. You can always offer to do
additional research to look into a question that arises. One way to prepare to handle tough questions is to
look at secondary sources like treatises or practitioner manuals. Secondary sources can often be the first step
in a research project anyway. In an oral presentation, secondary sources can be very helpful in allowing you
to predict an answer when the law does not definitively answer the question.
For example, if you read in a treatise on defamation that “courts generally take the position that
‘[c]artoons are rhetorical hyperbole’ . . . which cannot be reasonably construed as literal depictions of actual
situations,” then you might be able to make an informed prediction about a defamation action against your
cartoonist client even if there is no law in your jurisdiction.1 Similarly, if you know that historically, courts
have uniformly denied punitive damages where a civil plaintiff can’t establish a right to compensatory
damages, but that recently, some courts have allowed punitive damages in those cases, you know something
about the modern trend of the law and can make a prediction even if there is a gap in your law, or even law
against you in your jurisdiction.2 This kind of general, overarching knowledge is essential to the researcher
and will help you answer questions even if you have no on-point authority.
182

§18.4 The Most Essential Points
Prepare ahead of time so that you have fully synthesized your authority and are confident in your
conclusion and analysis.
Prepare a short, direct summary of your conclusion and analysis, which is the oral equivalent of the email
answer or brief answer.
Prepare to answer questions while explaining your conclusion and analysis.
To help you answer questions knowledgeably, use a case chart and secondary sources so you have a
comprehensive overview of the issue.
Your supervisor’s time is a very limited resource. Use it efficiently. When you begin, get straight to the
point and be brief.

§18.5 Mistakes to Avoid
Imagine the scene through your supervisor’s eyes. You don’t want her to see you
•
•
•
•

being long-winded or rambling,
showing up with a pile of cases and no plan,
losing focus and spending too much time on cases that are not relevant, or
hiding weaknesses in the case or painting an unrealistically rosy picture of the client’s position.

1. David A. Elder, Defamation: A Lawyer’s Guide § 8:45 (2016).
2. Automobile Liability Insurance 4th, § 27:20 (2016).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 4:20 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

144

183

Copyright 2021. Aspen Publishing.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

19

Client Advice Letters

§19.1 Advice in Writing
Advice is explaining to a client how the law treats the client’s situation. When you do that in writing,
you’ll write a client advice letter. This chapter explains how. A sample client advice letter is in Appendix E.
Client advice letters are about halfway between a conversation with the client and an office memo. They
record the essence of what you would say to the client during a meeting in your office. And often they
summarize ideas you worked out in detail earlier while writing an office memo.
If the client is an individual, you should probably give the advice, at least preliminarily, in person or over
the telephone. Advice given only by letter might seem cold to the client. Conversation, on the other hand,
promotes questions as well as brainstorming with the client about how to solve the problem. But an advice
letter can be a useful supplement to advice you’ve already given in person. For example, if a client has a
complicated or difficult decision to make, the client might want a written explanation to refer to while
thinking things over.
If the client is an organization, a larger proportion of the advice will be given solely by letter. For the most
part, the problems are more complex, and the people in the organization need conversation less because
they’re more experienced than individual clients are at dealing with the problems at hand.
184

§19.2 Style and Tone in a Client Advice Letter
Perhaps the biggest challenge in writing a client advice letter is explaining complicated legal concepts to a
reader who knows little or nothing about law. Some lawyers say that you don’t really understand the law
until you can explain it to a nonlawyer. To do that, identify the core concepts and then find everyday
language that precisely expresses them.
The tone of a client letter should be professionally precise and at least implicitly supportive. In choosing a
tone, ask yourself these questions:
What does the situation call for?
What would this client want from a professional?
What are you comfortable with in terms of your own style?
How do you want to present yourself to clients?
The second question — What would this client want from a professional? — may be the most complex.
Consider the client’s level of sophistication (education, occupation, experience with lawyers). And consider
the client’s feelings. Is the client experiencing anxiety, grief, or anger? Even in positive situations, such as
EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN
AN: 2750409 ; Richard K. Neumann Jr, Ellie Margolis, Kathryn M. Stanchi.; Legal Reasoning and Legal Writing
Account: s2953473.main.ehost

145

buying property, happiness can be mixed with anxiety. Or is this transaction, from the client’s point of view,
pure business? It probably is if the client is an organization or a businessperson, if you have been hired on a
matter the client considers routine, and if the client has a lot of experience with lawyers.
Contractions (“don’t,” “won’t”) are fine in a letter, although not in a document submitted to a court.

§19.3 How to Organize a Client Advice Letter
Client letter format resembles in some ways the format of an office memo: issue, brief answer, facts,
discussion, and conclusion. (See Chapter 16.)
In fact, sometimes you will write a client advice letter from an office memo. You’ll research and write the
memo to establish how the law treats the client’s situation. If the client needs advice in writing, you’ll
condense the memo, removing most of the detail about the law, and then rewrite what’s left into a letter that
includes what the client needs to know in language the client can easily understand. When you do this, you
need to change everything for a new reader. You wrote the memo for a supervising lawyer. Now write the
letter for a client who knows little or nothing about the law.
A client letter has these parts:
1. the beginning formalities
2. one or two opening paragraphs, stating the problem and summarizing your advice
185
3. one or two paragraphs reviewing the key facts
4. your advice in detail
5. one or two closure paragraphs
6. the ending formalities
If the letter is complex, you might use headings to break it up, although you should adapt the wording in
the headings to the client and the situation. The client advice letter in Appendix E is simple enough to need
only a few headings.
1. The beginning formalities. These are (1) the letterhead, which is already printed on the law office’s
stationery; (2) a confidentiality warning; (3) the date; (4) the client’s name and address; (5) perhaps a
reference to the letter’s subject; and (6) the salutation.
A confidentiality warning generally reminds the client not to show the letter to other people without a
good reason. It also suggests to others who accidentally see the letter that they are not to read it.
If the client is an organization, a “RE:” line might be helpful. It comes between the client’s address and
the salutation, is positioned close to the right-hand margin, and might include a number that would help the
client identify its own records on the matter.
The salutation (“Dear Ms. Naguchi:”) always ends with a colon, never a comma.
Here’s an example:
[letterhead]
CONFIDENTIAL
ATTORNEY-CLIENT COMMUNICATION
AND WORK PRODUCT
Monica Naguchi
Standard Insurance Co.
4 Cornell Street
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

146

Claremont, CA 91711
RE: Cucamonga Forwarders, Inc.
Your file # 98-326
Dear Ms. Naguchi:

186
2. One or two opening paragraphs, stating the problem about which the client has sought your
advice, and a brief summary of what your advice will be. This corresponds to the issue and brief answer
in an office memo. If you have bad news, this is where the client will learn that it’s bad. Think long and hard
about the words you use to convey that bad news. Reading words on a page can be a cold experience for the
client.
3. One or more paragraphs reviewing the key facts on which the advice is based, as you understand
those facts. You might think it wastes words to tell the client the client’s own facts, but there are several
good reasons for doing it.
First, if you’ve misunderstood any of the facts and the client knows better, the client can correct what’s
wrong. Many lawyers add a sentence asking the client to do that: “If I have described any of the facts
inaccurately, please call me.”
Second, a fact recitation limits the advice to the facts recited, and that can be important in the future if the
facts change. A tenant who doesn’t have a claim against the landlord for a filthy lobby might have one next
week if the lobby ceiling caves in.
Third, you might recently have learned of some facts the client doesn’t yet know about. If so, describe the
newly found facts in words that tell the client they are new: “Since we last spoke, I have discovered that the
1996 deed was never properly recorded in the county clerk’s office.”
And finally, a fact recitation is a good, professional transition into the advice itself.
4. The advice, which can be structured in either of two ways. First, if the client wants to know how the
law treats a situation — “Would my company violate the law if we import this product?” — you’ll predict
how a court would rule or you’ll report the client’s or other people’s rights and obligations. The client asked
a specific question, and you’re answering it.
Alternately, if the client must make a decision, you’ll counsel in the letter by suggesting the options from
which the client can choose and, for each option, explaining the factors that might make a given choice
attractive or unattractive. In the advice portion of the letter, list the options and explain their advantages,
costs, risks, and chances of success. When you estimate risks and chances of success, you are making
predictions. Costs are not limited to money. The cost of suing includes not only legal fees and other litigation
expenses, but also the time and energy the client would have to invest in the lawsuit and the stress most
litigants suffer while the suit is in progress.
Be especially careful about the words you use to communicate the degree of confidence you have in your
advice. When you write, “We have a reasonably good chance of winning at trial,” you might mean that you
believe the
187
client will probably win although the risk of loss is significant. But many clients would read those words
to mean that victory is nearly assured. That’s because it’s only human for a client who has suffered a wrong
to assume that forces of justice will resolutely correct it. Don’t, through vagueness, imply unjustified
optimism. Find ordinary, everyday words that the client you’re writing to will understand exactly as you
mean them.
Conversely, if the news truly is bad, don’t cushion it so much that the client will not appreciate it. Don’t
say, “Our chances in litigation are problematic,” if what you really mean is, “It’s very unlikely that such a
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

147

lawsuit would succeed.”
Use lawyer talk as little as possible. If a technical term has a good equivalent in ordinary English, use the
ordinary word even if it does not convey 100 percent of the meaning of the technical term. Eighty percent is
good enough, unless the missing 20 percent is relevant to the client’s situation. If you use a technical term,
define it. By talking law with other students and in class, you might forget that people outside law school
don’t understand what you have been studying so hard to understand.
When you translate lawyer talk into ordinary English, do it respectfully. Imagine writing the letter to one
of your grandparents. This isn’t just good communication, it’s also good business. People often distrust a
stereotyped lawyer who talks to everyone in legalese. But clients can like and trust a good human being who
can explain things clearly and respectfully and who does a good job of being their lawyer.
Write simply but don’t oversimplify. If the law is unsettled, in flux, or unclear, explain that. The client
will want to know why your advice is qualified by uncertainty in the law itself. Discuss authority only if it’s
central to the issue, such as a recent appellate case that changes everything you’ve told the client in the past.
Reciting the law can be cold and confusing (“in this state, tax must be paid by the property owner on each
lien against real property recorded in the county clerk’s office”). Describing its effect on the client is warm
and often eliminates the need to recite the law (“if you refinance the mortgage on your home, you’ll have to
pay $1,250 in mortgage tax”).
Unlike all your other readers, your client assumes that the law is exactly what you say it is. You don’t
need to recite rules of law or cite and explain authority the same way you would in a memo or a brief. But
you do need to know what you’re talking about. Lawyers aren’t perfect at predicting, but if you’re so wrong
as to not know what you’re talking about, you’ll lose clients and learn a lot about the details of malpractice
law.
Organize the material in any way that helps the client understand it. Often that isn’t through the paradigm
formula described in Chapter 11. You aren’t writing for the skeptical senior partner or judge to whom
everything must be proved. You’re writing for a lay person who won’t easily understand what you know.
188
5. One or two closure paragraphs. Sum up your advice in two or three sentences. Specify what can or
should be done next, who should do it, and when it should be done.
If the client must make a decision, set the stage for that. List the options from which the client will choose.
Invite the client to telephone you. If extended conversation would be better, suggest that the client make an
appointment to see you.
This is also a good place to note the extent to which your advice is conditioned on facts not yet known or
events that haven’t yet occurred. In some offices, the closure paragraphs include boilerplate sentences
pointing out that the advice is limited to the facts recited earlier and to current law, which might change, and
so on. Other offices don’t include this kind of thing, on the assumption that it alienates clients.
6. The ending formalities. Place your signature over your typed name and under a parting phrase like,
“Sincerely Yours” or “Best Regards” — whatever words are customary in your office.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

148

189

VI
GENERAL WRITING SKILLS

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

149

191

20

Paragraphing

§20.1 How Paragraphing Reveals Your Organization
In college, you might have organized your paragraphs by writing until you seemed to have written a lot,
stopping, starting a new paragraph, and then going through the cycle again and again. But in law, paragraphs
put together that way will confound and annoy readers who must find your meaning quickly.
Most readers unconsciously use paragraph divisions to learn how a writer’s thoughts fit together. Readers
assume that each paragraph substantiates or explores a separate and distinct idea or subject. They also
assume that the first or second sentence in each paragraph states or implies that idea or subject and, if
necessary, shows how it’s related to matters already discussed. To the extent that you frustrate these
assumptions, your writing will be less helpful to the reader and therefore less influential.
Paragraphing has three goals. The most obvious is to break your material up into digestible chunks. The
second is to help you discipline yourself to confront and develop each theme inherent in the material. The
third is to tell the reader where she or he is in your logic, how that place was arrived at, and where you are
headed — in other words, to make your organization apparent. If the reader feels lost or doesn’t immediately
know what the paragraph’s thesis or topic is or how it differs from that of the preceding paragraph, there’s
something wrong with the paragraph’s length or structure or with the wording of individual sentences. As
you’ll see in §20.4, the paragraph’s first sentence is the one most often botched.
How can you tell the difference between a paragraph that accomplishes these goals and one that does not?
An effective paragraph has five characteristics. First, it has unity. It proves one proposition or covers one
subject. Material more relevant to other propositions or subjects has been placed elsewhere.
192
Second, an effective paragraph has completeness. It includes whatever is necessary to prove the
proposition (or some part of it) or cover the subject. Third, an effective paragraph has internal coherence.
Ideas are expressed in a logical sequence that the reader can easily follow. Fourth, an effective paragraph is
of readable length. It’s neither so long that the reader gets lost nor so short that valuable material is
underdeveloped or trivialized. Fifth, an effective paragraph announces or implies its purpose at the outset. Its
first or second sentence states or implies its thesis or topic and, if necessary, makes a transition from the
preceding material. Ineffective paragraphing is related to incomplete analysis. When you set out to fix
problem paragraphs, you will often find yourself fixing analytical problems as well.

§20.2 Probative Paragraphs and Descriptive Paragraphs
Some paragraphs merely describe conditions or events; they convey information without analysis. But in
legal writing, most paragraphs are expected to do more than that: they prove propositions that help resolve
issues. In descriptive writing, the paragraph states information, and the first or second sentence tells the
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

150

reader the paragraph’s topic or theme, if that isn’t already evident from the context. In probative writing, the
paragraph exists to prove its first or second sentence, which states the paragraph’s thesis.
A topic is merely a category of information (‘‘weather in Death Valley’’). A thesis is a proposition
capable of proof or disproof (‘‘the climate of Death Valley is brutal’’):
Descriptive

Probative

In January in Death Valley, the average high
temperature is about 65°, and the average low is
about 37°. Spring and fall temperatures
approximate summer temperatures elsewhere. In
April and in October, for example, the average high
is about 90°, and the average low about 60°. July is
the hottest month, with an average high of about
116° and an

The climate in Death Valley is brutal. At
Furnace Creek Ranch, the highest summer
temperature each year reaches at least 120° and in
many years at least 125°. The highest temperature
reliably recorded in Death Valley — 130° — is
also the highest undisputed temperature recorded
anywhere on earth. In an average year, only 2½
inches of rain

193
average low of about 87°. The highest temperature reliably
recorded in Death Valley was 130° on August 16, 2020.
Average annual rainfall is about 2½ inches.

fall. In the summer sun, a person can lose
four gallons of perspiration a day and — in
3% humidity — die of dehydration.

A confused reader of descriptive writing might ask, ‘‘What is this paragraph about?’’ But a confused reader
of probative writing asks instead, ‘‘What is this writer trying to prove?’’
In a college essay, you might have written many descriptive paragraphs describing abundant raw materials
and then concluded with a short passage expressing some inferences that the raw materials support. In law,
that kind of organization will frustrate your readers. The law-trained reader wants to learn at the beginning
what you intend to prove and wants to be told, at each step along the way, how the raw materials support the
proposition you are trying to prove. Recitation of raw materials is not a proof. Proof is an explanation of how
the data support the inference.
Probative and descriptive writing can occur in the same document. But in a Discussion (or Argument in a
motion memo or appellate brief), the writing should be largely probative, with only occasional digressions
into description. Some other parts of a memo or brief, however, are predominantly description. The best
examples are the Statement of Facts in an office memo and the Preliminary Statement in a motion memo or
appellate brief.

§20.3 Thesis Sentences, Topic Sentences, and Transition Sentences
A probative paragraph states its thesis in its first or second sentence, and that sentence is the thesis
sentence.1 A descriptive paragraph does the same with its topic unless the topic is implied by the context.
Although in descriptive writing a topic can often be implied, in probative writing the thesis should be
expressly stated. (Remember that a practical reader needs to know your purpose in saying things before you
start saying them.) With either type of paragraph, a transition sentence helps show the reader how the
paragraph is connected to the material before it or the material after it.
Thesis, topic, and transition sentences can be worked into a paragraph in several different ways. A
transition sentence most often appears at the
194

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

151

beginning of a paragraph, less often at the end (as a bridge into the next paragraph), rarely in the middle,
and not at all if a transition is unnecessary. The first sentence in a paragraph can often do double duty. It
might both state a thesis or topic and make a transition. Or a transition sentence at the beginning of a
paragraph can imply a topic while making a transition from the previous paragraph. If the paragraph begins
with a transition sentence that does not also state a thesis or state or imply a topic, the paragraph’s second
sentence can express either. Where a paragraph’s thesis or topic is complex, the paragraph might end with a
closure sentence that ties up loose ends.

§20.4 The Two Most Common Ways of Botching a Paragraph’s Beginning
The two most common ways of botching the beginning of a paragraph are (1) omitting entirely any
statement of the thesis or topic, and (2) using a topic sentence to begin a probative paragraph (which should
have a thesis sentence instead). Either problem can force a supervisor or judge to read the paragraph two or
three times to figure out its purpose, unless that is clear from the context.
1. Botching the beginning by omitting any indication of the thesis or topic: The habit of announcing or
implying a paragraph’s purpose at the beginning is a kind of self-discipline. Because it forces you to
articulate the paragraph’s reason for being, it will encourage you — especially during rewriting — to limit
the paragraph to one thesis or topic (unity), to do whatever is necessary inside the paragraph to prove that
thesis or cover that topic (completeness), and to express the ideas in the paragraph in a sequence appropriate
to the thesis or topic (coherence). If a statement of the topic or thesis is missing, that often means that you
don’t yet know what the paragraph is supposed to accomplish — which can lead to conversations like this:
(a) Instructor identifies a murky paragraph in student writing.
(b) Instructor asks student, ‘‘Tell me in a sentence what you are trying to say in this paragraph.’’
(c) Student reads paragraph — ponders — and, generally, comes up with a one-sentence statement.
(d) Instructor says, ‘‘Well, would it help the reader if you said that at the front end of the paragraph?’’
(e) Light bulb flashes over student’s head.
(f) Instructor then asks, ‘‘Now if that’s your main idea, how does this sentence [indicating one whose function is
unclear] tie in to that idea?’’
(g) If the student suggests a function, the instructor asks, ‘‘Is there any way you could make that function clearer
to the reader?’’
(h) If the student does not see a function, the instructor asks, ‘‘Does that sentence belong in the paragraph?’’

195
As the author of this familiar scene concludes, ‘‘There is no reason why you, the writer, cannot carry on that
conversation inside your own head as you [rewrite].’’2
2. Botching the beginning by using a topic sentence to begin a probative paragraph: Consider this
probative paragraph, which begins with an unhelpful topic sentence:
The federal bank robbery statute penalizes obtaining anything of value from a bank ‘‘by force and violence, or by
intimidation.’’ 18 U.S.C. § 2113 (2000). Several cases have defined the term ‘‘intimidation.’’ For example, a
defendant takes by intimidation when he hands a bank teller a note reading ‘‘Put all your money in this bag and
nobody will get hurt.’’ United States v. Epps, 438 F.2d 1192 (4th Cir. 1971). The same is true where a defendant,
while holding his hand in his pocket to suggest that he has a weapon, hands a teller a note reading, ‘‘This is a
holdup.’’ United States v. Harris, 530 F.2d 576 (4th Cir. 1976). And even where a teller never sees a weapon,
intimidation is proved where a defendant produces a note stating, ‘‘I have a gun. Give me all the bills or I will shoot
you.’’ United States v. Jacquillon, 469 F.2d 380 (5th Cir. 1972).

This is not a descriptive paragraph. Its purpose is to prove a definition of ‘‘intimidation.’’ But the first
sentence doesn’t tell you what the definition is and therefore it isn’t a thesis sentence. The first sentence
announces only a topic — the federal bank robbery statute — and thus doesn’t communicate what the
paragraph is meant to prove. In fact, no sentence in the paragraph sets out the definition that the paragraph is

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

152

intended to prove. To the reader who needs to know what ‘‘intimidation’’ is, a paragraph like this one is
frustrating to the point of impatience. Not only does the reader need to know exactly what you’re trying to
prove, but he needs to know it before proof begins. Most of the problem could be solved with an accurate
thesis sentence like this:
Under the federal bank robbery statute, 18 U.S.C. § 2113 — which penalizes obtaining anything of value from a
bank ‘‘by force and violence, or by intimidation’’ — the courts have defined ‘‘intimidation’’ as conduct reasonably
calculated to produce fear, even in the complete absence of physical violence. . . .

The last fourteen words of this sentence give the whole paragraph meaning because they synthesize the
holdings of the cases into a definition that the paragraph proves to be accurate.
Once you’ve replaced a topic sentence with a thesis sentence, some rewording and reordering of other
sentences might be needed to give the paragraph coherence — to show, in other words, how the rest of the
paragraph proves the thesis. Notice how the earlier version has been changed below so that it now seems to
flow straight from the new thesis sentence:
196
Under the federal bank robbery statute, 18 U.S.C. § 2113 — which penalizes obtaining anything of value from a
bank ‘‘by force and violence, or by intimidation’’ — the courts have defined ‘‘intimidation’’ as conduct reasonably
calculated to produce fear, even in the complete absence of physical violence. For example, even where a teller
never actually sees a weapon, intimidation is proved where a defendant produces a note stating, ‘‘I have a gun. Give
me all the bills or I will shoot you.’’ United States v. Jacquillon, 469 F.2d 380 (5th Cir. 1972). More vaguely
expressed threats are treated the same way. A defendant takes by intimidation when he hands a bank teller a note
reading, ‘‘Put all your money in this bag and nobody will get hurt.’’ United States v. Epps, 438 F.2d 1192 (4th Cir.
1971). And the result is the same even where the threat is entirely implied — for example, where a defendant, while
holding his hand in his pocket to suggest that he has a weapon, hands a teller a note reading, ‘‘This is a holdup.’’
United States v. Harris, 530 F.2d 576 (4th Cir. 1976).

If your prior writing experience has primarily been descriptive — and that’s true of most law students —
you’ll need to discipline yourself to see the difference between a descriptive paragraph and a probative one.
And you’ll have to be careful to begin probative paragraphs with thesis sentences. You will probably find
that this kind of self-discipline forces you to make your meaning more clear to the reader throughout the
paragraph — and that consequently you’ll analyze more deeply.
When you begin a probative paragraph with a topic sentence — or when you write a paragraph that
doesn’t state or imply a thesis or topic — in all likelihood you didn’t know when you began to write the
paragraph what you intended to prove or describe within it. In a first draft, that’s okay. The purpose of a first
draft is to get the material out in the open so you can finish analyzing it. But during rewriting, when you find
a topic sentence atop a probative paragraph — or when you find a paragraph with no thesis or topic sentence
at all — that’s often a clue that you have not yet begun to articulate even to yourself what you are trying to
accomplish in the paragraph. But this problem isn’t hard to solve. Merely asking yourself ‘‘What am I trying
to prove here?’’ often produces almost instantly a thesis sentence that gives the whole paragraph meaning
and relevance.

§20.5 How to Test Your Writing for Effective Paragraphing
In first drafts, paragraphs are seldom put together well. Instead, the work of paragraphing generally occurs
during re-writing. To identify the paragraphs in need of rehabilitation, ask yourself the following questions.3
197

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

153

20-A Have you stated or implied, near the beginning of each paragraph, the paragraph’s thesis (if

the paragraph is probative) or its topic (if the paragraph is descriptive)? If the reader does not
learn the paragraph thesis or topic at the beginning, the reader is forced to read the paragraph two or three
times to figure out its purpose. The only time you’re exempt from this requirement is when the context
clearly implies the topic or thesis.
Have you gotten rid of throat-clearing introductory sentences, which bump into the

20-B paragraph’s thesis or topic backward? For example:

The district court considered this question in Pickett. There, the court showed limited patience with the way the
parties referred to themselves and each other. It did agree to call one defendant Guitar Maker Oswald Who Lives in
Germany. But it refused to call another The Artist Formerly Known as Prince, or even just ‘‘the Artist,’’ and it
refused to allow that defendant to use his guitar symbol in place of his name in the captions of pleadings and
motions. Instead, the court just called him Nelson.

You can combine the first two sentences into a single thesis or topic sentence that goes straight to the point:
In Pickett, the district court showed limited patience with the way the parties referred to themselves and each
other. . . .

Have you given each paragraph a unified purpose? Prove one proposition or cover as much of

20-C one subject as is digestible in one paragraph. Remove and place elsewhere material that is more
relevant to other propositions or subjects.

Within each paragraph, have you expressed your ideas in a logical and effective sequence?

20-D Where a paragraph is confusing but nothing is wrong with its size or with the wording of individual

sentences, the problem is usually that the paragraph lacks internal coherence. That happens when ideas
within the paragraph are presented in a sequence that makes it hard for the reader to understand them or how
they fit together to prove the thesis or illuminate the topic.
Have you broken up paragraphs that were so large that the reader would have gotten lost?

20-E Although no set rules govern paragraph length, paragraphs that wander aimlessly or endlessly don’t
accomplish the goals of paragraphing. Where that happens, you have probably tried to develop two or more
complex and separable themes in a single paragraph,
198
perhaps without being aware of it. The cure is to identify the individual themes and then break up the
material accordingly into digestible chunks (which become separate paragraphs).
Have you rewritten paragraphs that were so short that no thesis or topic is developed?

20-F Generally, one- and two-sentence paragraphs are ineffective unless you have a special reason for
emphasizing something or for separating out uncomplicated material. One- or two-sentence paragraphs can
be used to good effect in clearing up matters that are preliminary (such as identifying the procedural posture)
or ancillary (such as identifying issues that aren’t presently before the court). When used carefully, short
paragraphs can also emphasize some memorable aspect of the material. In many other situations, however, a
short paragraph leaves the reader hungry for a more satisfying explanation of some important point. If a
paragraph is so short that no thesis or topic is developed, ask yourself whether (1) you might have missed the
complexities of the thesis or topic, or (2) the thesis or topic might be so simple that it doesn’t merit treatment
in a separate paragraph because it’s actually part of some other thesis or topic.
Have you stated or implied how each paragraph is related to the surrounding material? There

20-G are several ways of doing this. The paragraph can begin with a transition sentence. Or it can begin

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

154

with a sentence that both makes a transition and states a thesis or topic. Or the last sentence of the preceding
paragraph can build a bridge between the two paragraphs. That sentence can raise an expectation, for
example, that the second paragraph satisfies.
Exercise I
The First Weeks of Law School (Probative and Descriptive Paragraphs)
Write two paragraphs — one descriptive and the other probative — about the first weeks of law school.
Descriptive paragraph: Summarize what happened during your first weeks in law school. Describe only
things you saw, heard, read, and wrote. Do not try to prove any belief you might have about the first weeks
of law school.
Probative paragraph: The opening sentence of this paragraph should be ‘‘The first weeks of law school
are hard’’ (or ‘‘puzzling’’ or ‘‘exciting’’ or ‘‘cruel’’ or ‘‘challenging’’ or any other characterization you
choose) ‘‘because’’ — and here you complete the sentence by stating whatever you believe to be the cause
of your characterization. The rest of the paragraph should prove the thesis expressed in this sentence.
199
Exercise II
Escape from Prison (Paragraph Unity, Coherence, and Length)
Is the paragraph below limited to proving a single proposition or covering a single subject? If not, what
material is extraneous? Is the paragraph of appropriate size? If you believe it’s too long, how should the
problem be solved? Are the ideas expressed in a sequence that enables you to understand the meaning of the
paragraph without reading it twice? If not, what sequence would be better? Edit the paragraph in light of
your answers to these questions. Add any thesis, topic, or transition sentences that you think are needed.
(Each sentence is preceded by a letter in brackets so that you can refer to it in class without having to read
the sentence aloud.)
[A] A prisoner who leaves a prison without permission is guilty of a crime of escape. [B] Until
relatively recently, the defense of necessity was not available in California to a prisoner who claimed
that prison conditions were so intolerable as to require escape. [C] An early case, for example, affirmed
a conviction for escape, conceding that ‘‘if the facts were as stated by the defendant, he was subjected
to brutal treatment of extreme atrocity’’ in a ‘‘remote’’ mountain prison camp far from any authorities
to whom he might complain. People v. Whipple, 100 Cal. App. 261, 266, 279 P.2d 1008, 1010 (2d Dist.
1929). [D] And a more recent case affirmed a conviction where the defendant offered evidence that
other prisoners had threatened to kill him, and that prison guards had refused to protect him. People v.
Richardson, 269 Cal. App. 2d 768, 75 Cal. Rptr. 597 (1st Dist. 1969). [E] Both Whipple and
Richardson cited 1 Hale P.C. 611 for the proposition that escape from prison can be excused only to
avoid death as immediate as that threatened when the prison itself is engulfed in fire. [F] But drawing
on decisions from other jurisdictions, the Court of Appeal for the Fourth District has held that, through
a ‘‘limited defense of necessity,’’ a prisoner can defeat a prosecution for escape if the prisoner can
demonstrate (1) that she or he was ‘‘faced with a specific threat of death, forcible sexual attack or
substantial bodily injury in the immediate future,” (2) that a complaint to the authorities would have
been futile or not possible, (3) that the same was true regarding resort to the courts, (4) that the prisoner
used no ‘‘force or violence’’ in escaping, and (5) that the prisoner surrendered to the authorities ‘‘when
he [had] attained a position of safety from the immediate threat.’’ People v. Lovercamp, 43 Cal. App.
3d 823, 831-32, 118 Cal. Rptr. 110, 115 (4th Dist. 1974). [G] Even under this test, Victor Minskov does
not have a defense to the charge of escape. [H] He had been beaten twice by a group of prisoners who
threatened to attack him as long as he remained in the same prison. [I] He scaled the prison wall at 4 A.
M. immediately after the second beating and while being chased by the same group. [J] After the first
beating, he had complained to prison guards, who laughed at him, and during the second beating his
cries for
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

155

200
help brought no response. [K] The courts would not have been able to protect him from such an
assault, and he used no force or violence in escaping. [L] But after leaving the prison he hid under an
assumed name for 16 months and was finally captured at the Los Angeles airport trying to leave the
country. [M] Thus, he will not be able to show that he complied with the last element of the Lovercamp
test by surrendering to the authorities upon attaining ‘‘a position of safety from the immediate threat.’’
1. In college, ‘‘thesis sentence’’ is sometimes used to refer to a sentence that sums up the meaning of an entire essay.
Here, it has a different meaning.
2. Peter W. Gross, California Western Law School’s First-Year Course in Legal Skills, 44 Alb. L. Rev. 369, 389–90
(1980).
3. When marking up your work, your teacher might refer to these questions by using the number-letter codes that
appear next to each question here.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

156

201

21

Effective Style

§21.1 Clarity and Vividness
The difference between the almost right word and the right word is . . . the difference between the lightning
bug and the lightning.
— Mark Twain

Modern English was created through the merger of two languages, Anglo-Saxon Old English and Norman
French, and it has borrowed liberally from other languages, especially Latin and Greek. Because it has such
a huge vocabulary, English can express with precision a very wide range of nuance — if you can find the
‘‘right’’ word. But with so many similar words to choose from, it’s easy to choose the ‘‘wrong’’ one — the
word that blurs meaning, rather than sharpening it.
Important-sounding words tend to be less vivid and less precise than simple and straightforward ones. The
following doesn’t say as much as it should: ‘‘The victim indicated that the defendant had held the gun.’’ Did
the writer mean ‘‘The victim said that the defendant had held the gun’’? Or did she mean ‘‘The victim
pointed at the defendant when asked who had held the gun’’? To the reader who needs to know exactly what
happened, indicated obscures the truth rather than communicating it. The simpler word often says more than
the more dignified one. And the dignified word is often euphemistic and fuzzy rather than crisp and vivid. 1
You might be tempted to try to sound like a lawyer but fail to communicate like one — for example by
writing ingested (an impressive but vague word) instead of something that would tell exactly what happened,
such as ate,
202
drank, or swallowed. Judges and senior lawyers want to read straightforward English. They are frustrated
and confused by pretentiously vague writing, which they treat as evidence of mediocrity. Law depends on
clarity, precision, and readability.
In one study, appellate judges and their law clerks were asked to appraise material written in a contorted
style that might be called ‘‘legalese,’’ while other judges and their law clerks were asked to evaluate the
same material rewritten into straightforward ‘‘plain English.’’ They thought the original legalese
‘‘substantively weaker and less persuasive than the plain English versions.’’2 And the judges and law clerks
assumed that the traditional legalese had been written by lawyers working in low-prestige jobs.3
Don’t write like this:
The above captioned appeal is maintained by the defendant as a direct result of

Instead, write like this:
The defendant appeals because
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

157

The longer version (‘‘the above captioned appeal . . .’’) might sound fancy, but a reader won’t as easily
understand it. Figure out exactly what should be said and then say exactly that.
To understand the importance of clarity in law, remember two things. First, you must prove everything
you say, because the legal reader considers every unsupported assertion to be the equivalent of an untruth.
Second, no matter how important the issue, your reader can spare only a very limited amount of time to
ponder what you write. The more time the reader must spend trying to figure out what you mean, the less
time the reader has to consider agreeing with you. Where poor writing obscures the message or makes the
reading troublesome, you may get rejection even where you should have gotten agreement. ‘‘[A] cardinal
principle of good writing [is] that no one should ever have to read a sentence twice because of the way it is
put together.’’4
When it comes to clarity, you will never get the benefit of the doubt. The reader is always right: ‘‘If the
reader thinks something you wrote is unclear, then it is, by definition. Quit arguing.’’5
203

§21.2 Conciseness
The present letter is a very long one simply because I had no time to make it shorter.
— Pascal

Most first drafts use too many words to communicate a given idea effectively. Part of rewriting is
disciplining yourself to trim your words down to something easily read and quickly understood. Compare
two explanations of Sherwood v. Walker, a mutual-mistake-of-fact case that appears in most Contracts
casebooks. The first draft is on the left. The rewrite, on the right, uses fewer words to express the same
concept both concisely and more clearly.
It is important to note that, at the time when the parties entered into the agreement
of purchase and sale, neither of them had knowledge of the cow’s pregnant
condition.

When the parties agreed to the
sale, neither knew the cow was
pregnant.

Because of the fact that the cow, previous to the contract, had not become
pregnant, despite planned and observed exposure to bulls whose reproductive
capacities had been demonstrated through past experience, the seller had made the
assumption that the cow would not be able to produce offspring.

The seller had assumed that
the cow was infertile because
she had not become pregnant
when he tried to breed her.

Due to the fact that the seller had made a statement to the buyer describing the
cow’s opportunities to reproduce and the failures thereof, there would have been, in
the buyer’s thinking, no purpose to any further investigation or inspection he might
have considered making.

Because the seller had told the
buyer about the cow’s history,
the buyer did not investigate
further.

For these reasons, the contract did not include a provision for an upward
modification in the payments to be made by the buyer to the seller in the event that
the cow should later prove to be capable of reproduction.

Thus the contract did not
provide for an increase in the
purchase price if the cow
should turn out to be fertile.

204
How did the writer convert the verbose first draft on the left into the concise final draft on the right?
First, the writer rewrote some sentences so that a person or a thing did something. Although the verbose
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

158

draft is weighted down with modifiers, the concise version focuses on well-chosen nouns and verbs, and
many modifiers became unnecessary as the writer incorporated their meaning into those nouns and verbs
(and sometimes into more succinct modifiers):
the cow’s pregnant condition

became the cow was
pregnant

despite planned and observed exposure to bulls whose reproductive capacities
had been demonstrated through past experience

became when he tried to
breed her

there would have been, in the buyer’s thinking, no purpose to any further
investigation or inspection he might have considered making

became the buyer did not
investigate
further

Second, the writer eliminated phrases that didn’t add any meaning:
It is important to was deleted because the ‘‘importance’’ is communicated by the sentence’s placement
note that
and, ironically, by the rewritten version’s brevity
previous to the
contract

was deleted because it’s communicated by the context

Third, the writer weighed each word and phrase to see if the same thing could be said in fewer words:
at the time when

became

when

entered into the agreement of purchase and sale

became

agreed to the sale

neither of them

became

neither

had knowledge of

became

knew

Because of the fact that

became

because

205

had made the assumption

became assumed

would not be able to produce offspring

became was infertile

Due to the fact

became Because

had made a statement to

became told

describing the cow’s opportunities to reproduce and the failures
thereof

became about the cow’s history

For these reasons

became Thus

include a provision for

became provide for

an upward modification in the payment to be made by the buyer to became an increase in the purchase
the seller
price
in the event that

became if

the cow should later prove to be capable of reproducing

became the cow should turn out to be
fertile

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

159

Be careful, however, not to edit out needed meaning. It would be folly to eliminate so much verbiage that
a reader wouldn’t know that the cow was pregnant when sold; that the parties didn’t know of the pregnancy
at the time; that the contract didn’t provide for an adjusted price; and why it didn’t do so.

§21.3 Forcefulness
Forceful writing engages the writer.6 Forceful writing leads the reader through ideas by specifying their
relationships with one another and by identifying the ideas that are most important or compelling.
206
Specify relationships. Transitional words and phrases, such as the following, can very economically show
relationships between ideas:
accordingly
additionally
although
analogously
as a result
because
but
consequently
conversely
despite
even if
even though
finally
for example
for instance
for that reason
furthermore
hence
here
however
in addition (to)
in contrast

in fact
(in order) to
in spite of
in that event
instead
moreover
nevertheless
not only . . . , but also
on the contrary
the other hand
on these facts
rather
similarly
since
specifically
such as
there
therefore
thus
under these circumstances
while

Some transitional words and phrases are stronger than others. Choose those that accurately represent the
relationship.
For example, some words are better than others at showing causation. Because and since do a much better
job than as and so. Both as and so can confuse a reader who sees them used much more often — and much
more effectively — to join contemporaneous events (‘‘the muggles gasped as Harry flew past on his Nimbus
2000’’) or to emphasize the abundance of some fact (‘‘they were so astonished that . . .’’).
The word since is an acceptable synonym for because, especially in passages where one word or the other
must be used several times. But since is the weaker of the two. It confuses a reader who wouldn’t know
immediately from the context whether it refers to causation or to time:
Because the defendant spent the marital assets on extravagances, the plaintiff has no money for attorney’s fees.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

160

If this had begun with since, you wouldn’t have known until near the end of the sentence whether the
dependent clause introduced causation or marked a point in time (‘‘Since the defendant spent . . .”).
207
Some words and sentence structures show contrast better than others do. Consider this:
The Court of Appeal has held that the objection is waived if not made at trial, but it has also held that, even without
an objection, a conviction should be reversed where a prosecutor’s conduct was as inflammatory as it was here.

The word but, buried in the middle of a long sentence, only weakly tells the reader that one idea (the rule
about waiver) is being knocked down by another (the exception for inflammatory prosecutorial conduct).
Everybody writes this kind of thing in first drafts, but you should recognize and fix it during rewriting:
Although the Court of Appeal has held that the objection is waived if not made at trial, it has also held that, even
without an objection, a conviction should be reversed where a prosecutor’s conduct was as inflammatory as it was
here.

Although tells the reader from the very beginning of the sentence that the first clause, however damning,
will be shown soon not to matter. If handled carefully, however, but can still do the job well:
The Court of Appeal has held that the objection is waived if not made at trial. But it has also held that, even without
an objection, a conviction should be reversed where a prosecutor’s conduct was as inflammatory as it was here.

This solves the problem in a different way. The sentence has been broken in two, and the new second
sentence begins with But. (Despite common belief, no rule of grammar forbids starting a sentence with a
conjunction.)
When you discuss several ideas together, you can make that clear to the reader through some sort of
textual list. The list need not be diagrammed. In fact, it’s usually more economical to incorporate a list into
the text with a transition sentence (‘‘There are four reasons why . . .’’), followed by sentences or paragraphs
coordinated to the transition sentence (‘‘First . . .’’ or ‘‘The first reason . . .’’).
Identify the most important ideas. There are several methods. One is simply to say it:
This attorney’s most reprehensible act was to make a motion for a preliminary injunction where his clients were not
in any way threatened with harm.

Other methods are more subtle. You can put an emphasized idea at the beginning of a sentence, paragraph,
or passage, where it will be most quickly noticed. Or, as in the paragraph below, you can write a series of
sentences that lead up to one that succinctly conveys the emphasized idea:
208
This attorney served and filed a pleading alleging extremely unlikely facts without making any factual
investigation.
He made numerous frivolous motions, including one for a preliminary injunction when his clients were not
threatened with harm. He has now brought an appeal without any basis in statute or precedent, and he has submitted
a record and brief not in compliance with the court’s rules. He has thoroughly disregarded the professional
obligations of an attorney.

§21.4 Punctuation and Other Rules of Grammar

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

161

In re HAWKINS
502 N.W.2d 770 (Minn. 1978)
[The Lawyers Professional Responsibility Board petitioned the court for an order disciplining the respondent lawyer
for unethical conduct.]
The referee . . . found that respondent’s failure to comply with [certain court rules] and his repeated filing of
documents rendered unintelligible by numerous spelling, grammatical, and typographical errors were sufficiently
serious that they amounted to incompetent representation. . . .
It is apparent to us that [respondent’s] repeated disregard of [court rules], coupled with the incomprehensibility of
his correspondence and documentation, constitutes a violation of Rule 1.1 of the Minnesota Rules of Professional
Conduct. . . .
. . . Public confidence in the legal system is shaken when lawyers disregard the rules of court and when a
lawyer’s correspondence and legal documents are so filled with spelling, grammatical, and typographical errors that
they are virtually incomprehensible. . . .
Respondent . . . is hereby publicly reprimanded for unprofessional conduct [and ordered, among other things, to
participate in a program of writing instruction].

In another case, a trucking company and the Interstate Commerce Commission battled for 19 years over
the confusion caused by the absence of a single comma in an administrative order.7 And the Maine Supreme
Court had to write a two-thousand word decision to untangle the mess created by two commas that somehow
ended up in the wrong place in a statute.8
Correct punctuation makes writing clear and easier to understand. It’s not mere decoration. A lawyer can’t
excuse a poorly punctuated sentence by arguing that the reader would be able to understand it if she or he
would think about it. A lawyer’s job is to make meaning so plain that the reader doesn’t need to read the
sentence twice.
209
Punctuation and other grammar skills have an important effect on your credibility and reputation. Readers
— including graders of law school exams — will question your analytical abilities and general competence
if you don’t observe the accepted rules of English grammar. ‘‘Where lumps and infelicities occur,’’ the
novelist John Gardner wrote, ‘‘the sensitive reader shrinks away a little, as we do when an interesting
conversationalist picks his nose.’’9

§21.5 How to Test Your Writing for Effective Style
[I]t is a struggle to make a sentence say exactly what you mean.
— Arthur Koestler

In first drafts — even by the best writers — style is usually pretty awful. Effective style is really achieved
through rewriting, as you spot style problems and fix them. While rewriting, ask yourself the following
questions.10
Do your nouns and verbs let the reader see the action? As you write and rewrite, ask yourself

21-A what words will engage the reader.11 What words will bring the reader into your thinking? For
example:
wrong
:
right:

In Smith, there was no withdrawal of the guilty plea, based on the court’s determination of
a lack of evidence of coercion.
In Smith, the court denied the defendant’s motion to withdraw her guilty plea because she
submitted no evidence that the plea had been coerced.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

162

wrong
:
right:

There is a possibility of action in the near future by the EPA to remove these pesticides
from the market.
The EPA might soon prohibit these pesticides.

In the ‘‘wrong’’ examples, you can barely tell who has done what because the ponderous tone obscures
the action, and because the nouns and verbs are vague and lazy. They don’t stand out, take charge, and create
action. The ‘‘right’’ examples are more vivid and easier to understand. You immediately know what’s going
on and don’t need to read the same words twice.
In law, people do things to ideas, objects, and other people. The only way to describe that clearly is with
relatively plain and simple nouns and verbs. As with so many other legal writing problems, rewriting is the
key to solving this one.
210
Your early drafts might have sentences like the ‘‘wrong’’ examples above, but your final drafts should
more closely resemble the ‘‘right’’ ones. Here is how to do it:
Nouns: As you rewrite, figure out who is doing things and make those people and organizations the
subjects of sentences and clauses. Grammatically, only the subject gets to act. In the first two examples
above, the main event was what the court did, which is why the court had to become the subject of the
sentence. But the defendant did something, too, (or, more accurately, failed to do something), and she thus
became the subject of a clause inside the sentence.
Verbs: As you rewrite, do two things.
First, wherever possible, replace the verb to be with an action verb. The verb to be includes is, are, am,
was, were, and will be. They do a good job of describing condition or status (‘‘the defendant is guilty’’). But
they aren’t verbs of action. In fact, they obscure action. If somebody is doing something, find an action verb
to express it. In particular, find ways of eliminating variations on there is (such as there were and it is).
Sometimes these constructions are helpful or even unavoidable (‘‘there are four reasons why the plaintiff
will not be able to recover. . . .”). At other times, however, they hide your message in a fog of excess
verbiage (“inside the locker there was a loaded gun” should become “a loaded gun was in the locker”).
Fixing this isn’t hard. During rewriting (Chapter 5, §5.7), use the find feature in your word processor to
search for are, is, and was. Every time you find one, consider replacing it with an action verb. In some
instances, that will strengthen your writing, and in others it won’t. Sometimes the only way to express an
idea is to use the verb to be. Decide one way or the other. If you have been overusing the verb to be,
replacing it with action verbs can transform your writing so that it immediately becomes more lively and
vivid.
Second, replace nominalizations with genuine verbs. A nominalization is a phrase that converts a simple
verb into a complicated noun or noun-phrase. ‘‘The search was a violation of the defendant’s rights’’ should
become ‘‘the search violated the defendant’s rights.’’ The nominalized phrase was a violation of is weaker
and wordier than the blunt and vivid verb violated. The same problem occurs when you ask an adjective to
do a verb’s job (‘‘was violative of”). Some other examples:
delete these

and replace them with these

is able to
enter into an agreement
make the argument that
make the assumption that
is aware of
is binding on
give consideration to
make a determination
make an objection
make payment to

can
agree
argue that
assume that
knows
binds
consider
determine
object
pay

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

163

make provision

provide

211
Have you used verbs that show the precise relationship between subjects and objects? For

21-B example:
wrong:

The court dealt with common law larceny.

What did the court do to larceny? Define it? Define only one of the elements? Clarify the difference between
larceny and false pretenses? Decide that that offense no longer exists because the legislature has replaced it
with the statutory crime of theft? The sentence would be much better with a verb that tells the reader
precisely what happened.
wrong:

The Freedom of Information Act applies to this case.

Does the Act require that the document at issue be published in the Federal Register? Does it require that the
document be given to anyone who asks for a copy? Does it require that the document be available for
photocopying, but not at government expense? Or does it give the government permission to refuse to do any
of these things? We would know more if applies were replaced with a verb that communicates exactly what
the Act really does.
wrong:

Section 452(a) involves the Rule Against Perpetuities.

Here, involves communicates only that § 452(a) has some connection with the Rule Against Perpetuities.
Has § 452(a) codified the Rule? Modified it? Abolished it?
The three verbs illustrated here — deal with, apply, and involve — rarely communicate a precise
relationship between a subject and an object.

21-C

Have you brought the reader to the verb quickly? Consider this:

The defendant’s solicitation of contributions through an organization with a misleading name, immediate deposit of
the funds in a bank account in the Bahamas, and eventual use of the money to buy a vacation home in his own name
constitutes fraud.

The verb is what ties an English sentence together. In fact, an English sentence is incomprehensible until the
reader has identified both a subject and a verb. And the most easily understood sentences bring the reader to
the verb as quickly as possible. The example above can’t be understood in a single reading because it’s
front-loaded. The reader doesn’t reach the verb and object (‘‘constitutes fraud’’) until after plowing through
a 39-word subject.
Sentences like that are caused by automatically making whatever you want to talk about the subject of the
sentence. ‘‘What shall I talk about next?’’ you ask yourself and then write down the answer. That becomes
the subject of a
212
sentence, no matter how unreadable the result. In first drafts, you can’t avoid doing this, but in later drafts
you should recognize the problem and fix it.
Front-loaded sentences can be fixed in either of two ways. The first is to simplify the subject so you can
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

164

bring the reader to the verb quickly:
The defendant committed fraud by soliciting contributions through an organization with a misleading name,
immediately depositing them in a Bahamian bank account, and eventually using the money to buy a vacation home
in his own name.

The other cure is to break the original sentence in two:
The defendant solicited contributions through an organization with a misleading name, immediately deposited them
in a Bahamian bank account, and eventually used the money to buy a vacation home in his own name. This was
fraud.

You’ll lose control of your sentences if you just let them happen. Each sentence must be built.
Have you put the verb near the subject and the object near the verb? A sentence is hard to

21-D understand if you insert a clause or phrase between a subject and a verb or between a verb and an
object:
Grateful Dead Productions, despite the Dead’s reputation for tolerating and even encouraging bootleg tapings of
concerts when they were still giving them, has several times sued for copyright infringement when the band’s
albums have been bootlegged.

The solution is to move the clause or phrase to the end or to the beginning of the sentence, leaving the
subject and verb (or the verb and object) relatively close together.
move phrase or
clause to the
END of the
sentence

Grateful Dead Productions has several times sued for copyright infringement
when the Dead’s albums have been bootlegged, despite the band’s reputation for
tolerating and even encouraging bootleg tapings of concerts when they were still
giving them.

move phrase or
clause to the
BEGINNING of
the sentence:

Despite the Grateful Dead’s reputation for tolerating and even encouraging
bootleg tapings of concerts when they were still giving them, Grateful Dead
Productions has several times sued for copyright infringement when the band’s
albums have been bootlegged.

213
The clause or phrase should begin the sentence only if you want to emphasize it.
Have you used transitional words and phrases to show how ideas are related? Beginners often

21-E underestimate the reader’s need to be told explicitly how ideas fit together or contrast with one
another. You can do this economically with transitional words and phrases. See the ones listed in §21.3.

Have you streamlined wordy phrases? Good rewriting pares a convoluted phrase down to

21-F something straight-forward:

delete these
because of the fact that
during such time as
for the purpose of

and replace them with these
because
during
to

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

165

for the reason that
in the situation where
in the case of
in the event that
make a motion
subsequent to
take into consideration
until such time as
with regard to
with the exception of

because
where
in
if
move
after
consider
until
regarding
except

Have you deleted throat-clearing phrases (also known as ‘‘long windups’’)? Phrases like the

21-G following waste words, divert the reader from your real message, and introduce a shade of doubt and
an impression of insecurity:
It is significant that . . .
The defendant submits that . . .
It is important to note that . . .
The next issue is . . .
Of the two examples below, why would the plaintiff’s lawyer feel more comfortable writing the first than the
second?
The plaintiff submits that the judgment should be reversed because . . .
The judgment should be reversed because . . .

214
The unnecessary words in the first example shift emphasis from the idea propounded and to the obvious but
irrelevant fact that the writer is the one doing the propounding. (But it is not ineffectual to begin an attack on
an adversary’s argument by beginning with phrasing like ‘‘Although the defendant has argued . . .’’)
Have you broken up or streamlined unnecessarily long sentences? If a sentence is too long to be

21-H understood easily on the first reading, express the sentence’s ideas in fewer words, or split the

sentence into two (or more) shorter sentences, or do both. If you decide to reduce the sentence’s verbiage,
see questions 21-A, 21-F, and 21-G and review §21.2. If you decide to break up the sentence, be sure to
avoid the ‘‘sing-songy’’ style described in question 21-I.

21-I

Have you rewritten sing-songy sentences? For example:

The defendant solicited contributions through an organization with a misleading name. He immediately deposited
the funds in a bank account in the Bahamas. Eventually, he used them to buy a vacation home in his own name.
This was fraud.

These are four simple sentences, three of them beginning with a subject. The passage sounds naive and
probably will bore the reader. The cause is a tendency to write down one thing at a time, without describing
the relationships between or among the things mentioned. At its most extreme, the result is a series of simple
sentences, all beginning with the subject.
There are two kinds of cure. One is to focus on the relationships, especially causal ones, using some of the
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

166

transitional words and phrases listed in §21.3:
Not only did the defendant solicit contributions through an organization with a misleading name, but he
immediately deposited the funds in a bank account in the Bahamas. Moreover, he used them to buy a vacation home
in his own name. Therefore, he has comitted fraud.

The other cure is to vary three things periodically: the types of sentences (some simple, some compound,
some complex); the lengths of sentences (some long, some short, some medium); and the way sentences
begin (some with the subject, some with a prefatory word or phrase, some with a dependent clause). Closely
related material can be combined into fewer sentences, where the sentence structure itself can demonstrate
relationships between ideas:
Having solicited contributions through an organization with a misleading name and deposited them in a Bahamian
bank account, the defendant used the funds to buy a vacation home in his own name. This was fraud.

215
This example uses a subordinate sentence element (‘‘Having solicited . . . bank account’’) to achieve the
desired effect.
You can avoid the sing-songy effect by understanding and using the full range of sentence structures
available in English.
Have you avoided the passive voice unless you have a good reason for using it? In the active

21-J voice, the subject of the sentence acts (‘‘Maguire sued Schultz’’). In the passive voice the subject of
the sentence is acted upon (‘‘Schultz was sued by Maguire’’).
The passive voice has three disadvantages. It’s often more verbose. It tends to vagueness. And it’s usually
weaker and more boring to read. Most sentences should be in the active voice.
But the passive may be the more effective voice when you don’t know who acted, when you think the
identity of the actor is not important, or when you want to deemphasize the actor’s identity. For example,
compare the following:
Ms. Blitzstein’s aid-to-dependent-family benefits have been wrongfully terminated fourteen times in the last six
years.
The Department of Public Welfare has wrongfully terminated Ms. Blitzstein’s aid-to-dependent-family benefits
fourteen times in the last six years.

Here the passive is actually more concise. Depending on the context, the passive might not be vague because
the reader would know that the Department is the only agency capable of terminating
aid-to-dependent-family benefits, or at least that the Department is being accused of doing so in this
instance.
And, again depending on the context, the passive sentence may be the stronger and more interesting of the
two. If the reader is a judge who’s being asked to order the Department to stop this nonsense, the passive
will be the stronger sentence because it emphasizes the more appealing idea. Generally, a judge is more
likely to sympathize with a victim of bureaucratic snafus than to condemn a government agency for
viciousness or incompetence.
Sometimes, the passive voice is a good way of avoiding sexist pronouns. See question 21-S.
Have you placed modifiers close to what they modify? When people talk, modifiers sometimes

21-K wander all over sentences, regardless of what they’re intended to modify. But formal writing
requires more precision. These sentences all mean different things:
The police are authorized to arrest only the person named in the warrant.
[They aren’t authorized to arrest anyone else.]
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

167

216
The police are authorized only to arrest the person named in the warrant.
[They aren’t authorized to torture or deport him.]
The police are only authorized to arrest the person named in the warrant.
[They have the right to arrest him, but they don’t have to. The warrant gives them some discretion.]
Only the police are authorized to arrest the person named in the warrant.
[Civilians aren’t authorized.]

Make sure that the modifier’s placement communicates what you really want to say, and don’t assume that a
busy reader can figure out the meaning from the context.
Have you used parallel constructions when expressing a list? Even implied lists should be

21-L expressed in some sort of consistent structure. Each item or idea must be phrased in the same
grammatical format. Consider the following:
This attorney should be disbarred because of his neglect of a matter entrusted to him, for pleading guilty to the
felony of suborning perjury, and because he disclosed a client’s confidences without the client’s consent.

Here, the first listed item is expressed as a noun possessed by a pronoun (‘‘his neglect’’); the second as an
unpossessed gerund (‘‘for pleading’’); and the third as a dependent clause, complete with subject, verb, and
object (‘‘because he disclosed confidences’’). Although the first and third items are preceded by the word
‘‘because,’’ the second is not. Isolated from the others, each form alone would be grammatical. But the
inconsistencies among them make the whole sentence sound inarticulate. That would not have been true if
each item in the list were expressed in the same format:
This attorney should be disbarred because he neglected a matter entrusted to him, pleaded guilty to the felony of
suborning perjury, and disclosed a client’s confidences without the client’s consent.

Have you used terms of art where appropriate? Where an idea peculiar to the law is usually

21-M expressed through a term of art, that term should be used because it conveys the idea as precisely as

the law can manage and because it often makes long and convoluted explanations unnecessary. Don’t write
‘‘the plaintiff asked the court to tell the defendants to stop
217
building the highway.’’ It is much more precise to write ‘‘the plaintiff moved for an order preliminarily
enjoining. . . .”
But don’t confuse terms of art with legal argot. A term of art is the law’s symbol for an idea that usually
cannot be expressed with precision in any other way. Legal argot, on the other hand, has no special meaning
peculiar to the law. It’s just pretentious wording used for everyday concepts. (See question 21-O.)
Have you edited out inappropriately used terms of art? Terms of art ought to be used only to

21-N convey the precise meaning the law holds for them. Where you use a term of art (perhaps because it

sounds lawyer-like) but don’t really intend to communicate the idea the term of art stands for, the reader will
assume that you don’t know what you are talking about.
Have you edited out imitations of lawyer noises? Said noises found in and about a lawyer’s

21-O writing have heretofore caused, resulted in, and led to grievous injury with respect to said lawyer’s

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

168

readers, clients, and/or repute, to wit: by compelling the aforesaid readers to suffer confusion and/or
consternation at the expense of the aforementioned clients and consequently rendering said repute to become
null, void, and nugatory.
Thinking like a lawyer is not the same as imitating lawyer noises like the ones in the preceding paragraph.
Expressions like ‘‘to wit,’’ ‘‘hereinbefore,’’ and ‘‘aforesaid’’ are argot — not terms of art (see question
17-M) — and they do not convey anything that ordinary English cannot communicate more clearly and less
awkwardly. The most valuable memos and the most persuasive briefs are written in the real English
language. For example:
just fine:
bad:
worse:
meaningless:
meaningful:

Elvis has left the building.
Elvis has departed from the premises.
It would be accurate to say that Elvis has departed from the premises.
Elvis has clearly and unequivocably left the building.
There is uncontroverted evidence that Elvis has left the building.

Why is ‘‘clearly and unequivocably’’ meaningless? Elvis could not unclearly or equivocably leave the
building. Either he has, or he hasn’t. Writing something like ‘‘clearly and unequivocably’’ pounds the table
without adding meaning. But ‘‘uncontroverted evidence’’ is meaningful because it says that there’s evidence
that Elvis has left and no evidence that he hasn’t. We expect to read in the next sentence about the 27
witnesses who will testify that they
218
saw Elvis go through the stage door, step into a stretch limousine, and disappear into the night.
Have you edited out contractions and other conversational language? Conversational language

21-P — the kind you’d use in a casual email to a friend — doesn’t belong in most professional

documents.
Professional practice, however, has been evolving on the question of contractions — merging two words
with an apostrophe (such as “don’t” for “do not”). Contractions do not belong in documents filed in court.
But lawyers routinely use contractions in professional email (Chapter 17) and in client letters (Chapter 19).
Office memos are a middle ground. Some law firms discourage contractions in office memos. Other firms
have no preference one way or the other. (No contractions appeared in the first edition of this book. But
because professional practice has been evolving, contractions appear frequently in the edition you’re reading
now.)
Have you edited out inappropriate abbreviations? In formal documents, a lawyer doesn’t write

21-Q ‘‘the N.C. Supreme Court has held . . . .” Spell words out unless the abbreviation is generally used at

least as often as the full name (for example, ‘‘NAACP’’ and ‘‘FCC’’). Otherwise, abbreviate only in
citations.
Have you avoided rhetorical questions? They don’t work. Your job is to lead — not jab — the

21-R reader.

Have you avoided gender-specific language? Formal legal writing has traditionally used pronouns

21-S that assume a gender binary (he, she) and a default to male pronouns. But society is evolving away

from this. English has not yet settled into universally accepted gender-neutral pronouns. Our
recommendations for how to navigate this issue follow.
When you are writing about a specific person, always use the pronoun that person prefers, whether he,
she, they, or something else. The most widely accepted neutral pronoun is the singular “they.” 12 The
singular they can also be used as a generic, gender-neutral pronoun. Nevertheless, we recognize that in some
legal environments, using the singular they will be perceived as incorrect.
The best approach is to eliminate the need for a pronoun by writing a different sentence. If that can’t be
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

169

done, recast both the pronoun and its noun in the plural. That might also make the writing more concise, but
can only be done when not referring to a specific person:
219
Gendered pronoun (disfavored)
Pronoun replaced with “the”
Actor made plural
Actor
eliminated
sentence

from

To calendar a motion, a lawyer must file his motion with the
clerk.
To calendar a motion, a lawyer must file the motion with the
clerk.
To calendar motions, lawyers must file their motions with the
clerk.
A motion is calendared by filing it with the clerk.

If these solutions don’t make sense in your sentence, use the singular they or alternate male and female
pronouns. Try to avoid using pronouns that reinforce stereotypes that do not reflect the world we live in (for
example, male pronouns for lawyers, female pronouns for litigants).
Be mindful of nouns that imply a particular gender and try and avoid them. “Congressman” can be easily
replaced by “representative,” “policeman” with “police officer;” similarly “fireman” can be replaced with
“firefighter.” Unless a person’s gender is legally relevant, strive to use neutral language wherever possible.
Exercise
Kalmar’s Driveway
Rewrite the following sentences around nouns and verbs that describe action. Make sure that each
sentence is of comprehensible length. Eliminate throat-clearing phrases, and replace nominalizations,
unnecessary passives, and unnecessarily wordy constructions. You’ll find this easier if you read the whole
exercise before starting to rewrite.
1. It is evident that Kalmar is likely to be convicted of accepting a bribe because all the elements of
bribery are susceptible of proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
2. A person is guilty of accepting a bribe if that person is an employee of the government and
‘‘requests or receives from any other person anything of value, knowing it to be a reward or
inducement for an official act,’’ Crim. Code § 702, and a conviction may occur only if evidence is
presented by the prosecution that persuades the finder of fact beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant is guilty.
3. The initial element that can be established is that Kalmar is an employee of the government.
4. The facts indicate that in his capacity as Roads Commissioner, Kalmar had occasion from time to
time to purchase, on behalf of the government, quantities of cement, asphalt, and other road
construction materials from Phelps,
220
who caused these materials to be delivered to road-repair sites on trucks owned by Phelps.
5. Kalmar had need for a new driveway at his own home, and he made a request to Phelps for a
recommendation of a contractor who would do a good job at a reasonable price.
6. Phelps told Kalmar that she would look into the matter, but, without Kalmar’s knowledge, a new
driveway was built at his home by her employees the next day.
7. The circumstances fit into a pattern showing that Kalmar had knowledge that he was being offered a
reward or inducement by Phelps for official acts directly relating to his job, and although the statute
does not specify that a defendant must know at the time the thing of value is actually delivered or
physically taken that it is a reward for official acts, Kalmar both accepted and continued to receive
the bribe when, according to the facts, he did not undertake any effort to compensate Phelps for the
cost of the driveway.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

170

8. Because the cost involved is such that it could not have been accidentally overlooked by Kalmar,
there can be no innocent explanation for the fact that he had an opportunity every day to see that he
had a new driveway for which nothing had been paid, and there is therefore no reasonable doubt
about his guilt.
1. Both tendencies are described in George Orwell’s most famous essay, Politics and the English Language.
2. Robert W. Benson & Joan B. Kessler, Legalese v. Plain English: An Empirical Study of Persuasion and
Credibility in Appellate Brief Writing, 20 Loyola L.A. L. Rev. 301, 301 (1987). Other research has produced similar
results. See, e.g., Sean Flammer, Persuading Judges: An Empirical Analysis of Writing Style, Persuasion, and the Use of
Plain English, 16 J. Legal Writing 183 (2010).
3. Benson & Kessler, supra n.2, at 301-02.
4. Wilson Follett, Modern American Usage 480 (1974).
5. Donald McCloskey, The Writing of Economics 7 (1987).
6. Mark K. Osbeck, What Is “Good Legal Writing” and Why Does It Matter?, 4 Drexel L. Rev. 417 (2012).
7. T. I. Mccormack Trucking Co. v. United States, 298 F. Supp. 39 (D.N.J. 1969).
8. Sawyer v. State, 382 A.2d 1039 (Me. 1978).
9. John Gardner, The Art of Fiction: Notes on Craft for Young Writers 99 (Knopf 1984).
10. When marking up your work, your teacher might refer to these questions by using the number-letter codes that
appear next to each question here.
11. Osbeck, supra note 6.
12. Heidi K. Brown, Get With the Pronoun, 17 Leg. Commun. & Rhetoric 1 (2010) (advocating for use of singular
“they”).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

171

221

22

Quotations

Section 22.1 explains the complex rules on quotation format. Section 22.2 explains how to avoid faults
like overquoting, unnecessarily long quotations, and quoting out of context.

§22.1 Quotation Format
Bluebook rule 5 governs the format of quotations. Here are the most essential requirements:
Use brackets to enclose additions and substitutions that you place inside a quotation, including conversion
of a lowercase letter into a capital or vice versa (Bluebook rule 5.2). Use brackets, not parentheses. On your
computer keyboard, brackets are at the right end of the row under the numbers.
If you incorporate a quote beginning with a capitalized word into a sentence of your own, the capital letter
must be reduced to a lowercase letter unless the capital denotes a proper name. Use brackets to show that
you have changed the original. For example:
wrong
:

right:

The court held that ‘‘Not so long ago, in a studio far, far away from the policymakers in
Washington, D.C., George Lucas conceived of an imaginary galaxy,’’ but his trademark is
not infringed when politicians refer to a proposed missile defense system as Star Wars.
Lucasfilm Ltd. v. High Frontier, 622 F. Supp. 931, 932, 935 (D.D.C. 1985).
The court held that ‘‘[n]ot so long ago, . . .’’

222
Under Bluebook rule 5.3, if you delete words (other than a citation) from a quote, you must indicate that
by an ellipsis (‘‘. . .’’). When the final words of a sentence are omitted, the sentence ends with four periods
— three for the ellipsis and one to end the sentence. There are two exceptions.
First, where you incorporate a quotation into a sentence of your own composition — as in the Star Wars
example above — don’t place an ellipsis at the beginning or the end of the quotation. Incorporating the quote
into your own sentence already suggests that part of it might have been chopped off.
Second, don’t place an ellipsis at the beginning of a quotation, even if you intend the quote to stand on its
own as a complete sentence. If the quote isn’t incorporated into a sentence you have written and if the first
letter of the quote wasn’t capitalized in the original, capitalize that letter and place it in brackets to indicate
an alteration.
If the quotation is 50 words or more, you must put it in a block quote, separated from your text with extra
white space above, below, and on the sides. To add extra space above and below, skip an extra line in each
place. To add it on the sides, use the indent function in your word processor’s Layout or Format menu.
Don’t use quotation marks at the beginning and end of a block quote. The extra white space around the
quote tells the reader that you’re quoting. And don’t put the citation inside the quotation block.
Instead, put the cite in your text, at the beginning of the next line you write. Notice where the cite appears
in the two examples below.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

172

wrong
:

The Court held that the government had not proved misbranding or adulteration with a
poisonous substance under the Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906, which Congress had
enacted ten years earlier.
In the present case, the article belongs to a familiar group; it is a syrup. . . . It is
produced by melting sugar, the analysis showing that 52.64 per cent of the product is
sugar and 42.63 per cent is water. Into the syrup thus formed by boiling the sugar,
there are introduced coloring, flavoring, and other ingredients, in order to give the
syrup a distinctive character. The caffeine, as has been said, is introduced in the
second or third ‘melting.’ We see no escape from the conclusion that it is an ‘added’
ingredient within the meaning of the statute. United States v. Forty Barrels and
Twenty Kegs of Coca Cola, 241 U.S. 265 (1916).
Today the formula might be somewhat different.

223
right:

The Court held that the government had not proved misbranding or adulteration with a
poisonous substance under the Pure Food and Drugs Act of 1906, which Congress had
enacted ten years earlier.
In the present case, the article belongs to a familiar group; it is a syrup. . . . It is
produced by melting sugar, the analysis showing that 52.64 per cent of the product is
sugar and 42.63 per cent is water. Into the syrup thus formed by boiling the sugar, there
are introduced coloring, flavoring, and other ingredients, in order to give the syrup a
distinctive character. The caffeine, as has been said, is introduced in the second or third
‘melting.’ We see no escape from the conclusion that it is an ‘added’ ingredient within
the meaning of the statute.
United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca Cola, 241 U.S. 265 (1916). Today
the formula might be somewhat different.

§22.2 How to Test Your Writing for Effective Use of Quotations
While writing — and rewriting — ask yourself the following questions.1
Have you quoted and cited every time you use other people’s words? Other people’s words must

22-A have quotation marks around them and a citation to the source. If you don’t do this, you will be

treated as a plagiarist. See §6.5 in Chapter 6. It doesn’t matter whether you do it out of sloppiness or out of
an intent to deceive. An idea that you get from a written source must be attributed to that source with a
citation, even if you express the idea in your own words.
Have you quoted only the essential words? Don’t quote unless the quoted words fit into at least

22-B one of the following categories:

1. words that must be interpreted in order to resolve the issue, such as a statute’s key words (see §8.8
in Chapter 8);
2. words that are so closely identified with the topic under discussion that they are inseparable from it;

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

173

224
3. words that, with remarkable economy, put the reader in touch with the thinking of a court,
legislature, or expert in the field; or
4. words that are the most eloquent and succinct conceivable expression of an important idea.
Beginners are too quick to think that words, merely because they’re from a case or a statute, can satisfy the
third or fourth criterion. That kind of awe results in a sentence like the following:
The court relied on ‘‘[w]ell-established jurisprudence of our sister states . . . holding that baseball is a strenuous
game involving danger to . . . players . . . and that one who, with full knowledge of this danger, attends . . . and
places himself in a position of danger, assumes the risks inherent in the game.’’ Gaspard v. Grain Dealers Mut. Ins.
Co., 131 So. 2d 831, 834 (La. Ct. App. 1961).

Although the writer of the sentence above did some editing, the only words really worth quoting are the ones
in quotes below:
Relying on ‘‘[w]ell-established’’ precedent in other states holding baseball to be a dangerous game, the court
concluded that anyone who knows of that danger and nevertheless plays baseball ‘‘assumes the risks inherent in the
game.’’ Gaspard v. Grain Dealers Mut. Ins. Co., 131 So. 2d 831, 834 (La. Ct. App. 1961).

Which sentence is easier to read and understand — the first one with a big quotation (44 words) or the
second one with two short quotes (totaling 9 quoted words)? Which sentence more clearly focuses on the
relevant ideas?
The most convincing descriptions of authority are written almost entirely in your own words with very
few and very short quotations that convey the essence of the court’s approach.
Block quotations are especially troublesome. Busy readers skim over or refuse to read large quotations
because, in their experience, only a few of the quoted words really matter, and it may take too much effort to
find them. Readers feel that block quotations are obstacles that have to be climbed over. The more of them
you use, the more quickly a reader will decide not to read any of them. Judges and supervising lawyers view
large quotations as evidence of a writer’s laziness. They believe that your job is to find the essential words,
isolate them, and concisely paraphrase the rest. When you throw a big block quotation at a reader, you’re
asking the reader to do some of your work.
How do you cut a block quotation down to size? Assume that you have written the following in a first
draft:
In Roth the Supreme Court held that a government could, without satisfying the traditional clear-and-present-danger
test, restrict public distribution of obscene

225
material. But it came to the opposite conclusion when faced with a statute that punished private possession of
obscene materials in one’s own home:
It is true that in Roth this Court rejected the necessity of proving that exposure to obscene material would
create a clear and present danger of antisocial conduct or would probably induce its recipients to such conduct.
. . . But that case dealt with public distribution of obscene materials and such distribution is subject to different
objections. For example, there is always the danger that obscene material might fall into the hands of children .
. . or that it might intrude upon the sensibilities or privacy of the general public.
Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557, 567 (1969). A number of the Court’s later right-to-privacy rulings have been
based in part on Stanley.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

174

First drafts are full of passages like this, and in a first draft they cause no harm. But in later drafts, you
should realize that the block quote will repel the reader. Ask yourself ‘‘Why do I want this quote? What
words inside it satisfy one or more of the four criteria?’’
Your answer might be that no words in the quote satisfy those criteria, but that the quote does contain
ideas that you want the reader to know about. If so, rewrite all of it in your own words. If you do this well —
and it does require effort — your words will be better than the original quote because your words will fit
better.
On the other hand, the answer might be that some words are too valuable to give up. Here, ‘‘might fall
into the hands of children’’ creates an image that economically reflects the Court’s thinking (criterion 3), and
‘‘intrude upon the sensibilities or privacy of the general public’’ sets out a standard that will need to be
interpreted (criterion 1). Isolate words like that, and rewrite everything else, condensing in the process. You
might come up with something much more readable, like this:
In Roth the Supreme Court held that a government could, without satisfying the traditional clear-and-present-danger
test, restrict public distribution of obscene material. But it came to the opposite conclusion when faced with a
statute that punished private possession of obscene materials in one’s own home. In Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S.
557 (1969), the Court struck down such a statute and distinguished Roth because publicly distributed pornography
‘‘might fall into the hands of children’’ or ‘‘intrude upon the sensibilities or privacy of the general public.’’ Id. at
567. A number of the court’s later right-to-privacy rulings have been based in part on Stanley.

This is shorter; it flows better; and it makes the meaning much clearer than the block quote did. The
reader’s attention is taken straight to the essential words, which stand out when integrated into your own
text.
226
To accomplish this you don’t need to be a better writer than a Supreme Court justice was. The justice who
wrote Stanley had the task of justifying a significant decision of constitutional law. The writer of the passage
above had a smaller job: explaining, as concisely as possible, the difference between Roth and Stanley. The
smaller job takes fewer words.
At the opposite extreme is the problem of too many short quotations rather than quotations that are too
long, although the effect on the reader is similar. This is called snippetizing, and it might take the form of a
quote from and cite to case A, followed by a quote from and cite to case B, followed by a quote from and
cite to case C, and so on, without much discussion of any of the cases or of the ideas expressed in the quotes.
Strings of snippet quotations give the reader a feeling of sliding over the surface of complex ideas, which the
writer refuses to explain. Explain the cases.
A writer who quotes too much is sometimes called a ‘‘cut-and-paste artist’’ because the product is not
really writing at all. Little thought goes into it, and readers have no confidence in it. What they want is your
analysis, which comes only with hard mental work — not finding quotable words and typing them into your
document.
Have you avoided quoting out of context? Sometimes words mean something different in context

22-C than they do when quoted out of context. Assume that a reader will check the source from which you

quote. Readers often do that to learn more or to make sure that your reasoning is correct. Suppose a reader
understands the words, as you have quoted them, to mean one thing, but, when checking your source, the
reader discovers that in context they mean something completely different. Not only have you done the
reader a disservice, but now the reader distrusts you.
Have you quoted accurately? Suppose you see language in a case that you want to quote. You type

22-D it into your draft, but —although you don’t realize it at the time — some of the words you type into

your document aren’t the same as those that appear in the case. Supervisors, judges, and teachers can easily
spot this. When they do, they’ll lose some confidence in you because it suggests that you haven’t been
careful. We all tend, at least a little bit, to rewrite quotes unconsciously into our own style while copying
them. The only way to prevent this is to proofread your work with the sources in front of you. Don’t try to do
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

175

this by toggling back and forth on your computer between the source and your draft. Instead, print your draft
and compare it to the source, which you can bring up on your screen. That’s the safest way to compare the
two word for word.
227
Have you placed quotation marks exactly where they belong? The most common problems are

22-E (1) omitting the quotation marks that close a quotation, even though the opening quotation marks are
included (‘‘Where does the quote end?’’ writes the teacher in the margin); (2) omitting the quotation marks
that open a quotation, even though the closing marks are present (‘‘Where does the quote begin?’’ asks the
teacher); and (3) where there’s a quote within a quote, forgetting to change the double quotation marks of the
original to single marks.
Exercise
The First Amendment
1. You are in the midst of writing a memorandum involving the right-of-assembly clause — and no other
part of the First Amendment. You intend to quote the words to be interpreted. This is the text of the entire
amendment:
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the
Government for a redress of grievances.

Using words from the Amendment, complete the following sentence: ‘‘The First Amendment provides . . .
‘‘
2. Do the same for a memorandum involving the freedom-of-speech clause.
1. When marking up your work, your teacher might refer to these questions by using the number-letter codes that
appear next to each question here.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

176

229

VII
THE SHIFT TO PERSUASION

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

177

231

23

Introduction to Motions and Appeals

§23.1 Introduction to Persuasion Through Motions and Appeals
As a lawyer, you will use legal persuasion to convince judges to make decisions that favor your clients.
You will do this primarily through motions and appeals, procedures that allow you to put a request before
the court and get an answer. While motions and appeals often have an oral component, the lion’s share of
legal persuasion takes place in writing. Whether you are writing a motion memorandum or an appellate brief,
the ability to persuade centers on three skills: developing a persuasive theory (Chapter 24), telling the
client’s story (Chapter 25), and developing persuasive arguments (Chapter 26). This chapter will provide a
general overview of how motions and appeals work.

§23.1.1 What Happens During a Motion
A motion is the mechanism lawyers use to ask the court to take an action. The party making the motions
requests the court to issue an order. An order is the court’s command that something happen, such as
requiring the opposing party to comply with a discovery request. The court can also issue a judgment ending
the case, such as by granting a motion for summary judgment. The party making the request “moves,” or
files a motion, and the other party can oppose the motion.
Motions can be filed at any stage of litigation after a complaint has been filed, both at the trial court and
during appeal. You can file a motion to request something small, like extending a deadline, to something big,
like getting an entire case dismissed. Some motions are controlled by laws like the Rules of
232
Evidence or the Rules of Civil Procedure, and others are completely within the court’s discretion. You
might file many different motions in the process of litigating one law suit. Chapter 27 identifies many of
those motions.
Some motions are made orally, by asking a judge in open court. The vast majority, however, are made in
writing, by filing the request with the court. The party requesting the motion can file an accompanying
memorandum of law in support of the motion, and the opposing party can file a memorandum of law in
opposition to the motion. In some courts, these are called briefs. Every court has local rules governing what
form the motion and briefs should take, and identifying exactly what needs to be filed, so you should always
check the local rules when preparing a motion. Chapter 28 describes writing for motions in more detail.
After the motion is filed and the opposition has responded, the judge might hold a hearing if more
evidence is needed, or an oral argument to hear more directly from the lawyers. You can request an oral
argument if you think it will help to present your argument directly to the judge and answer questions, but in
most courts, the judge is not obligated to grant your request. As a result, many motions are decided based
only on the written documents, which is why it is so important for them to be well written and persuasive.
The judge grants or denies the motion and issues an order identifying what should happen next. This also
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

178

varies by local practice, but the majority of the time orders are proposed by the parties as a part of filing the
motion. Occasionally the judge will write a judicial opinion explaining the reason for the decision, but much
of the time the judge just issues the order and the case proceeds according to the outcome of the motion.

§23.1.2 What Happens During an Appeal
In an appeal, you ask an appellate court to affirm or reverse the outcome of a decision by the trial court.
For the most part, you can only appeal decisions that resolve an entire case or fundamentally affect the
outcome. For example, orders on motions to compel discovery or exclude evidence cannot be appealed until
the trial is over. A judgment — or in equity, a decree — is a decision that terminates a lawsuit and decides
the parties’ rights and obligations. The judgment might award damages or grant an injunction, for example.
A jury verdict also resolves the parties’ rights and obligations in a case. Judgments, verdicts, and some but
not all orders can be appealed.
The primary job of appellate courts is to correct errors made in the trial court, but appellate courts also
create precedent clarifying existing law and, in cases of first impression, making new law. In jurisdictions
with a two-tiered appellate court system, the intermediate appellate court focuses primarily on error
correction, while the highest appellate courts mainly focus on making and clarifying law.
233
In intermediate appellate court, appeals are typically decided by smaller panels of judges, rather than all of
the judges in that court. For example, U.S. Courts of Appeals decisions are made by panels of three judges.
In rare cases, a party that has lost before a panel may persuade the full court en banc to review the panel’s
decision. In the U.S. Supreme Court and in the highest court of every state, all the judges meet together to
hear and decide appeals.
Similar to motions practice, appellate practice varies from court to court and depends on the jurisdiction’s
rules of appellate procedure, but these are the significant steps in most appeals:
First, the party seeking the appeal (called the appellant or petitioner) files whatever document is required
by law to begin the appeal. In some courts, the appellant can appeal “as of right,” which means the court
must hear the appeal if the losing party has filed the appropriate documentation in a timely manner. In these
jurisdictions, the document is a simple notice of appeal, declaring that the losing party is pursuing its right to
have the case reviewed. Other courts, such as U.S. Supreme Court, have the discretion to refuse to hear an
appeal. In that situation, the appellant must petition and file a brief, arguing to the court that there are
important reasons to correct the error below or clarify important matters of law and policy.
Once the appeal is underway, the record (all the documents and evidence presented at the trial court) must
be transmitted from the court below to the court above. This can be simple and speedy, if the record is
electronic or where the appeal is from an order issued in the early stages of litigation, such as a motion to
dismiss a complaint. Most appeals, however, arise after more extensive litigation. In those cases, the
preparation and transmittal of the record can delay matters for months and add great expense to the cost of
the appeal, especially in many state jurisdictions that do not maintain electronic records.
In addition to the full record, some courts require the parties to compile an abbreviated version of the
record called the joint appendix or the record appendix. Because the full record can be so extensive, the joint
appendix allows the judges to more easily locate the record facts that are most relevant for resolving the
case. In jurisdictions without electronic records, the full record can consist of multiple volumes and be
extremely cumbersome.
The next step is drafting the briefs. If you are the appellant/petitioner, you file the opening brief, setting
out the arguments that lead to a result in your client’s favor. If you are the appellee/respondent, you file a
response, presenting the arguments for why the court should leave the lower court decision in place. The
appellant can file a reply.1 In novel cases or cases that present an issue of jurisprudential significance, the
court may allow other parties, known as amici, to file briefs arguing in support of one party or the other.
Each of
234
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

179

these briefs is an opportunity for persuasive writing. Chapters 29-31 explain appellate brief writing.
Once all the briefs have been filed, you may have an oral argument. As with motions, many appeals are
decided based exclusively on the briefs. When a court holds oral argument, each lawyer has the opportunity
to present their arguments and answer the judges’ questions. Oral argument is the lawyer’s only chance to
speak directly with the judges about the problems and issues raised by the appeal. For more on oral
argument, see Chapter 32.
After oral argument, the judges confer and discuss the merits of the appeal. One judge is selected to write
the court’s opinion. In some courts, the assignment is made by chance rotation, but in others it is made by
the presiding judge. In the U.S. Supreme Court, the assignment is made by the most senior judge among the
majority. The assigned judge drafts an opinion and circulates it to the other judges, who might suggest
changes or might draft and circulate concurring or dissenting opinions of their own. In routine appeals, the
draft majority opinion is often quickly approved, and concurrences and dissents may be held to a minimum.
But in more complex cases, views can change, and an opinion originally written as a dissent might be
transformed into the court’s opinion, while the original majority draft is converted into a dissent.

§23.2 The Roles of the Brief and of Oral Argument
The brief and oral argument each play important, yet different roles in persuading a court to rule on a
motion or appeal.
Because many cases are decided based on the briefs, what you write can play a critical role in influencing
the judge’s decision. In a brief, you can tell the client’s story and make the client’s arguments in detail. You
can present complex legal analysis with detailed citation to authority. A successful brief not only persuades
the judge that your client should win, but it can also be used as a manual, explaining to the judge exactly
how to make the decision and how to justify it in an opinion. A judge may use the brief to prepare for oral
argument, to prepare for the conference with other judges, to come to a decision about the case, and to write
the opinion.
Oral argument is not the place to present detailed legal analysis, but it can do two things better than a brief
can. First, in oral argument you can more immediately motivate the court by focusing on the most important
ideas — the few facts, rules, and policies — that make your case compelling. Second, in oral argument you
can try to discover, through the court’s questions, each judge’s doubts. And you can explain on the spot
exactly why those doubts shouldn’t prevent a ruling in your favor. Oral argument, in fact, is your only
opportunity to learn directly from the judges the problems they have with your arguments. But oral argument
also has a significant disadvantage. Oral argument
235
lasts only a few minutes, and memories of it can fade. The brief, on the other hand, has permanence. It’s
always among the judges’ working materials, and it “speaks from the time it is filed and continues through
oral argument, conference, and opinion writing.”2
Detail is communicated best in writing, which can be studied. But the spontaneity of conversation
encourages dialogue and lends itself to the broad sweep of underlying ideas.

§23.3 How Judges Read Briefs
How does a judge read a brief? The answer may vary considerably from judge to judge, but the following
is typical:
Usually I first read both parties’ statements of the questions presented; then I read the appellant’s statement of the
general nature of the controversy. Then I look at his outline of argument to see what points he makes. Then I look at
the appellee’s outline of argument to see what he is going to do in reply. Then I go to the joint appendix to see what
the trial court or the administrative agency did. Then I read the appellant’s statement of the facts and the appellee’s
statement. Thereafter I examine the two briefs one point at a time, first the appellant’s and then the appellee’s, on

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

180

the first point; then both briefs on the second point, etc. If the point is an obvious one, or if one side or the other
seems to be wholly without strength on it, I do not spend too much time on that point in my first study. On the
really contested points I study both sides, read the cases, and, if facts are critical check the record references. The
briefs on the critical points are often reread and reread.3

Other judges might read the parts of a brief in a different sequence — perhaps reading the point headings
before anything else — and a given judge might vary the sequence from case to case.
As a backdrop, consider how busy most judges are. Depending on the court, over the course of a month,
an appellate judge might hear oral arguments and confer with colleagues on several dozen appeals, and trial
court judges may be overseeing cases in the hundreds. For each motion or appeal, the judge will have to read
at least two briefs and in multiparty cases, a half-dozen briefs or more, together with portions of the record.
Trial court judges must issue orders and, where necessary, draft opinions on their own (or with the help of
the clerks who work for them). Appellate court judges will have to write opinions in a proportion of the
appeals before the court. On a five-judge court,
236
for example, each judge is assigned one-fifth of the majority opinions. In addition, the judges may also
write concurring or dissenting opinions in additional cases.
Appellate judges will also have to read opinions drafted by other judges and at times will write
memoranda to colleagues suggesting changes in those opinions. And trial and appellate judges will spend a
fair amount of time reading some of the authorities which are cited in all these briefs and draft opinions.
With all this work, the typical judge would find it a luxury to spend as much as an hour reading the average
brief. The time available is often no more than half an hour per brief. That’s why briefs must be carefully
written to persuade while demanding the least possible time and effort from the reader. Judges spend more
time on briefs where the appeal raises deeply troubling issues than on briefs in more routine cases. And a
judge who writes an opinion might read the briefs more thoroughly than one who does not.
As the brief-writer, the following considerations about your audience and their approach to reading should
guide you:
First, your brief will likely be read by multiple readers. Most judges have law clerks or research attorneys
who assist judges by studying the briefs and conducting independent legal research. They will read your
brief and make recommendations to the judge. In appellate courts, all of the judges deciding the case will
read your brief—that could be a panel of three or an en banc court of more than twenty. Opposing counsel
will also read your brief and develop arguments in response, as you will with theirs.
Second, a brief is read for specific purposes. Whether judge or clerk or opposing counsel, they are reading
to learn about the case and make decisions. Judges may read to prepare for oral argument, and again
afterward to decide how to vote. A judge will reread various portions of the brief several times while writing
the opinion, looking for the detail needed to justify and explain the decision. And all along the way, the
judges will be assisted by law clerks who check up on the details of the brief while the judges focus on the
broader principles. Each segment of the brief must be written to satisfy all of these purposes.
Third, briefs — like memos — aren’t read from beginning to end at a single sitting. They’re read in
chunks, at different times, depending on the needs of the reader. (You probably read an appliance or
automobile owner’s manual in pretty much the same way, and a brief is a manual for making a decision.)
Finally, a brief must be easy to navigate. A judge will go first to a part of the brief that reveals the
fundamental issues and your theory on each issue. A judge ought to be able to find that material plainly set
out in multiple places. In an appellate brief, for example, those places are: the point headings and
subheadings (collected in the Table of Contents); the Introduction or Questions Presented; the Summary of
Argument; and the Statement of the Case.
237
In a motion brief, it might be the Preliminary Statement or Introduction; the Statement of Facts; and the
point headings. Each judge has a favorite starting place. Not only do you have no way of knowing when you

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

181

write the brief where a given judge prefers to begin, but you’re writing for several judges and must
accommodate them all. Thus, you must draft these components so that each can separately be a
self-sufficient and self-explanatory entry point for any reader.
1. In most law school classes, both sides will turn in their briefs at the same time because the structure of the school
year does not leave time for back and forth filing.
2. Herbert Funk Goodrich, “A Case on Appeal — A Judge’s View,” in A Case on Appeal 10-1 (1967).
3. E. Barrett Prettyman, Some Observations Concerning Appellate Advocacy, 39 Va. L. Rev. 285, 296 (1953).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

182

239

24

Developing a Persuasive Theory of the

Case
§24.1 Strategic Thinking
Luck is the residue of design.
— Branch Rickey

Every aspect of persuasive legal writing should be the result of a deliberate choice. You should have, and
be able to articulate, good reasons for the decisions you make in your writing. That includes decisions about
structure (What arguments or facts should I begin with?), vocabulary (What should I call the key people and
things?), and space (How much space should I devote to particular facts or arguments?). Making these
decisions requires careful thought and planning. For each choice you make, ask yourself how it will help you
win your case.
In post-mortems of your work, a supervising lawyer or a teacher might ask you a litany of questions about
strategy. You should ask yourself these questions before your supervisor does:
What was your goal?
What was your strategy?
What other possible strategies did you consider and reject?
For each rejected strategy, why was it inferior to the one you did choose?
What led you to believe that the strategy you chose would actually achieve the ultimate goal?
Did you do all the things necessary to execute the strategy you chose?
240

§24.2 Theories: Of the Case, of the Motion, of the Appeal
The first step in articulating a goal and planning a strategy is to figure out what your theory of the case is.
The theory of the case combines the relevant law and the key facts, and gives an overarching rationale for
why you win. It is the essence of your case. One commentator describes it as a “succinct, general description
of your version of what happened and why” coupled with a “characterization that paints your client in a
positive light.”1 A good theory has logical and emotional appeal: it is “persuasive both to the mind and to the
heart.”2
Persuading is selling, and judges have accurately been described as “professional buyers of ideas.”3 You
are selling your theory to the judge with your brief (and, if you have one, in your oral argument).
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

183

On appeal, the theory of the case may be referred to as theory of the appeal. On motion, it may be referred
to as theory of the motion. Although these terms refer to a similar concept, lawyers do consider the level of
court and procedural posture when crafting their theories.
Specifically, when crafting a theory, lawyers consider that a trial court is a place of routine, and trial
judges (generally) are not in a position to make grand changes in the law. Trial judges do not like to be
overturned by appellate courts and they try to make decisions that will avoid that result. While trial judges
certainly consider policy, they are likely to respond positively to a theory that shows how the case outcome
conforms to existing law in their jurisdiction.
Appellate judges, on the other hand, are conscious of their responsibility to see the bigger picture because
they are making law for an entire circuit (in the federal realm) or the entire state. The rules they announce
must apply to a wide range of factual circumstances. This is especially true in cases of first impression where
little or no mandatory law exists. Appellate courts are also mindful of precedent, but are equally concerned
with the broader social implications of the law.

§24.3 Developing a Theory: Be Open to Possibility
When Savana Redding approached lawyers in the case of Safford v. Redding4 and told them that her
school had strip-searched her to look for drugs, a lawyer who lacked the skill of theory design might have
said, “I’m sorry Savana, but
241
public school students have limited rights under the Constitution and school districts have broad latitude.
I’m afraid you are unlikely to prevail in a lawsuit.”
But Savana’s actual lawyers were very skilled and they brainstormed. Was this really a case analogous to
the search of a student’s backpack (which was the major Supreme Court case on this issue)? Might the law
draw a different line when a body search is at issue? Were drugs even found? What kind of drugs were at
issue?
Notice the technique. First, think about fairness and justice. The law isn’t always fair and just, and it
doesn’t always help people who have been hurt, but as lawyers we can explore if any possibility exists to
right a wrong. So, explore the possibilities. Be open to your emotions here. If it doesn’t seem fair, maybe
there is a legal argument there. Second, open doors to additional factual possibilities. Ask the questions.
Third, find out how the law treats those possibilities. You shouldn’t let your feelings of fairness outweigh
your reading of the law, but your feelings should inform how you approach the law.

§24.4 Developing a Theory: Process
Legal research and a solid understanding of your factual record guides the growth of your theory. At the
same time, your theory also guides the course of the research. That circular process of crafting a theory,
looking carefully at your record and researching the law, brainstorming a theory, researching more, and then
reevaluating a theory is a critical lawyering skill. Your first version of your theory of the case may be quite
rudimentary and may develop or change as you learn more about the law.
Ask what the case is really about. Finish this sentence: “This is a case about . . .”. Is it a case about a
broken promise? An overzealous school principal? A rogue FBI agent who ignores the protections of the
Constitution? What do you see as the human conflict in the case?
Ask what will matter to the court. The human conflict is, of course, not the end of your inquiry. You
must think about the legal issues. The law doesn’t right all wrongs. Certain kinds of suffering — for good
reasons or bad — have no effect whatsoever on the typical judge. Do research to see what is significant to a
legal audience.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

184

Make a list of your strengths and weaknesses. Taking into account what you know about the law, what
are your best facts? You might want to review the chapter on persuasive facts (Chapter 25). What facts that
favor your client’s position are both legally relevant and have a high emotional appeal? Those are your best
facts. What are your worst facts? (Your worst facts are usually the best facts for the other side.)
242
Consider your opponent’s likely theory. Finally, it can help to develop your adversary’s most likely
theory while creating your own. If you look at the case as your adversary will see it, and if you
hypothetically work up a theory that your adversary might argue, you’ll be able to identify the weaknesses in
your theory. Otherwise, you will look at the controversy one-sidedly, and your theories will reflect wishful
thinking and be too unidimensional to withstand attack.
Articulate a very short story or headline. Using what you have learned about the law, your best facts,
your worst facts, and the human elements of the case, what is the best story you can tell? This story should
be short: a headline, a tweet, or a “six word story.”5
Look at these two Questions Presented from the Safford v. Redding case. Can you tell what the litigants’
theories of the case are? Try to formulate theories for both sides. Then look at the list of possible theories of
the case. Notice how theories of the case can vary significantly.
School District:
Whether the Fourth Amendment prohibits
public school officials from conducting a
search of a student suspected of possessing
and distributing drugs on campus in
violation of school policy.

Savana:
Whether it is reasonable to subject a 13-year-old girl to the
indignity of a strip search based on an unreliable accusation
that she previously possessed ibuprofen and no information
that she possessed ibuprofen in her undergarments at the
time of the search.

Possible Theories for the School District:
1. The health and safety of all middle school students must outweigh the privacy interests of one.
2. School officials must be able to safeguard students by searching students who might be distributing
drugs to other students.
3. It was reasonable to search the student because the school had evidence she was going to sell
dangerous drugs to other students.
Possible Theories for Savana:
1. A strip search of a minor for a legal, common painkiller is way beyond what is acceptable in our
society.
243
2. The Fourth Amendment is a safeguard against overzealous school officials who would strip a
13-year-old girl to search for a legal drug.
3. The School District had no evidence to justify such an invasive, harmful search of a young girl.

§24.5 How to Evaluate Your Theory
To figure out whether your theory stands a significant chance of persuading a court, ask yourself the
following questions.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

185

24-A Does your theory present a positive, assertive account of why your client should win?
Does your theory have a solid basis in fact? Make sure your theory is fully supported by your facts

24-B and isn’t marred by hyperbole or bias.

Does your theory have a solid basis in law? Are your interpretations of the statutes and cases

24-C reasonable? When a court examines your legal arguments, will the court be persuaded?

Does your theory pass the “straight-face” test? In other words, is it plausible? Would you be

24-D comfortable stating it to a judge’s face in chambers during a pretrial meeting or during oral

argument? All else being equal, a simple theory is more down-to-earth than a complex one. The most easily
sold theories are those that are based on easily believable interpretations of the evidence and the authorities;
that would lead to reasonable results; that don’t ask a judge or jury to believe that people have behaved in
improbable ways; and that ask for narrow decisions rather than earth-shaking ones. (A judge would much
rather find that your client is not guilty on the facts than hold that the statute defining the crime is
unconstitutional.)
Does your theory “[e]xplain why people acted in the way they did”?6 A theory is effective when

24-E it rings true for the reader. If a theory assumes that the actors behave differently than a reader would

expect in that situation, the theory isn’t persuasive unless it includes a compelling reason for the difference.
Theories that impute deceit to otherwise objective witnesses, for example, are less attractive than those that
suggest honest mistakes.
244
Does your theory account for unfavorable facts? Your theory should be a positive assertion about

24-F why your client prevails. It also must be broad enough to explain the evidence against you. All the

School District theories of the case noted above, for example, are some version of “we had to keep students
safe” or “we had to stop her from dealing drugs.” Note that the School District theories do not highlight the
strip search, because that is a very bad fact for them, but when confronted by that fact, their theory still
holds: student health and safety trumps one student’s right to privacy.
Exercise
Escape from Prison? (Developing a Theory)
Orville Bradwyn is charged with the crime of escape from prison. The state’s sole witness was Benjamin
Tunmeyer, a prison guard, who testified as follows.
Q
:
A:

Q
:
A:

Q
:

Please tell the court what you observed and did at 6:30 in the evening on the sixth of July.
I was checking prisoners in the dinner line. Prisoners are required to be in there at that time, and
any prisoner who hasn’t shown up for dinner is considered missing. The defendant didn’t appear. I
then checked his cell. Some material had been put in his bed, bunched up so that it looked like
somebody was asleep there. His radio had been left on. But he was gone.
What did you do?
We searched the grounds outside the prison. We didn’t find the defendant there, so we searched
inside the prison — first the perimeter, and then the inside of buildings and containers where
someone might hide. We finally found him in the laundry room at 7:39 P.M.
What did he have with him?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

186

A:
Q
:
A:
Q
:
A:
Q
:
A:
Q
:
A:

All of his clothing.
Does the prison wash the laundry of any other institution?
Yes, we do the laundry for the state hospital down the road. It’s done in the same laundry room
where we found the defendant.
How is the hospital’s laundry transported to and from the prison?
By truck. The hospital’s truck brings it in the morning and picks it up at about 8 P.M.
Are prisoners permitted in the laundry room in the evening?
No prisoner is allowed in that room after 5 P.M. Hiding in one of the hospital’s laundry bags is an
obvious way to escape from the prison.
What precautions are taken to prevent that?
At 5 P.M., a guard makes sure all prisoners assigned to work in the laundry have left, and then the
door is locked. In addition, the guard opens up each laundry bag that goes to the state hospital and
makes sure it has only laundry in it. Then he locks up the room and locks another door on the
corridor leading to the laundry room. Nobody is inside those doors until the hospital’s truck
arrives about three hours later.

245
Q
:
A:
Q
:
A:

What guard was assigned that responsibility on the night in question?
Me. I sent out all the prisoners and satisfactorily inspected the state hospital’s bags. Then, I locked
the doors and left.
Was Mr. Bradwyn assigned to work in the laundry?
Yes. But he was not scheduled to work in the laundry room on the day in question.

Cross-examination:
Q
:
A:
Q
:
A:
Q
:
A:
Q
:
A:
Q
:

Are you familiar with Mr. Bradwyn’s reputation among other prisoners and among corrections
officers?
He is an exceptionally tidy person.
Were there any prior occasions on which you and Mr. Bradwyn had shouting matches?
Yes. It’s almost impossible to inspect his cell. He starts yelling the minute you touch any of his
things. He says he doesn’t like them moved.
What was the defendant doing when you found him?
He was washing his clothes. No, actually, he was drying them. They were in the dryer.
What items of clothing were in the dryer?
Both of his prison uniforms — prisoners are issued two — socks, undershirts, undershorts. They
were still wet.
What did you find when you searched Mr. Bradwyn’s cell?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

187

A:
Q
:
A:
Q
:
A:

Letters from his family, personal photographs, letters from his lawyer, an address book.
Before dinner, prisoners are free to move about outside their cells; aren’t they?
Yes.
And the same is true after dinner, isn’t it?
Until 7:30.

After this testimony, the prosecution rested. Before any defense witnesses testified, Bradwyn moved to
dismiss on the ground that the prosecution had presented insufficient evidence to convict.
Develop two theories that satisfy the criteria in §24.7. One theory should support Bradwyn and his
motion. The other should support the prosecution and oppose the motion. Use the method outlined in this
chapter.
The relevant statute and cases interpreting it appear below:
CRIMINAL CODE § 745
If any person committed to prison shall break and escape therefrom or shall escape or leave
without authority any building, camp, or any place whatsoever in which he is placed or to which
he is directed to go or in which he is allowed to be, he shall be deemed guilty of an escape and
shall be
246
punished by imprisonment for a term not to exceed five years, to commence immediately upon
the expiration of the term of his previous sentence.
STATE v. HORSTMAN
The crime of escape is established by proof that the defendant was confined in a prison and
escaped from such confinement or departed without authority from a place to which she or he was
duly assigned. Unauthorized departure is the gravamen of the offense.
STATE v. CAHILL
While incarcerated, the defendant was placed in solitary confinement for fighting with another
prisoner. A guard inadvertently left the cell door unlocked. The defendant got out and was
apprehended on top of the prison wall.
The defendant argues that the evidence does not prove that he committed the crime of escape
because there is no evidence that he escaped from the custody of the Department of Prisons. He
argues that, at most, he is guilty of the lesser crime of attempted escape.
The crime of escape was complete, however, when the defendant got out of his cell. The crime
can be committed without leaving the prison as a whole. It is enough that the defendant left a place
where he was confined within the prison.
STATE v. LIGGETT
The defendant was incarcerated and assigned to work in the prison shop manufacturing auto
license plates. On the day in question, the defendant was reported absent from his shift in the
license plate shop. After a prolonged search, he was found inside a machine in the prison cannery,
using a pillow, and reading a novel.
The evidence does not prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant committed the crime
of escape. He failed to report for work in one part of the prison and, without authorization, spent
the time in another part. That might violate prison rules and merit internal prison discipline, but it
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

188

is not the crime of escape.
1. Albert J. Moore, Paul Bergman & David A. Binder, Trial Advocacy: Inferences, Arguments & Techniques 95-96
(1996).
2. David Binder & Paul Bergman, Fact Investigation: From Hypothesis to Proof, 140, 184 (West 1984).
3. Girvan Peck, Strategy of the Brief, Litigation, Winter 1984, at 26, 27.
4. Safford Unified Sch. Dist. v. Redding, 557 U.S. 364 (2009).
5. Legend has it that Ernest Hemingway was asked to write a story in six words and he wrote the following: For Sale:
baby shoes, never worn. This legend has spawned collections of six-word stories. https://www.npr.org/templates/story
/story.php?storyId=123289019.
6. David M. Malone & Peter T. Hoffman, The Effective Deposition 53 (2d ed., 1996).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

189

247

25

Telling Your Client’s Story in a Statement

of the Case (or Facts)
[M]ost contentions of law are won or lost on the facts.
— Justice Robert Jackson, Associate
Justice U.S. Supreme Court

How you present the facts of your client’s case is critically important. People think in story form and we
remember stories vividly. Think of how much easier it is to remember a legal case with vivid facts as
opposed to sections of the Tax Code. Many lawyers will tell you that they would rather have bad law than
bad facts. Bad law we can get around. Bad facts tend to stick. This chapter explains how to tell your client’s
story in a persuasive way, highlighting the good facts and minimizing the bad.
The first thing to keep in mind is that presenting your client’s facts is about telling a story. Your fact
statement should be clear and well written, but it should also have a clear emotional, intuitive appeal. It
should meet three basic goals: (1) to motivate the judge to act in your favor; (2) to communicate your
fundamental facts, including who the parties in conflict are, to apprise the judge of the basic issue; and (3) to
highlight favorable and neutralize unfavorable facts.
Before reading this chapter, you might want to first review Chapter 10 on fact analysis and peruse the
Statements of Facts in the Appendix F motion memo and the Statements of the Case in the Appendices G
and H appellate briefs.
248

§25.1 The Basics
Fact statements in briefs have different names in different courts. In the U.S. Supreme Court and the
Federal Courts of Appeals, the fact section of the brief is called the Statement of the Case. Statement of Facts
is also a commonly used name, especially in trial courts (see Appendix F motion memo).
Your first step in telling your client’s story is to read your record. The legal record is the definitive
compilation of the evidence in a case.
One of the first things a lawyer does when starting to write a brief is to read the record carefully and make
a timeline of the facts, identifying what happened and when. Once you have the basic outline of what
happened, you can begin to analyze which facts are good for the client (and which are bad). These are the
building blocks for the story.
For the most part, every statement you make in your statement of facts must have a citation to the record.
With rare exceptions, if something is not in your record, it generally cannot be included, even if your client
swears to you that it is true. In other words, if it isn’t in the record, for your purposes (and the court’s) it
doesn’t exist as a fact.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

190

If a fact appears in your Argument, it should be in your facts. Period.
Your Statement of Facts should be only facts — no legal argument or inferences. “Joe ran a red light” is a
fact (if it is in your record). “Joe drove carelessly” is an inference. “Joe was negligent” is a legal argument.
Only facts that are drawn from the record belong in the facts. Everything else goes in the Argument. The
only exceptions to this are inferences that witnesses drew, which if they are in the record testimony are facts.
You can also state inferences that your adversary won’t contest.
The absence of a fact from the record can itself be a fact. You can say things like “Nothing in the record
shows that . . .” or “No witnesses identified the defendant.”

§25.2 The Basic Tools of Persuasive Storytelling
If you cannot argue or make inferences in your statement of facts, how will you persuade? To begin,
consider three basic building blocks of persuasion: structure (in what order to present things), space (how
much space to devote), and language (what to call things). In your facts statement, you will state your facts
in a carefully chosen order, using deliberately chosen language, and devoting the most space to your good
facts and the least to your bad ones.
Once you have your timeline and you’ve done some legal research so that you know which facts the law
considers relevant, begin to assess your facts as good or bad for your client’s position. It is helpful to have a
working theory of the case (Chapter 24) at this point, though you may revise it after evaluating your facts
more closely.
In evaluating your facts, consider both legal relevance and emotional power. A legally relevant fact is one
that has the potential to change the legal outcome
249
of a case; some lawyers refer to these facts as outcome determinative. If the fact were not present, or were
the opposite, the legal outcome would be different. Emotional power refers to the intuitive, emotional pull of
a fact. Some facts are legally relevant but don’t have much emotional pull, like the date a contract was
signed or the manufacturer of a faulty airbag.
The most important facts, and the ones around which you likely based your theory of the case, are usually
those with high legal relevance and high emotional power. The good facts that have the highest relevance
and emotional power are the ones you will emphasize. The bad facts that have the highest relevance and
emotional power are those you have to think carefully about how to handle.

§25.3 The Opening
Your reader should know immediately who your client is when she reads the very first sentence of your
facts. Think about where your story should start. Most students default to chronological order, but this is not
always the most persuasive use of structure. Consider your theory of the case and what event is most
important to your theory, and start there. For example, in a case about criminal assault in a bar, the
prosecution might begin the story with the first punch the defendant threw at the victim, or even the victim’s
medical treatment (how many staples, loss of blood). The defense, on the other hand, might go back in time
to when the victim entered the bar and started drinking. Or, might choose to begin with what the victim said
to the defendant before the fight began.
Often, lawyers begin the facts with a short, theory-heavy “preamble” that introduces the case and tells the
judge why the case is before the court. The preamble, like the theory of the case, finishes the statement “This
case is about . . .” But skilled legal advocates avoid that hackneyed phrase. Consider this opening from Ricci
v. DeStefano, a case about an affirmative action policy by the City of New Haven:
In 2003, New Haven sought to fill command vacancies in its fire department. Petitioners qualified for promotion
under a race-blind, merit-selection process mandated by local law but were denied the positions by the city because
of their race and racial disparities in the examinations’ outcome. City officials refused to promote the successful

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

191

candidates and left the vacancies unfilled, intending to repeat the competition with the aim of awarding a higher
proportion of the promotions to minority candidates. [Footnote omitted.]

There can be no question which side wrote this opening. That is so even though the paragraph contains
only facts — few adjectives and adverbs, no overstatement, just facts. Notice the juxtaposition of “qualified
for promotion . . . based on a merit-selection process mandated by local law” and “refused to promote” and
“left the vacancies unfilled.” Petitioners’ theory of the case is
250
loud and clear: they were qualified but were denied the positions based on their race. The opening
simultaneously apprises the court of the overarching impetus of the lawsuit and persuades the court of the
rightness of Petitioners’ position.

§25.4 Tips for Effective Storytelling
Using Structure. Put good facts at points of emphasis. Most readers notice information that occurs at the
beginning of a point of emphasis and remember things that are stated last. That means that your good facts
should be at the beginning and end of: your statement (macro organization), headings (if you use them), and
paragraphs (micro organization).
Using Space. The majority of space in your statement should be good facts. Unpack the details of your
good facts so that your reader has a rich, thick description of the good facts. Overuse of adjectives and
adverbs is a common novice error in the statement of facts. These words are not descriptive — they tell as
opposed to show. They also compress facts instead of expanding them. Consider the following example:
Telling
(adjectives and
adverbs in
bold):

Showing (better):

Defendant paid a
strongman to
violently
terrorize the
family of the
man who owed
him money.
Defendant knew
that the man
would use
unsavory
collection
practices.

Over a period of several months, defendant met with Robbie Mutch, a man with several
convictions for arson and assault. Mutch had approached defendant and offered to “go
after” Jessup, who owed defendant money. Over the course of these meetings, defendant
agreed to “hire” Mutch to get his money back. Mutch then followed Jessup until he was
alone and broke his arm with a pipe, saying “it’s time to pay.” When this did not
immediately work, he also went to the school attended by Jessup’s children, two girls
ages 7 and 9, and gave the girls “notes” to pass on to their father. The notes said things
like “look how easy it was to get to your kids” and “next time you’ll pry this note from
her beaten body.” Mutch told defendant that he was going to do these things, and
defendant paid him to do them.

The adverbs and adjectives in the “telling” example do not help the court understand what happened. They
are the writer’s editorializing. If you asked ten lawyers what “unsavory” practices are, you would get ten
answers. Moreover, “violently terrorize” is a loaded term that can encompass a wide range of behavior.
Instead, show the court what happened and let the court make the value judgments.
251

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

192

This second example is much more memorable than the first. When you are done with a first draft of your
facts, consider reviewing them to check for adverbs and adjectives. Did you overuse them? Are there places
where you could substitute detail for an adjective or adverb to better effect?
Another good way to check your facts for persuasiveness is to count sentences. How many sentences are
good facts? How many are bad? In most cases, there should be far more sentences devoted to good facts than
bad.
Using Space, Part 2. Make sure you do not clutter your fact statement with extraneous information. As
you go through your story, ask yourself whether each fact you include is necessary either because it is
relevant, emotionally affecting, or important to the context. Sometimes lawyers call this the “so what”
question. Are some of your included facts “so what” facts, meaning if you took them out it would change
absolutely nothing about the case or the reader’s understanding? Get rid of them. They force the reader to
wade through a lot of clutter to get to the gems.
Compare these:
Example 1

Example 2

At 2:10 A.M., on Tuesday, September 2, 1986, Officer Joyner was told by Ms. Leyland was awakened and
his dispatcher to investigate a disturbance on the fourth floor of the
arrested by Officer Joyner at her
building at 642 Sutherland Street. (T. at 162.)
apartment shortly after 2 A.M. on
There he took a complaint from Kenneth Novak, a tenant in apartment
the day she was beaten. (T. at
4-C, and, as a result, arrested Ms. Leyland, who lives in apartment 4-E. 162-67.)
(T. at 163-65.) Officer Joyner was not able to leave the building with
A police booking clerk testified
Ms. Leyland until 2:45 A.M. because she had been asleep and needed to that she heard “a man yelling in
dress. (T. at 166-67.) Ms. Leyland testified that she was so tired that she the parking lot” just before
fell asleep in the police car during the drive to the precinct station. (T. at Officer Joyner brought Ms.
14.) Cynthia Scollard, a police booking clerk, testified that she was on
Leyland into the precinct station.
duty at about 3:05 A.M. on September 2, when she heard a commotion in (T. at 145.) The booking clerk
the precinct parking lot. (T. at 145.) Ms. Scollard further testified that
also testified that she
she noticed Ms. Leyland’s injuries as soon as Officer Joyner turned Ms. immediately noticed bleeding
Leyland over to her, and that Ms. Leyland appeared to be very tired at
from Ms. Leyland’s lip and from
the time. (T. at 147-49.)
the side of her head (T. at
147-48), and that Ms. Leyland’s
face began to swell during
booking (T. at 148-49.)

252
In the passage on the left, the following are all clutter: the date, the address, the precise times, the booking
clerk’s name, and the details about Leyland’s tired state. The passage on the right omits the unnecessary
facts, opening up room to dwell on the details that are truly essential.
Using Language. Consider carefully what you want to call people, events, and things. Choose words that
resonate with your theory. Use vivid, memorable language for your good facts. Consider the effect of words,
the images. In terms of people, think about the difference between calling someone a “defendant” versus
“Mr. Harris.” Or calling people “rioters” as opposed to “protestors.” Or calling the entity in a criminal case
“the prosecution” versus “the People of Indiana” versus “the State.”
The Safford v. Redding case is a good example of the importance of what to call things or events. In that
case, recall, a middle school student was searched on suspicion that she possessed prescription-strength
ibuprofen. The School District refers to “drugs” multiple times in its brief, occasionally referring to “OTC”
drugs (over the counter) or “IBU 4000s.” Savana’s brief refers to the drugs almost exclusively as
“ibuprofen.”

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

193

§25.5 Dealing with Bad Facts
Every case has bad facts — those facts that are damaging to your client’s position. Although the
professional rules of ethics impose upon lawyers a duty of candor, that duty does not require lawyers to
disclose bad facts to the tribunal in a litigation setting.1 The decision to include bad facts is most often a
strategic one and depends on many factors.
If the damaging fact is one that the other side is likely to disclose and rely on, or the court is likely to learn
of it, good advocacy counsels in favor of confronting that fact and trying to neutralize it. Lawyers sometimes
call this “drawing the sting” or “inoculation.”2 Confronting bad facts has two advantages. First, it makes you
look credible and reasonable in the eyes of the court, the benefit of which cannot be overstated. Second, by
confronting the bad fact, you take full advantage of the opportunity to characterize that fact (hence, “drawing
the sting”).
There are several strategies for handling bad facts in written advocacy, including:
Structure: Juxtapose Next to a Favorable Fact That Explains, Counterbalances, or Justifies It. This
is often, but not always, done through the “Even though [this], [that]” or “Although [this], [that]”
formulation. In a case about the legality of a search, the brief for the United States might juxtapose the fact
of the search (a bad fact for them) with the reason for it (a good fact): “TSA agents made
253
the determination to examine Mr. Ballard’s luggage only after Jessie, a drug-sniffing beagle, had signaled
that Mr. Ballard’s suitcase contained contraband.”
Language: Passive Voice, Euphemizing. Your legal writing professor has probably told you that passive
voice should be avoided because it is wordy and creates ambiguity. That is true. However, good advocates
learn to control the passive voice, using it effectively to deflect blame. Think about the difference between
“Agents of the TSA patted her down and then emptied her suitcases of all their contents” with “She and her
belongings were looked over for contraband.” The passive hides the actors and obscures power, agency, and
authority. Passive makes it seem like things “just happened.” This can be a valuable tool for the advocate.
You can use it, but use it wisely and control your use.
Similarly, you can euphemize. The same way you used vivid, colorful language to describe your good
facts, you can use less “charged” language for your bad facts. Think about the difference between “search”
and “look over” or “inspect.” All of these words have different connotations. Like everything else in the
brief, the words you choose to describe the key components of the case should be carefully chosen.
“Bury” the bad facts structurally and devote less space to them. Although hiding bad facts by
avoiding points of emphasis and using generic language is often effective, using only these methods to deal
with bad facts is like sticking your head in the sand. You can’t hide or ignore facts that your opponent is
going to emphasize. Use this method, but use it in conjunction with one of the other methods described for
full effect.

§25.6 The Procedural History
So far, we have been talking exclusively about the facts related to the dispute between the parties — what
conflict happened between the litigants that brought them to court. But the fact statement has another
important component: the procedural history. You are likely familiar with the concept of procedural history
from briefing cases for your other classes. In an appeal brief, the procedural history covers what happened
before the appeal was filed. In a motion brief, it covers what happened leading up to the filing of the motions
at issue. If it is advantageous to the client, the procedural history might include detail about the substance of
what happened below. For example, if the appellate brief writer won in the trial court, he may elaborate on
the trial court’s reasoning.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/21/2022 10:39 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

194

Your legal writing professor will talk about what kind of information to include in the procedural history.
It will vary depending on context, including how critical procedure is to the resolution of the case (e.g., Is
there a procedural issue?) and how complicated the procedural posture is.
254

§25.7 How to Evaluate Your Statement of Facts
Does your opening paragraph focus on your best core facts and/or make clear your theory of the

25-A case?
25-B
25-C
25-D
25-E

Have you used structure, space, and language to tell the story most persuasively?
Have you emphasized favorable facts?
Have you neutralized unfavorable facts?
Have you humanized your client?
Have you made careful decisions about what to include and exclude? Is the statement of facts

25-F streamlined, with little “so what” clutter?

Have you checked your statement of facts for inferences and legal argument? Have you checked for

25-G overuse of adjectives or adverbs?
25-H

Have you included a procedural history?

§25.8 Story Ethics
As you know, the rules of professional conduct forbid a lawyer from “[k]nowingly mak[ing] a false
statement of material fact or law” to a court.3 But even if the rules were silent, you should never be
misleading or false with the court. As a lawyer, your word is your bond and your reputation will precede
you. It is also simply poor advocacy. And it will backfire because the court will be angry and will likely hold
it against your client. It is never a good day when your adversary accuses you of misrepresenting the facts in
open court and the judge says, “Well, let’s look at the record” and you cannot find the support for your
statement.
Maybe this seems obvious to you and you think you would never do such a dishonest thing. But being in
advocacy mode can have a significant impact on your worldview. The authors have found that we sometimes
misremembered facts — coincidentally always in favor of our clients — and had to look back carefully at
our records after drafting the statement to be sure we were accurate. We weren’t trying to mislead, but we
sometimes found ourselves doing so inadvertently because we felt so passionately for our clients.
255
Also, the line between appropriate advocacy and overstatement is not an easy or bright line. We all know
a lie when we see one, but it is harder to know whether a euphemism we use for a bad fact is legitimate
advocacy or misleading. The best way to guard against this is (i) scrupulous citation to the record; (ii)
thinking about making the statement in open court (Does it pass the straight face test?) and/or bouncing your
characterizations off your peers or your professor; and (iii) checking your fact statement for inappropriate
inferences and editorializing.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

195

Exercise I
Consider two examples, each the beginning passage of a Statement of Facts. Assume that the plaintiffs are
suing a backcountry hiking guide for negligence after the guide led them into disaster. (Citations to the
record have been deleted.)
On June 11, the plaintiffs asked in Stove Pipe
Springs whether a backcountry guide could lead them
through certain parts of Death Valley. After some
discussion, they hired the defendant to take them on a
full-day hike the next day.

When they started out, the defendant carried a
compass and map. Each plaintiff carried sunglasses, a
largebrim hat, and a quart of water.
At trial, a climatologist testified about the climate in
Death Valley. Occasionally, winter temperatures fall
below freezing, but there is no water to freeze. Spring
and fall temperatures approximate summer
temperatures elsewhere. July is the hottest month, with
an average high of about 116° and an average
low of about 87°. The highest temperature reliably
recorded in Death Valley was 130°. Reports by early
explorers of temperatures above 150° have not been
confirmed or repeated through official measurements.
Average annual rainfall is about 2½ inches, and the
number of days on which precipitation falls in an
average year is eight.

The climate in Death Valley is one of the
hottest and driest known. The highest
temperature recorded each year reaches at least
120° and in many years at least 125°. The
highest temperature reliably recorded in Death
Valley — 130° — is also the highest undisputed
temperature recorded
anywhere on earth. The rainfall is only 2½
inches per year — the lowest in the Western
Hemisphere — and in a few years no rain falls
at all.
In the summer sun there, a person can lose
four gallons of perspiration a day and — in 3%
humidity — die of dehydration unless the lost
water is quickly replaced. A person becomes
delirious after two gallons are lost. At that heat
and humidity, unprotected wood can split open
spontaneously.
The defendant advertised himself as a
professional and experienced backcountry
guide. He was hired by the plaintiffs and then
took them into Death Valley for a full-day hike
on a June day with a quart of water each.

256
After reading the example on the right, you’re probably ready to believe that this hike was madness, and that
the guide was responsible for it. How did the example on the right persuade you? How is it different from
the example on the left?
Exercise II
Escape from Prison? (Rewriting Fact Statements)
Orville Bradwyn is being tried for attempted escape from prison. Below is a Statement of Facts for the
prosecution, followed by one for the defense. (Citations to the record have been omitted.)
Rewrite each Statement.
For the prosecution:
The defendant is a prisoner at the Simmonsville Penitentiary. On July 6, he was not in the dinner line
where he was required to be, and Sgt. Tunmeyer, the prosecution’s sole witness, organized a search for
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

196

him. According to Sgt. Tunmeyer, no prisoner is allowed in the laundry room after 5 P.M., and the
defendant was found in the laundry room at 7:39 P.M. The reason for this rule is that the laundry room is
an obvious place from which to escape. The prison does the laundry of the state hospital nearby, and
hospital trucks pick up hospital laundry directly from the prison laundry room. At 5 P.M., Sgt.
Tunmeyer checked the laundry room thoroughly, did not see anyone, and subsequently locked the door.
Even though the defendant had been assigned to work in the laundry, he was not on duty when he was
found in the laundry. Before and after dinner, prisoners are free to move about outside their cells. When
the defendant’s cell was checked, many of his personal belongings were found. In fact, the defendant
had a reputation for being tidy and was drying all of his clothes when found in the laundry at 7:39 P.M.
However, when his cell was checked his radio had been left on, and some material had been left under
the covers of his bed to make it look like someone was asleep there.
For the defendant:
Mr. Bradwyn is an inmate at the Simmonsville Penitentiary. At this prison, inmates are free to move
about outside the cells before and after dinner, which is from 6:00 to 7:00 P.M. The prisoners are
counted each day in the dinner line, and when Mr. Bradwyn was not present, he was considered
missing. Prisoners are not allowed in the laundry after 5 P.M. because the laundry room provides an
obvious escape route on the truck the state hospital sends at 8 P.M. each night to pick up its laundry. Sgt.
Tunmeyer testified that he checked the laundry at 5 P.M. and locked it up without seeing Mr. Bradwyn
there.
257
When Mr. Bradwyn was discovered to be absent from the dinner line, Sgt. Tunmeyer organized a
search and found him in the laundry room at 7:39 P.M., where Mr. Bradwyn was drying his prison
uniforms. There was no testimony about how Mr. Bradwyn could have entered the laundry room, which
Sgt. Tunmeyer claims to have locked. Mr. Bradwyn is one of the prisoners assigned to work in the
laundry. Sgt. Tunmeyer admits to past quarrels with Mr. Bradwyn, and that Mr. Bradwyn had filed a
complaint against him for beating him. He also admitted that Mr. Bradwyn is an unusually tidy person
who does not like other people to touch his things, and that at 7:39 P.M. all of Mr. Bradwyn’s clothing
was in a dryer.
The state has not introduced any evidence that Mr. Bradwyn was not on duty earlier in the day. Nor
has it introduced any evidence that Mr. Bradwyn could not have been locked in the laundry room
accidentally by Sgt. Tunmeyer at 5 P.M.
1. Model Rules of Professional Conduct, Rule 3.3.
2. Kathryn Stanchi, Playing with Fire, 60 Rutg. L. Rev. 381 (2008).
3. Rule 3.3(a)(1) of the Model Rules of Professional Conduct.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

197

259

26

Developing Persuasive Arguments

§26.1 What Is an Argument?
An argument is a group of ideas arranged logically to convince a reader or listener to do a particular
thing or to adopt a particular belief.
That doesn’t include hostile comments between drivers after a fender bender in a parking lot. The drivers
are really venting anger, neither of them having any hope of persuading the other. Nor does it include
aggressive expression of one’s opinion on politics, fashion, or sports. Many people are eager to state their
opinions so that you know what they think — and not with the intent of changing your mind. But if they are
truly trying to persuade you, they’re making a genuine argument.
Uncapitalized, the word argument means a contention designed to persuade. Capitalized, an Argument is
the largest portion of a motion memo or appellate brief. An Argument might include many separate
individual arguments.
In designing an argument, your first question should be “What will make the reader or listener want to
agree with me?” A good argument will affect the audience. It leads readers or listeners through reasoning so
convincingly that, at the end, they are pleased to be persuaded.
Most disputes are two-sided in the sense that each side can make credible arguments, and it takes real
work for the judge or jury to choose between them. Here is an example of opposing arguments from the
parties’ briefs in Lawrence v. Texas:1
260
Section 21.06 puts the State of Texas inside its
citizens’ homes, policing the details of their most
intimate and private physical behavior and dictating
with whom they may share a profound part of
adulthood. Texas has enacted and enforced a criminal
law that takes away — from same-sex couples only —
the freedom to make their own decisions, based upon
their own values and relationships, about the forms of
private, consensual sexual intimacy they will engage
in or refrain from. The State defends this law only by
saying the majority wants it so. Texas asserts a power
of the majority to free itself from state dictates about
private, consensual sexual choices, while using the
criminal law to condemn and limit the choices of a
minority. This law and its application to Petitioners
violate both the guarantee of equal protection and

The States of the Union have historically
prohibited a wide variety of extramarital sexual
conduct, a legal tradition which is utterly
inconsistent with any recognition of a
constitutionally protected liberty interest in
engaging in any form of sexual conduct with
whomever one chooses. Nothing in this Court’s
“substantive due process” jurisprudence
supports recognition of a constitutional right to
engage in sexual misconduct outside the
venerable institution of marriage. This Court
should adhere to its previous holding on this
issue in Bowers v. Hardwick, and it should
reaffirm that the personal liberties protected by
the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment from State regulation are limited to

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

198

fundamental liberties safeguarded by the Fourteenth
Amendment.

those “so rooted in the traditions and conscience
of our people as to be ranked as fundamental.”

Your job is to make your arguments more appealing than your adversary’s, or to make your adversary’s
arguments weaker by pointing out their flaws, or — preferably — to do both of these things. This chapter
explains how.

§26.2 What Judges Expect from Written Argumentation
Judges are busy readers who view any assertion skeptically and who must make many decisions in short
periods of time. Thus, they need complete but concise arguments that can be quickly understood.
261
Judges are not experts in all areas of the law. In most courts, judges cannot specialize in particular areas of
substantive law: they must decide any case you bring before them. Unless a case turns on parts of the law
about which a judge has thought deeply lately, the judge will depend on you to explain what the law is and
how it governs the case. And a judge knows nothing at all about the facts of a case except for what can be
learned through the lawyers and their evidence.
Your job is to teach and persuade at the same time. Think of a motion memo or appellate brief as a
manual on how to make a particular decision (and on how to write the opinion that justifies that decision). A
lawyer who can show the court how the decision should be made, by laying out all the steps of logic, stands
a much better chance of winning.

§26.3 Types of Legal Arguments
A carefully prepared, carefully stated, lawyer-like written argument is a work of art and a joy forever.
— E. Barrett Prettyman

Good legal arguments are reasonable and accurate, appear reliable, and make your client’s victory appear
inevitable — either because the higher courts will reverse any other result, or because it’s the only right
thing to do, or both. The feeling of inevitability is a judge’s selling point. It’s reached by laying out for the
judge every step of logic so that your conclusion becomes irresistible as the argument proceeds. It is
accomplished by making an assertion and then backing it up with evidence (from your record) and authority.

§26.3.1 Motivating and Justifying Arguments
Arguments can fall into two basic categories: motivating and justifying.
Motivating arguments make the judge want to rule for your client. They are not so much about legal proof
as emotion or intuition. Aristotle called this pathos. Pathos gives your arguments an intuitive, gut appeal.
They make the judge believe your position is right in a grand sense of achieving justice — not just legally
correct.
This is how you might express the motivating argument in the Appendix F motion memo:
The Defendant did not take basic precautions to make sure he did not file a claim barred by res judicata.

262

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

199

Note the way the motion memo reinforces the idea of the defendant as a bad actor by emphasizing his failure
to act and highlighting how simple the precautions would have been. This motivates the reader to see the
defendant in a negative light.
Justifying arguments are those based in law, fact, and proof. A justifying argument shows proof of a
conclusion of law according to the paradigm explained in Chapters 11-14. In a justifying argument, you
identify the controlling rule of law and show that the rule’s application to the case facts lead to a positive
result for your client.
A simplified version of a justifying argument in the Appendix F motion memo would be:
The Defendant has not met his burden of proof by providing evidence to support his bona fide error affirmative
defense.

This argument relies on providing concrete legal standards and applying them to the case facts.
A good Argument section in a motion memo or appellate brief will include both types of argument. A
motivating argument alone isn’t enough because even a motivated judge isn’t supposed to act without a solid
legal justification. Have you ever seen an opinion without citations to authority? No. That is why motivating
arguments are not enough. A justifying argument is also often not enough, particularly if the law can be
interpreted in more than one reasonable way. When a judge is given a choice between two conflicting
justifying arguments, each of which is reasonable, a motivating argument can affect which choice the judge
makes.

§26.3.2 Policy Arguments
Policy arguments are arguments about the effect that the rule you are advocating will have in the future.
Policy arguments answer questions such as: if the court does as you request, how would the law in the future
treat facts that are similar to — but not exactly the same as — yours? What would be the practical effects in
the courts, in the economy, and in society as a whole? Why is the rule you advocate better than the one your
adversary urges?
Policy arguments can be highly motivating, especially in a close case. While there is no standard structure,
here is a sound approach for making policy arguments:
1. Begin by identifying one or more public policies that a decision in your favor would further. Tell the
court exactly which policy or policies you want the court to be guided by.
2. Then persuade the court that the policy or policies you’ve identified are valuable. Your adversary
will urge competing policies. Show that yours
263
are more important. But it’s not enough just to say yours are worth more; prove it with argument.
3. Finally, show exactly how a decision in your favor will further the policy or policies you’ve
identified. Don’t assume that the court will understand how. Explain it specifically.
Prove policy with authority. Judicial opinions often include policy and are a good source of authority.
Common policy concerns addressed in cases include public health and welfare, enforceability of rules, ease
of administration, and the proper role of courts. Policy considerations may differ from state to state. In
Arizona, for example, public policy disfavors solutions that interfere with development of land for homes
and industry, while in Vermont policy prefers conservation, the environment, and preservation of
agriculture. Some states favor providing tort remedies even at some risk to judicial efficiency, although in
others the reverse is true.
If you lack legal authority, cite and explain nonlegal sources that show a genuine public need. For
example, if you argue that the courts should adopt strict tort rules assigning liability for contamination with
industrial chemicals, you can cite scientific studies showing the presence of PCBs and other toxic chemicals
in the food supply.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

200

When a court is being asked to clarify the interpretation of a statute, the court isn’t free to attach to the
statute any policy the judges like. Instead, the court must use the policy that the legislature adopted when it
enacted the statute. Sometimes that policy is expressed in the statute or the legislative history. If not, the
court, with your assistance, must figure out what policy the legislature probably adopted.
But also go beyond that and demonstrate that what you want will also produce the best result in future
cases, remembering that the decision will become precedent. If a court must choose between competing
rules, for example, show that the rule you urge is better than others. If you win, the decision will stand for
that rule.
Lawyers tend to introduce policy-based arguments with phrasings like the following:
This Court should reject the rule urged by the defendant because it would cause . . .
Automobile rental companies [or some other category of litigants] should bear the risk of loss because . . .
Not only is the order requested by the plaintiff not sanctioned by this state’s case law, but such an order would
violate public policy because . . .

Remember, however, that policy arguments are used to reinforce argument from authority. Only where
authority is unusually sparse should policy arguments play the predominant role in a theory.
264

§26.3.3 Brainstorming Arguments
Legal arguments come in many different forms. We’ll outline just a few here. Many of these are based on
Wilson Huhn’s The Five Types of Legal Argument.
Arguments from text. Common in statutory and constitutional issues, these arguments posit that a result
is mandated by the plain language of the legal text at issue. You have probably seen judges talk about the
“common meaning” of a word, or even use a dictionary to support what most people believe is the meaning
of a particular word or phrase. That’s argument from text.
Arguments from precedent and analogy. The most common legal argument, these posit that the court
should reach a result because courts have reached similar results in similar cases.
Arguments from intent. These are close cousins of policy arguments, discussed below. But instead of
focusing on general social good, these arguments posit that a result is required because that is what the law
intended to happen. You will often see these arguments in statutory or constitutional cases, but they also
crop up in common law. All laws have a reason or purpose for why they were passed or made. Judges are
meant to interpret and apply the law to serve those purposes. Arguments from intent state that the law’s
purpose is best accomplished by a decision in the advocate’s favor.
You will need authority to support your intent arguments. Sometimes a statute will be very clear about the
purpose it meant to serve. Other times, intent must be inferred (by you or the court) by looking at legislative
history or even sometimes newspaper articles about the law. For example, you can easily discern the purpose
of “Megan’s Law,” which required sex offenders to register in a state database, by looking at news accounts
surrounding the law.
Policy Arguments. As discussed above, these arguments posit that a ruling in favor of the advocate’s
position will result in a social good and/or a ruling against the advocate will result in a social evil.

§26.3.4 Selecting and Organizing Your Arguments
Macro Organization. First decide on the big picture — which arguments to include and in what order to
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

201

present them. You might be tempted to include every point you can think of to support your theory and
refute your adversary’s arguments. This approach can hurt more than help. Instead, focus sharply on your
strongest points. Develop them fully, and leave out the weak ones. As Holmes put it: “strike for the jugular
and let the rest go.”2
265
Include only those arguments which, in your judgment, have a reasonable chance of success. A
“reasonable chance” doesn’t mean certainty and, in a case where you have nothing better, it might not even
mean probability. To be worth making, however, a contention should have the potential to lead to a decision
in your favor. Lawyers often use the “straight face” test: If they would feel comfortable making the argument
to a judge’s face (say, during oral argument), then it is worth putting in the brief.
Once you have decided which arguments to include, consider the most effective way to organize them.
The general rule is strongest arguments first unless logic dictates otherwise.
For example, if your adversary must prove that a five-element test has been satisfied, and if you think that
your adversary’s proof is weakest on element number three, don’t argue the elements in the order in which
they’re listed in the controlling statute. Argue element three first because as far as you’re concerned, it’s the
controlling element. Your adversary will likely have a very different organization, for example, arguing the
elements in the order they appear or addressing those elements that are easier to satisfy before those that are
more challenging.
Sometimes, however, the logic of the dispute requires that the strongest material be delayed to avoid
confusing the court. Some arguments are simply hard to understand unless preceded by less punchy material.
In these situations, you must weigh your need for clarity against your need to show merit from the start.
Micro Organization. While justifying arguments can be organized through the paradigm formula because
they are proofs of a conclusion of law (see Chapters 11-14), motivating arguments are more often appeals to
a human sense of justice or pragmatic policy needs. Motivating arguments can be made at any point in the
Argument section of a motion memo or a brief, but they often work best at the very beginning of a section.
Here is an example of how to incorporate motivating arguments into the paradigm structure:
Conclusion: You can “beef up” the conclusion with additional sentences incorporating why your result is
fairer, more likely to work justice, or any other motivating argument. Note that the conclusion part of the
paradigm can be more than one sentence.
Rule: You can add material here about the intent of the rule and why your articulation of the rule best
serves the intent. You can also insert policy here, to show that your rule will best serve some public policy.
Rule proof: If the cases discuss intent or policy, include that in your discussion of the cases. You can add
nonlegal materials here to support what the cases say, particularly if the cases say it in a conclusory manner.
266
Application: Use the policy that you have raised in the first parts of the paradigm to apply your rule. Show
how the facts of your case directly implicate the intent or policy at issue.
Communicating Organization. Use “signals” to persuade and organize. Don’t let the judge grope for
clues about how your arguments relate to each other. Instead, use concrete language to help the judge see
your focus. Review how to use point headings (Chapter 30). Use paragraphing to signal a change in topic or
argument. Use thesis sentences to show the main point of the paragraph to the reader. And use transitional
words and phrases to show how your points are cumulative:
There are three reasons why . . . First, . . . Second, . . . And finally, . . .
Not only has the defendant violated . . . , but she has also . . .

These verbal and visual cues will make your Argument easier to follow and understand, which will enhance
persuasion.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

202

§26.3.5 Stating Rules Clearly and Persuasively (Rule and Rule Proof)
Your argument must make clear the legal rule that supports the outcome you are advocating to the court.
That rule might not be exactly as stated in the cases you cite. In fact, the cases might enforce the rule without
stating it at all, and you might have to figure out what the rule is based on the court’s reasoning, particularly
the way it treats the facts.
State the rule in a way that leads to a decision in your client’s favor when it is applied to the facts. The
judge drafting an opinion will want it to be as convincing as possible to the parties, to the bar, to the public,
and to any higher court to which the decision could be appealed. That is a hard task where a gap in the law
must be filled. The judge who asks in oral argument in a gap-filling case, “Counselor, what rule would you
have us enforce?” really wants to know how — if the lawyer prevails — the court should word the second
component of the paradigm formula when it writes the opinion. Your goal should be to describe the rule in a
way that the court can adopt it without modification.
To convince a court to adopt a rule you are advocating, you need to provide sufficient authority to show
that the rule is legally justified. Consider the amount of citation and explanation a skeptical but busy judge
would need. Separate the authorities into categories based on how much influence they will have on the
outcome. Think in terms of cause and effect. If you had to make the judge’s decision, which authorities
would probably have an effect on you, even an effect adverse to your client’s position? Thesis sentences will
267
help you here — you should be able to articulate the goal of using a particular case or line of cases, and
that goal should be clearly stated in a thesis sentence. The motion memo in Appendix F provides a good
illustration of effective rule statements in the roadmap section (between headings I and A).
The amount of authority and the depth of explanation will depend on how much is needed to clarify the
issue involved, how disputed that issue is, and how important it is to your theory. At one extreme, an idea
may be so complex, so disputed, and so critical that it must be supported by a comprehensive explanation,
filling many pages, of major authorities. At the other extreme, if the court is apt to be satisfied with a mere
conclusory explanation, you should limit citation to one or, at the very most, two cases. (For example, notice
how the test for summary judgment is proved in the memo in Appendix F.)

§26.3.6 Working Carefully with the Facts (Fact Application)
A court rules for one party over another not merely because the law is abstractly favorable, but, more
importantly, because the law and facts combine favorably. After all the work of explaining the law, a
beginner might assume that the application to the facts is obvious, but it hardly ever is. Don’t assume that
merely mentioning the facts is enough: argue the facts. In other words, show the court exactly how the
determinative facts require the decision you seek. If you set up your rule persuasively, when you apply it to
the facts, it should seem clear and obvious that it leads to the outcome you seek.
The key to arguing the facts is to make sure nothing in the “fact application” is a pure statement of fact.
Instead, the sentences should connect law and fact. For example, if you are arguing that a defendant is liable
for reckless driving when he was driving the posted speed limit in the middle of a snowstorm, you might
state as the rule, “a driver is liable for maintaining an unsafe speed in disregard of adverse weather
conditions,” and then in applying that to the facts, go into detail about the conditions at the time of the
accident. A pure fact is “John drove through the snowstorm.” A combination of law and fact is “John
disregarded the snowstorm when he maintained his speed on the highway.”
Review your fact application for “so what” problems. A pure fact assertion such as “John drove through
the snowstorm” will make a legal reader say “so what” because the writer has not told the reader why John’s
unsafe speed matters legally.
There is more room for inference and vividness in the Argument fact application than in the Statement of
Facts, but restrain yourself from melodrama. Try to hit the line between being vivid and argumentative and
being overly dramatic. It’s the difference between a reader’s “whoa, that’s terrible” and a reader’s eyeroll.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

203

We wish we could give you an easy rule for this, but experienced lawyers struggle with this line. The best
way to learn is to try different methods and get feedback.
268

§26.4 How to Handle Adverse Authority and Arguments
Which authorities most strongly favor your adversary? (Make a list.) What is your adversary’s strongest
argument? Her second strongest argument? If you’re having a hard time answering these questions, you
haven’t begun to see the case as a whole.
Ignoring adverse authority won’t make it go away. It just gives opposing counsel the opportunity to
characterize it and you lose the opportunity to show why it doesn’t undermine your argument. Also, if you
ignore it and the court learns about it, be prepared for the court to be very angry and draw negative
conclusions about your credibility.
Dealing with Mandatory Adverse Authority. If the adverse authority is a statute, court rule, or
administrative regulation, you must show that the provision does not apply to your case, or that it applies in a
way that favors your client. Statutory language is almost always ambiguous and susceptible to multiple
interpretations, one of which could favor your client. Although it may seem tempting to argue that a statute
you don’t like is unconstitutional, courts rarely sustain such attacks. You should frontally attack a statute
only if there’s significant doubt — shared by respected lawyers — about its validity.
If the adverse authority is precedent, try to weaken it using the techniques described in Chapter 9.
Consider distinguishing the precedent, focusing on significant — and not merely coincidental — differences
between the precedent and your case. But be sure that these differences pass the “so what” test. The
differences on which you rely should be legally significant. Hypertechnical discrepancies and minor factual
variations won’t persuade because they seem arbitrary rather than a basis for a just decision. Another
approach might be to reconcile the precedent with your case, showing that — although the precedent seems
superficially adverse — its underlying policy would actually be furthered by the ruling you want from the
court. Still another approach is to attack the precedent head-on, challenging its validity on the grounds that it
is poorly reasoned or that changes in society or in public policy have made it unworkable. For reasons
similar to those outlined above about frontal challenges on statutes, this should be a last resort.
Adverse Authority That’s Not Mandatory. If the adverse authority is from outside your jurisdiction,
then you are much freer to criticize and urge the court to reject it. If a judge must choose between competing
out-of-state rules, she won’t be able to decide without rejecting at least some precedent as ill-founded. This
is where policy arguments can make a difference.
Make your own arguments before refuting opposing arguments. You’ll win more easily if the court’s
dominant impression is that you deserve to win,
269
rather than that your adversary deserves to lose. A defensive tone can undermine an otherwise worthwhile
argument. For that same reason, give adverse arguments only the space needed to dispatch them and no
more. The overall tone of your motion memo or appellate brief should be affirmative, not defensive.
Consider counting paragraphs to see how many are positive, affirmative arguments and how many rebut
arguments from the other side. Positive should greatly outweigh negative in most cases.
Beginners often have difficulty writing the transition and thesis sentences that introduce attacks on
opposing arguments. As with your thesis sentences in your positive argument, the thesis sentence
introducing your rebutting argument should encapsulate your response. For example:
The plaintiff misconstrues § 401(d)(1). Four other circuits have already decided that § 401(d)(1) provides for X
and not, as the plaintiff contends, for Y. [Follow with an analysis of the circuit cases.]

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

204

No appellate court has held to the contrary, and the few district court decisions cited by the plaintiff are all
distinguishable. [Follow with an analysis of the district court cases.]
The legislative history also demonstrates that Congress intended to provide for X and not for Y. [Follow with an
analysis of the legislative history.]

These opening sentences are written so that opposing counsel’s contention is surrounded by the writer’s
counter-contention and the beginning of the counter-contention’s proof. Avoid giving voice to the other
side’s argument by saying, “the plaintiff argues . . .” or “the defendant states that . . .”.
An “although” clause can be useful in thesis and transition sentences:
Although the House Judiciary Committee report states that its bill would have provided for Y, the Senate Judiciary
Committee actually drafted § 401(d)(1). Both that committee’s report and the conference committee report flatly
state that § 401(d)(1) provides for X.

§26.5 Argumentation Ethics
The rules of professional ethics place limits on what you’re permitted to do in argument.
First and most basically, you’re forbidden to “knowingly . . . make a false statement of fact or law” to a
court.3 The whole system of adjudication would break down if lawyers did not speak honestly to courts.
Second, you must inform a court of “legal authority in the controlling jurisdiction” that you know “to be
directly adverse to the position of [your] client
270
and not disclosed by opposing counsel.”4 You aren’t required to disclose out-of-state authority. You’re
required to disclose authority in your jurisdiction that’s “directly adverse” to your arguments if your
adversary hasn’t disclosed it.
Third, you may not advance a theory or argument that is “frivolous,” except that you may make a “good
faith argument for an extension, modification or reversal of existing law.”5 In a legal system like ours, where
“the law is not always clear and never is static,” the rules of ethics permit you to advance theories and
arguments that take advantage “of the law’s ambiguities and potential for change.”6 But a frivolous theory or
argument — one that stands little chance of being adopted by a court — is unfair to courts and to opposing
parties because it wastes their time, effort, and resources.
Separate court rules — procedural, rather than ethical in nature — also punish lawyers who make
frivolous arguments. In federal trial courts, for example, every “pleading, written motion, and other paper”
must be signed by a lawyer, whose signature certifies “that to the best of the [signer’s] knowledge,
information, and belief, formed after inquiry reasonable under the circumstances . . . the claims, defenses,
and other legal contentions are warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous argument for extending,
modifying, or reversing existing law or establishing new law.”7 Where that standard is violated, the court has
the power to impose monetary fines on the offending lawyer.8 Similar rules govern in appellate courts.9

§26.6 Evaluating Your Arguments
As you develop your arguments, consider whether you have included the elements that will make your
Argument section strong and persuasive.

26-A

Have you designed a compelling theory and backed it up with persuasive arguments?
Have you made both motivating arguments and justifying arguments and included policy arguments

26-B where relevant?

Have you limited your contentions to those that have a reasonable chance of persuading the court?
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

205

26-C 271

26-D
26-E
26-F
26-G
26-H
26-I
26-J

Have you organized to emphasize the ideas that are most likely to persuade?
Have you made your organization obvious?
Have you given the court a clear statement of the rule or rules on which the case turns?
Have you relied on an appropriate amount of authority with an appropriate amount of explanation?
Have you explained exactly and in detail how the law governs the facts?
Have you reinforced your theory with carefully chosen wording?
Have you confronted openly your weaknesses and your adversary’s strengths?
Have you enhanced your credibility through careful editing and through the appearance of your

26-K memo or brief?

1. 539 U.S. 558 (2003) (citations omitted).
2. Oliver Wendell Holmes, Speeches 77 (1934).
3. Rule 3.3(a)(1) of the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct.
4. Rule 3.3(a)(2) of the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct.
5. Rule 3.1 of the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct.
6. Comment to Rule 3.1 of the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct.
7. Fed. R. Civ. P. 11.
8. Id.
9. For example: “If a court of appeals determines that an appeal is frivolous, it may . . . award just damages and
single or double costs to the appellee.” Fed. R. App. P. 38.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

206

273

27

Handling the Procedural Posture

§27.1 Why Procedural Postures Matter
The procedural posture is the procedural event or events — such as a motion — that places an issue before
the court. The procedure affects the type of decision a judge can make, and may also limit how the court can
view the facts, so a lawyer writing a motion memorandum or appellate brief must take the procedural
posture into account.
Each type of motion is governed by rules on how the motion is to be decided. For example, if you move
for summary judgment, you must satisfy the test for summary judgment, which requires you to accept your
opponent’s version of the facts as you make your legal arguments. You are saying, in other words, that even
if every fact relied upon by your opponent is true, you still win. In contrast, if you are moving to exclude an
expert witness from trial, you may be entitled to provide the court with your own evidence to support your
position. In an appeal, the appellate court may be limited to finding whether the trial court correctly followed
the procedure, rather than independently deciding the case.
Because the procedural posture plays such a significant role in shaping the arguments you can make in a
motion memorandum or appellate brief, identifying and understanding it should be your first step when
preparing to write.

§27.2 Types of Procedural Postures
Trial court motions fall into four very generalized categories: (1) motions that challenge the quality of an
adversary’s allegations (in a pleading); (2) other
274
motions that challenge the manner in which the litigation began; (3) motions that challenge the quality of
a party’s evidence; and (4) a large, catchall category of miscellaneous case management motions. When a
trial court’s decision is appealed, the case moves into yet another procedural posture, where the trial judge’s
decision is evaluated according to a standard of review.
Rules governing how motions are decided may differ from state to state. Each state and the federal court
system has its own rules of procedure. Check the rules that govern the jurisdiction for which you are writing
a memorandum or brief, as well as the precedent interpreting those rules. Always check for local rules from
the specific court where you will be filing the brief.

§27.2.1 Motions Challenging the Quality of a Party’s Allegations
In litigation, parties initiate legal claims through documents called pleadings. In a civil case, the plaintiff’s

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

207

complaint alleges violation of a legal principle and the facts that support that violation. The complaint must
allege facts that, if proven, would constitute a cause of action. The defendant’s pleading is called an
“answer.” If a defendant pleads a counterclaim or an affirmative defense in the answer, that answer must
allege facts that, if proven, would substantiate a counterclaim or affirmative defense. And in a criminal case,
the government’s indictment or information must allege facts that, if proven, would be a crime.
Because, at this stage in litigation, no evidence has been submitted, the facts mentioned in the pleadings
are called allegations. When ruling on motions attacking allegations, courts must generally assume that the
alleged facts are true, but will eventually have to be proven by evidence submitted to the court. One
exception is that an allegation is considered true and proved if the opposing party admits to it in its own
pleadings.
In a civil action, a defendant can move to dismiss a plaintiff’s complaint for failure to state a claim.
Because this motion tests the sufficiency of allegations (and nothing more), the record is limited to the four
corners of the complaint. Motions to dismiss are often called “so what” motions: “even if everything the
plaintiff alleges is true, so what?” The court must assume the plaintiff will be able to prove all of the
allegations and decide whether they meet the requirements of the legal claim. If the answer is yes, the case
will move forward to give the plaintiff the opportunity to prove the allegations. If the court strikes all the
claims pleaded in a complaint, the complaint itself is dismissed and the litigation is over unless the plaintiff
appeals, or can file an amended complaint with additional or reformulated allegations that would survive a
motion to dismiss.
Similarly, a plaintiff can move to dismiss a counterclaim or an affirmative defense pleaded in the
defendant’s answer. And in a criminal case a defendant can move to dismiss one or more counts in the
indictment or information, or the entire indictment or information.
275
In motions challenging a party’s allegations, you must be careful to avoid referring to facts as if they are
proven. For example, you would write “Plaintiff alleges Defendant was driving too fast” rather than
“Defendant was driving too fast.” If, however, the opposing party has admitted the fact, you may treat it as a
proven fact and refer to it accordingly.

§27.2.2 Motions Challenging Other Aspects of the Way in Which the Litigation Began
A defendant might move to dismiss an action on the ground that the court lacks personal or subject matter
jurisdiction, venue is improper, the summons did not include all the information required, the complaint was
improperly served, or that some persons who must be made parties have not been,1 and so on.
Like motions challenging the allegations, these seek dismissal of the action at the earliest stage of
litigation, before the defendant files an answer. These motions aren’t limited to the contents of the
complaint. If the defendant asserts that the summons was improperly served, for example, the court would
ignore the contents of the complaint and would instead hear testimony from the process server and from the
defendant about how the summons was delivered to the defendant.

§27.2.3 Motions Challenging the Quality of a Party’s Evidence
These include (1) motions for summary judgment; (2) motions for directed verdict (or in federal courts,
motions for judgment as a matter of law); and (3) motions for judgment notwithstanding the verdict (in
federal courts, renewed motions for judgment as a matter of law). In contrast to the motions testing
allegations in pleadings, these require the court to decide whether a party has carried a burden of production.
There are also (4) motions for a new trial, which are analytically different from the other three (explained
further near the end of this section).
The burden of production (often called the burden of going forward) means that the party seeking relief
can provide enough evidence that a rational fact finder — a judge or jury — could decide in that party’s
favor. The burden is defined by the relevant rules of procedure and by the case law interpreting those rules.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

208

When you bring a motion to challenge the quality of the other party’s evidence, the judge applies those
standards to rule on the motion.
Although these motions are governed by different procedural rules, all three are decided according to
approximately the same logic: the motion should be granted if (1) the opposing party has failed to satisfy a
burden of production
276
and (2) the law is such that the movant is entitled to a favorable judgment. These motions require a judge
to apply the substantive law to the facts and determine whether the requirements of the claim can be
satisfied. For example, if you move for summary judgment in a products liability case, the judge will have to
decide if the facts in the record meet all of the elements of a products liability cause of action.
A party brings a motion for a new trial after a verdict has been rendered. A new trial can be granted on
two kinds of grounds: (1) the jury’s verdict is seriously tainted through procedural faults such as erroneously
admitted evidence or inaccurate jury instructions, or (2) the verdict was against the overwhelming weight of
the evidence. The first category obviously doesn’t test the quality of a party’s evidence. The second does, but
it does so by examining the extent to which a burden of persuasion (rather than a burden of production) has
been carried. A new trial isn’t granted merely because the judge would have come to a different verdict if
she had been the trier of fact. But it can be granted if the overwhelming weight of the evidence is on one side
of the case and the jury returned a verdict for the other side.

§27.2.4 Miscellaneous Case Management Motions
These are housekeeping motions, used to manage the progress of litigation, such as motions in discovery,
motions for preliminary injunctions, and suppression motions in criminal cases. What makes these motions
different from the ones you’ve just read about is that the granting of a management motion doesn’t terminate
the litigation; instead, management motions regulate the litigation’s progress.
For example, before trial, a criminal defendant who gave the police a confession might move to suppress
it, arguing that the police wrongfully obtained the statement by failing to inform him of his constitutional
right to remain silent. If the court grants the motion, the statement cannot be used as evidence at trial.
Case management motions cannot be appealed, though the trial judge’s ruling on these motions can be
challenged after the full case has been resolved.

§27.2.5 Appeal
On appeal, a standard of review is applied to the decision below. Standards of review are explained in §29
.3.

§27.3 Writing in a Procedural Posture
You will understand this section more easily if you read the Appendix F motion memo first.
277
Because much of law school is focused on studying the substantive law of torts, property, and so on, you
might tend to view issues in the abstract (“should the plaintiff win?”). But judges are constrained by the
procedural context in which issues are raised.
If, for example, a plaintiff moves for summary judgment, the judge can’t just decide in the abstract
whether the plaintiff should win the case. Instead, the judge must decide whether the parties disagree about

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

209

the material facts and whether the plaintiff is entitled to judgment as a matter of law (the test for summary
judgment) — in other words, whether it is possible for a jury to rule in the plaintiff’s favor. Compare the
following Questions Presented:
Is a painting contractor liable for negligence if he power-sands large amounts of lead paint from the exterior of a
building and thus spreads lead paint debris over most of an adjacent preschool?
Is plaintiff preschool entitled to summary judgment for its negligence claim against a painting contractor if it is
undisputed that the contractor power-sanded large amounts of lead paint from the exterior of a building and thus
spread lead paint debris over the adjacent plaintiff preschool?

The first question is stated abstractly without reference to the procedural posture. It will not make as much
sense to the court as the second. The italicized words in the second example aren’t throwaway jargon. They
reflect the test for summary judgment and are the core of the decision the court must make.
Similarly, on appeal the question isn’t whether the appellant should have won in the trial court, but instead
whether the trial court’s ruling was error as defined by the applicable standard of review (see §29.3). See
Chapter 30 (Point Headings and Subheadings) for how to incorporate the procedural posture and appellate
standard into your headings.
Because the procedural posture and the rules governing it control the way the judge will make the
decision, you must show the judge how to decide within those procedural rules. How can you do that in
writing?
First, remember that in a motion or appeal the threshold rule is procedural. It isn’t the rule of substantive
law that provides the remedy sued for. In a trial court, the threshold rules are the rules that govern how the
motion is to be decided. On appeal, the threshold rules are the ones that govern the trial court’s decision plus
the appellate court’s standard of review. So you must develop your argument to be consistent with the
limitations of those rules.
For example, the motion memo in Appendix F has been submitted by plaintiff Beatrice Russell in
opposition to a motion for a summary judgment. In deciding the motion, the court will evaluate the record in
terms of the elements of the test for summary judgment: whether there is a genuine dispute about a material
fact and whether, on the undisputed facts, the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. That test is
invoked very early in Russell’s Argument.
278
Second, some procedural tests incorporate the underlying substantive rules on which the litigation as a
whole is based (causes of action, affirmative defenses, and so on). In the test for a summary judgment, that
happens through the element requiring entitlement to judgment as a matter of law. In the test for a
preliminary injunction, it’s done through the element requiring likelihood of success on the merits. In these
situations, you make those substantive legal arguments within the framework of the procedural requirements.
Third, organize your paradigm variations around the procedural test. See Chapters 11-14. If the procedural
test incorporates a substantive test, the substantive test operates as a sub-rule. To see how that’s done, read
carefully the Argument in Appendix F, which includes several sub-arguments inside the organization of an
umbrella structure. The umbrella structure — set out under the major heading in roman numeral I — is built
on the test for a summary judgment. Because the second summary judgment element (entitlement to
judgment as a matter of law) incorporates a rule of substantive law (the test for the bona fide error defense),
proof of the second summary judgment element includes all of the arguments that show why the defense is
not available. Note the way each argument ties back to why the defendant failed to carry his burden and how
that affects summary judgment. This tracks the sequence a judge will follow in deciding whether to grant or
deny the motion.
Finally, be thoughtful about providing authority for the procedural test. Most procedural tests are so
commonly invoked that judges know them by heart. A conclusory explanation (see §12.2) is often sufficient
for rule proof. (And that’s all that was needed at the beginning of Beatrice Russell’s Argument in Appendix
F. Can you find the sentence and cite where it happens?) But often attorneys provide more. This may be
necessary if the parties disagree about the appropriate formulation of the procedural rule. In other cases,

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

210

attorneys might provide more as part of their persuasive rhetoric. A lawyer requesting summary judgment
might cite a case that shows how easy it is to grant such a motion, while a lawyer opposing summary
judgment might look for citations that say that summary judgment is an extraordinary remedy because it
removes the case from the hands of a jury (or other fact finder) and should be granted sparingly.

§27.4 Researching to Account for Your Case’s Procedural Posture
You’re looking for two kinds of rules:
First, you are, of course, searching for the rules that govern the substance of the controversy — definitions
of causes of action, crimes, affirmative defenses,
279
and other forms of rights and obligations like the ones you’ve already learned. This is by far the larger
research task in nearly all instances.
Second, you’re looking for the procedural rules that govern how the court’s decision is to be made. Some
examples are —
1. rules setting out the tests for granting various motions (“Summary judgment is appropriate if there is
no genuine issue of material fact and if the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law”);
2. rules controlling how the court must evaluate the record before it on the motion to be decided (“In
deciding a motion for summary judgment, the court views the evidence in the light most favorable to
the party opposing the motion”); and
3. if an appeal has been taken, the rule defining the standard of review in the appellate court (“On
appeal, a grant of summary judgment is reviewed de novo”).
You can save a lot of research time if you first identify the type of motion involved and then look in the
procedural statutes and court rules, as well as in the cases for procedural rules that govern the motion’s
disposition. For any given motion, you’ll probably find part of the procedural law in a statute or court rule
and the rest in interpretive case law.
If you find the procedural rules in a procedural statute or court rule, the language may be subtle, but it
won’t be terribly hard to recognize. The section heading alone will usually announce that you have arrived at
the right place — for example, “Rule 56. Summary Judgment.”
In case law, when a court mentions the rules governing how a motion is to be decided, it usually does so
immediately after reciting the facts and immediately before beginning the legal analysis. That is because the
procedural rules are a threshold through which the court must pass in order to begin the analysis. This is
typical of the kind of language you’ll find:
Summary judgment should be granted when the moving party shows that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. [Citation omitted]. In other words,
the time and expense of the parties and the court should not be wasted on a trial when there are no material facts in
dispute, one party is entitled to judgment on those facts, and thus there is nothing to try. In deciding a motion for
summary judgment, all reasonable inferences are construed in favor of the nonmoving party. [Citation omitted]. The
party opposing the motion for summary judgment must “submit evidentiary materials that set forth specific facts
showing that there is a genuine issue for trial.” [Citation omitted]. “The nonmoving party must do more than simply
show that there is some metaphysical doubt as to the material facts.”

280
[Citation omitted]. Summary judgment is properly entered against a party “who fails to make a showing
sufficient to establish the existence of an element essential to the party’s case, and on which that party will bear the
burden of proof at trial.” [Citation omitted].2

The first sentence is the test that must be satisfied before the motion can be granted. The rest are some of

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

211

the rules that govern how the court is to evaluate the record before it on this particular type of motion.
1. See Rule 12(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
2. Sommers v. Target Corp., 382 F.Supp.3d 842, 846 (E.D. Wis. 2019).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

212

281

28

Motion Memoranda

§28.1 Motion Memorandum Format
When a motion is made, each party may submit a memorandum of law presenting an argument to the
court about the decision it should make. A defendant moving for an order dismissing a complaint, for
example, submits a document that might be titled “Memorandum in Support of Defendant’s Motion to
Dismiss.” The opposing party’s document might be titled “Memorandum in Opposition to Defendant’s
Motion to Dismiss.” In some cases the moving party can file a reply to their opponent’s brief. This chapter
describes the format of a motion memo and the process of writing one.
The format and structure of motion memoranda vary widely from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. Some courts
have extensive local rules governing what should be included and specifying format requirements, and
others have very few rules. Local custom also plays a role in how these documents are written, so it is
always a good idea to check for local rules and ask a lawyer in the jurisdiction for a sample. The following
are typical components of a motion memo, although not all memos include them all:
1. case caption and title
2. Table of Contents (typically if the memo is over a specified length or if you want to gain the
persuasive effect of showing all the point headings and subheadings in one place)
3. Table of Authorities (only if the memo is long and many authorities have been cited)
4. Preliminary Statement, also called an Introduction or Summary
5. Statement of Facts or Facts, also called a Statement of the Case
282
6. Argument (longer arguments are broken into sections indicated by point headings)
7. Conclusion
8. signature block
As you read the description below of each of these components, consult the sample brief in Appendix F.
The case caption and title correspond to the memorandum heading at the beginning of an office
memorandum. The caption identifies the court and the parties, specifying their procedural designations
(plaintiff, defendant, etc.). In a criminal case, the prosecution is called, depending on the jurisdiction,
“State,” “Commonwealth,” “People,” or “United States,” and no procedural designation follows those terms
in the caption. (The prosecution is not a “plaintiff.”) The title identifies the memorandum and the purpose of
its submission (“Memorandum in Opposition to Defendant’s Motion to Dismiss”).
If a motion memo includes a Table of Contents, it begins on the page after the caption page. If a Table of
Authorities is included (and it usually is not), it appears on the first page after the Table of Contents. The
tables are put together and paginated just as they would be in an appellate brief. They are explained in
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

213

Chapter 29 (Appellate Brief Format) because they’re often omitted from law school memo assignments.
Although it is optional, a Table of Contents can help you persuade by compiling all your point headings and
subheadings in one place so the reader can see a broad overview of your Argument. Point headings are
explained in Chapter 30. Some lawyers add a Table of Contents to a medium- or large-sized motion memo to
gain that advantage. A Table of Authorities, however, is needed only in an exceptionally large motion
memo, approaching the size of an appellate brief.
The Preliminary Statement or Introduction or Summary follows the title in a motion memo that
doesn’t have tables. At a minimum, this section begins by introducing the judge to the parties, the procedural
posture, the issues involved, and the relief sought by the moving party. Because it will likely be the court’s
introduction to your position, the section should strongly reflect your theory of the motion (see Chapter 24).
The Preliminary Statement might also summarize your arguments, but this must be done very concisely. The
point is to tell the judge why the matter is before the court and to define the type of decision the judge is
being asked to make. That can usually be done in less than a page.
Although a minimalist Preliminary Statement is acceptable, every component of a motion memo should
be seen as an opportunity for persuasion, and this is no exception. Because it must be so concise, it is a good
idea to write, or revisit, your Preliminary Statement after you write your argument and have a strong, solid
articulation of your theory. A good Preliminary Statement sets the tone for the rest of the memo. A busy
judge might not want to keep going after a dull, dry Preliminary Statement. In contrast, a persuasive
overview
283
of your case can lead the judge to read further to see how you support your contentions.
The Statement of Facts or Facts or Statement of the Case corresponds to the Facts in an office memo,
but there are differences in substance and in drafting technique. Chapter 25 explains how to write a
persuasive Statement of Facts. The Statement of Facts is especially important in a motion memo because
most motions require trial judges to make decisions based on their understanding of the facts, or factual
allegations, rather than decisions about what the law is.
The Argument corresponds to the Discussion in an office memo, but here the goal is to persuade as well
as to explain. An Argument is organized into sections indicated by point headings. Those sections can be
further subdivided according to the organizational principles outlined in Chapter 13. Chapter 30 explains
how to construct point headings and subheadings. The Argument is the most complex component of a
motion memorandum, but you have already learned many of the skills required. Additionally, you will need
to know how to develop theories (Chapter 24) and arguments (Chapter 26).
The Conclusion is intended only to remind the reader of what you seek (or oppose), with an allusion to
your theory, if that can be compressed into one or two sentences. You should not raise anything new in your
conclusion that you haven’t already clearly presented in the Argument section. Check your local rules (or
ask your professor) to see what the courts in your jurisdiction prefer in a conclusion. Some courts prefer a
one-line recitation of the relief you seek. Others prefer a very short summary of your theory and any further
action you need the court to take. Compare the following:
Conclusion
For all these reasons, this court should preliminarily enjoin construction of the logging roads here at issue.

Conclusion
Thus, the Forest Service’s authorization of these logging roads violates the National Environmental Policy Act, the
Administrative Procedure Act, and the enabling legislation of the Forest Service. The harm would be irreparable,
and an injunction would promote the public interest. This court should therefore preliminarily enjoin the Forest
Service from building the roads.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

214

The second example does a more complete job of reminding the court, in just a few sentences, of precisely
what the writer wants and why it should be done.
The signature block appears under a line reading “Respectfully submitted.” The signature block includes
the lawyer’s name, an indication of which party
284
she represents, and her office address and telephone number. In some jurisdictions, the attorney also signs
the memo.1

§28.2 Writing a Motion Memorandum
As with office memos, lawyers differ about which part of a motion memorandum they draft first. But
lawyers modify their habits somewhat from document to document, simply because a practice that works
well in one instance might not work well in another.
Some lawyers start by writing the Preliminary Statement because it is an overview of the case, but as
noted above, it is a good idea to revisit this section after you have solidified your theory. Others lawyers start
with the Statement of Facts. Others may start with the point headings as a kind of outline. Still others may
start with the Argument, using the drafting process to figure out organization and refine the theory.
Wherever you begin, as you develop and refine each section, consider the effect on other sections and revise
accordingly.
The Conclusion, the Tables, and the signature block are best done last. The caption can be done at any
time. Many lawyers use specialized software (or features of basic word-processing programs) to
automatically generate the Tables.
While putting the memo through further drafts, ask yourself the questions in the checklists on the inside
front and back covers of this book.
1. See, e.g., Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

215

285

29

Appellate Practice

§29.1 Appellate Brief Format
Once an appeal has begun, all interested parties may file appellate briefs with the court, arguing for both
the result and reasoning they want the court to adopt. The party seeking reversal, the appellant, files their
brief first, and then the opposing party files a response. In some cases the appellant can file a reply
addressing specific arguments in the appellee’s brief. This chapter describes the format of an appellate brief
and the process of writing one.
As with any court document, always check local rules for specific requirements. In general, appellate
briefs include the following components:1
1. cover page containing a caption and other basic information;
2. Table of Contents;
3. Table of Authorities;
4. if the appeal involves interpretation of a constitutional provision, statute, administrative regulation,
or court rule, a reprinting of the relevant material;
5. Preliminary Statement, sometimes called an Introduction;
6. Question(s) Presented or Statement of Issues;
7. Statement of the Case or Statement of Facts;
8. Summary of Argument;
9. Argument, broken up with point headings;
286
10. Conclusion; and
11. signature block.
As you read the descriptions below each of these components, consult the sample briefs in Appendices G
and H.
The cover page includes the caption, followed by the document’s title (such as “BRIEF FOR
APPELLANT”) and information about the lawyer submitting the brief. The caption includes the name of the
appellate court, the appellate court’s docket number, and the names and procedural designations of the
parties (appellant, appellee, etc.). Many courts require that the caption also include the parties’ procedural
designations in the trial court.2 In federal appellate courts, the appellant is listed first in the caption, but in
most state appellate courts the parties appear in the same order in which their names appeared in captions in
the trial court. The cover page does not have a page number.
The Table of Contents begins on the page after the cover page. It lists all of the components of the brief
(except the cover page and the Table of Contents itself); reproduces the point headings and subheadings
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

216

from the Argument; and sets out the page on which each component, point, or subpoint begins. Because the
point headings and subheadings are reproduced verbatim in the Table of Contents, a reader can look there for
an outline of the Argument and for a quick grasp of the lawyer’s theory of the appeal. When read together in
the Table of Contents, the point headings and subheadings should express the theory persuasively and
coherently. See Chapter 24 on developing a persuasive theory.
The Table of Authorities appears on the first page after the Table of Contents. It indexes the cases,
statutes, constitutional provisions, court rules, administrative regulations, treatises, and law review articles
cited in the Argument, together with references to the pages in the brief where each authority is cited. In the
Table, every authority is listed in a complete citation conforming to citation rules.
The Table of Authorities can be divided by type of authority: “Cases,” “Statutes,” and “Miscellaneous.”
Cases are listed in alphabetical order. If constitutional provisions, court rules, or administrative regulations
are cited, they are listed with statutes, and the heading is reworded to accommodate them. Under the
heading, the citations appear in the following order: federal constitutional provisions, state constitutional
provisions, federal statutes, state
287
statutes, court rules, federal administrative regulations, and state administrative regulations.
“Miscellaneous” is reserved for secondary authority, such as restatements, treatises, law review articles, and
other sources. They are usually listed there in that order.
The two Tables (sometimes called the “front matter”) are typically paginated together in lowercase roman
numerals. The rest of the brief (the “body”) is paginated separately in Arabic numbers, beginning with “1,”
on the first page after the Tables. This practice stems from a time before word processing when the body of
the brief was typed before the tables. Now most word processors will automatically generate the tables if you
set up the document correctly.
The Constitutional Provisions/Statutes/Regulations/Court Rules Involved is the easiest part of the
brief to draft. It is a place where the court can learn two things.
The first is a list of the enacted or adopted law (as opposed to precedent) that is central to the decision the
court is asked to make. Not every provision that will be cited in the brief needs to be included here. A
provision is central to the decision if the court cannot dispose of the appeal without interpreting its meaning.
A procedural rule that provides for the type of motion made below is not central to the decision unless the
parties disagree about the rule’s meaning and the court has been asked to resolve the disagreement.
The second thing the court can learn from this part of the brief is either the precise wording of those
relevant portions or — if the relevant portions are extensive — an indication that they are reproduced in an
appendix to the brief. If the material is complicated enough to warrant an appendix, the reference to it could
read something like this:
The following statutes and court rules are set out in the Appendix: Sections 362 and 363 of title I of the
Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978, as amended, 11 U.S.C. §§ 362, 363 (2000), together with Bankruptcy Rules 1002
and 1003.

On the other hand, if the provisions are short, this portion of the brief might be written in a manner
somewhat like the following:
The First Amendment to the United States Constitution provides, in pertinent part, as follows:
Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech or of the press; or the right of the people . . . to
petition the Government for a redress of grievances.

A reasonable editing of the relevant provisions aids the court. Be careful to indicate deletions, as you would
with any other quote. See Chapter 22 on quoting.
288

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

217

The Preliminary Statement (or Introduction) briefly sets out the appeal’s procedural posture by
identifying the parties, listing the relevant procedural events, and describing the order or judgment appealed
from. The Preliminary Statement might also describe the reasoning of the court below and identify the
grounds on which the decision below is challenged on appeal. The point is to tell the court why the matter is
before it and to specify the type of decision the court will have to make. That can usually be done in less
than a page.
Many lawyers use this part of the brief to introduce the court to their theory of the appeal as well as their
motivating arguments. See Chapter 24 and the examples in Appendices G and H.
A persuasive Question Presented (or Issue) is explained in Chapter 31.
The Statement of the Case is explained in Chapter 25.
A Summary of the Argument is what it sounds like: It condenses the argument into a few paragraphs —
usually one paragraph per issue. Often, lawyers will outline the summary by starting with the point headings
and then rephrasing and building on them to give the court a clear overview of your position and how you
will support it in the more detailed Argument section. Your theory of the appeal should be absolutely clear
from the summary. In drafting the summary, think to yourself: If I had only ten minutes to describe why I
should win this appeal, what would I say? What are the most essential parts of my argument? That’s what
goes in your summary.
The Argument (Chapter 26) provides the detailed legal analysis to support the conclusions you want the
court to draw. Much like the Discussion of Authority in a memo, the Argument should be divided into
sections resolving different aspects of the claim. Those sections should be indicated by point headings. Point
headings are explained in Chapter 30.
Although some lawyers use the Conclusion to reargue and resummarize the theory of the appeal, the
better practice is to limit the conclusion to a very short reiteration of the relief desired, together with an
unamplified identification of the ground on which the relief would be based. For example:
For all the foregoing reasons, the order of the Circuit Court for Albemarle County should be affirmed on the ground
that the complaint does not state a cause of action.

A judge should be able to find in the Conclusion exactly what you want the court to do. This is particularly
important where there are cross-appeals:
For the foregoing reasons, the District Court’s order should be affirmed insofar as it enjoins enforcement of
Glendale Ordinance 88162, and in all other respects the District Court’s order should be reversed.

289
The signature block is similar to the signature block in a motion memorandum (see Chapter 28).
Every court has rules governing the contents of briefs and other submitted documents. The rules are
designed to make briefs easier for judges to use, and judges understandably become exasperated when the
rules are ignored. Egregious violations of court rules can result in the court’s striking the brief, in financial
penalties imposed on the lawyer, and even in dismissal of the appeal.

§29.2 Writing the Appellate Brief
§29.2.1 Developing a Theory of the Appeal
You might want to review Chapter 24 (Developing a Persuasive Theory), but also think about these
additional considerations when crafting a theory of the appeal.
First, as noted in Chapter 30 (Point Headings and Subheadings), most appeals are based on a theory that

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

218

the court below erred. So, if you are the appellant, your theory must reflect the reasons the error is reversible.
If you want an affirmance, the theory should reflect the absence of reversible error.
Second, because appellate court decisions have greater precedential weight than trial court decisions,
appellate courts are likely to be more concerned about the policy implications of their opinions. This is
especially true in cases of first impression and those dealing with novel legal issues. Therefore, policy can
play a larger role in an appellate theory than it might at the trial court.
Finally, a persuasive appellate theory incorporates the limitations on appellate review described in §29.4.
An appellate court will reject a theory that would violate restrictions on the court’s own power to act.

§29.2.2 The Process of Writing a Brief
Before you begin to write, carefully review the record, do a significant amount of the research, and
develop the basic shape of your theory.
Reviewing the record is more than merely reading it: study the record to identify potential reversible error
by the trial court and to find every fact that could be used either to prove error or to defend what the trial
court did. Look for both kinds of facts — regardless of whom you represent. Favorable facts will be key to
your argument, but your theory must also show the appellate court why and how the facts that favor your
opponent should determine the outcome.
Just as a judge doesn’t read a brief from beginning to end, neither does a lawyer write it that way. The
Table of Contents and Table of Authorities are
290
done last, after the rest of the brief has already been written3 (otherwise, as you revise the brief you will
have to go back and change those parts.) The order in which the other parts are written differs from lawyer to
lawyer and from appeal to appeal because one lawyer’s work habits aren’t necessarily effective for someone
else and because an effective lawyer adapts to the individual task at hand. Moreover, the entire process is
recursive, meaning that you may start one section, realize something, and turn to another section, and then
loop back. Eventually, you’ll settle into a range of work habits that are effective for you, and your first brief
is an opportunity to begin to define yourself in that way.
Many lawyers prefer to draft from an outline. Once the point headings outline the “bones” of the
argument, the writer can fill in the “flesh” by taking notes or free-writing the material to be covered under
each heading, and then expanding that to the Argument itself. A lawyer who takes this approach might draft
the Statement of the Case after the Argument on the ground that it is easier to see what facts are most
important after the Argument is written. The Questions Presented would be written afterward because the
lawyer identifies the most determinative facts — the ones recited in the Questions — while working out the
Argument and the Statement.
Other writers like to begin by defining the issues. Starting with the Questions Presented gives focus and
direction as the writer develops the other sections. A lawyer who uses this model may write the Statement of
the Case next, using it to work out the details of the theory of the appeal, and tackle the Argument section at
the end, developing the headings to conform to the Questions Presented. Still others may start with the
Statement of the Case as a way of testing out the facts and figuring out which are most significant.
Start writing before you finish the research. You might feel like you can’t start writing until you finish
all the research, but writing after some initial research can help you figure out more specifically what kind of
cases you should be looking for. Open-ended research is inefficient. Research takes less time and effort if
you know what you’re looking for. Start writing as soon as you have enough research to know roughly what
your theory will be. You may want to make a case chart or matrix as illustrated in Chapter 9, §9.6.3. This
will show you the gaps in your authority. It will also help you start drafting the Argument. Because writing
and thinking are inseparable, the act of writing will show you where you need more authority. When you go
back into research, you’ll focus more sharply on what you really need.
Take a break periodically to put the brief out of your thoughts. Come back to it in a frame of mind
that enables you to put yourself in the judge’s position: If you were a skeptical judge, would you be
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

219

persuaded?
291
Start practicing oral argument while you’re writing the brief. It might seem illogical to spend time on
oral argument when you’re up against a closer deadline with the brief. But many lawyers discover that when
they begin to practice their argument, they discover new aspects of the case and see logical or research gaps
that they didn’t see before. Many people learn not just by reading and listening, but also by talking and
doing. The real reason for practicing oral argument early is to help you write a better brief.
Suppose you disregard this advice. You submit your final draft brief, rest for a few days, and then start
developing an oral argument. As you practice, you come up with some terrific wording, and you wish you
could put it in the brief — but it’s too late.
Set up a schedule with a series of deadlines. Start from the date on which the brief is due. Allow at least a
day or two for editing and proofreading at the end. Figure out how long it will take to turn a second or third
draft into a final draft and so on, working your way backward in time to deadlines where each draft must be
finished and, for the first draft, when each component must be done. Writing a brief is a big job, and writing
it in the time available requires self-discipline.
Think of brief-writing as a collection of small tasks, rather than as one huge task. A huge task can be
frightening. But a lot of small tasks can be organized and then done one by one. You haven’t been given one
big assignment. You’ve been given several smaller ones: a Question Presented, a Statement of Facts, and so
on. You can write all these things separately — as separate files, if you prefer — and then combine them into
a single document. Even the Argument can become two or more smaller jobs. If you have two points,
writing each of them is a separate task. But be careful to coordinate all these smaller tasks, so that the
eventual brief becomes coherent and internally consistent.

§29.3 Handling the Standard of Review and the Procedural Posture Below
To prevail, the appellant must demonstrate that the appropriate standard of review has been violated. The
standard of review will vary from one kind of appeal to another. Think about a referee or line judge who
reviews a videotape to see whether the other line judge made the right call on a sports play. That is akin to
what appeals courts do in most cases.
How much error does it take to cause reversal? That depends on the appellate court and the procedural
posture below. The appellate court matters because standards of review differ somewhat from one court to
another. The procedural posture matters because different standards are applied to different rulings by the
court below. Lawyers who don’t take the correct standard of review into account make the court’s job more
difficult.
292
Many trial court rulings — such as orders dismissing pleadings, summary judgments, directed verdicts,
jury instructions, and judgments notwithstanding the verdict — are evaluated on appeal “de novo.” De novo
review means the appellate court asks itself whether it would have done what the trial court did. It gives the
trial court no deference. The appellate court can do that because all of these rulings present pure questions of
law. They can be decided just as well on the written appellate record as by the trial court below, so the
judges can substitute their own judgment for that of the trial court.
Other types of decisions, including the trial court’s determination of witness credibility at a trial, for
example, will be reversed only if “clearly erroneous.”4 With “clearly erroneous,” the appellate court defers
significantly to the trial judge because the trial judge was there to see the witness testify, whereas the appeals
court has only the written record.
And on an issue where the lower court has discretion, the result below will be reversed only for an “abuse
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

220

of discretion,” which, again, represents a degree of deference to the trial court. A trial court has a wide range
of discretion on issues of equity and on issues concerning management of the progress of the litigation, such
as rulings on discovery motions and on the conduct of the trial.
Many law school appellate advocacy assignments involve de novo standards of review. If that’s true of
your assignment, you probably will not have much difficulty arguing within the standard properly. You do
not have to specifically identify what the trial court did wrong; you can argue directly about the outcome the
law requires.
The only way to find out which standard controls a given appellate issue is to research local law in the
same manner that you would research rules governing the procedural posture in a trial court. Look for
authority that tells you not only what the standard is, but also what it means and how it works. Where a court
mentions the standard of review in a decision, it usually does so immediately after reciting the facts and
immediately before beginning the legal analysis. This is an example of the type of language you’ll find:
A dismissal for failure to state a claim pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 12 is a ruling on a question of law and as such
is reviewed de novo. [Citation omitted.] Review is limited to the contents of the complaint.

Here we learn what the standard is (“de novo”), and we learn a little — but certainly not everything —
about how the standard operates. (“Review is limited to the contents of the complaint.”) The more complex
the standard of review, the more the court will have to say about it.
This diagram illustrates how standards of review work and how they are related to procedural tests in trial
courts. (Read the diagram from the bottom up.)
293

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

221

How do you handle the standard of review in a brief? Do three things:
First, set out the relevant standard of review at or near the beginning of the Argument section of the brief
(or, if you have more than one point, each point’s standard of review can be set out shortly after the point
heading).5
294
While doing so, identify the procedural posture below and invoke the procedural test that governs it. And
— if it can be done succinctly — tell the court how the standard was violated (if you are the appellant) or
how it was not (if you are the appellee). For example, from an appellant’s brief:

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

222

This is an appeal from a summary judgment, which is reviewed de novo in this court. [Citation omitted.]
Summary judgment should occur only where there is no genuine issue as to any material fact and the movant is
entitled to judgment as a matter of law. [Citation omitted.] In this case, the movant was not entitled to judgment as a
matter of law.

This passage tells us that the standard is de novo, and that the appellant’s theory of error is that the second
element of the test for summary judgment wasn’t satisfied. (The writer doesn’t say that there was a genuine
dispute as to a material fact; thus only one element of the summary judgment test is at issue.)
In an appellate brief, a good place to address the standard of review is between a point heading and the
first subheading. Cite to authority to prove the procedural rule that governed the trial court and the standard
of review on appeal. Unless the law is unclear, a conclusory proof is usually sufficient because these rules
are the type with which an appellate court would be routinely familiar. (Notice how this is handled in the
Appendix G and H briefs.)
Frame your legal arguments in terms of the standard of review, unless that standard is de novo. If, for
example, you’re appealing from a decision committed to a trial court’s discretion, show throughout rule
application (Chapter 11) that the trial court abused its discretion. If you are the appellee in such a case, show
the opposite. It’s not enough merely to state the standard of review at the beginning and then ignore it for the
rest of the Argument. Instead, use it and corollary rules wherever they are relevant, weaving the substantive
and procedural law together to show either error (if you seek reversal) or the absence of it (if you urge
affirmance).
A de novo standard need not be referred to throughout the Argument unless the very neutrality of the de
novo standard helps your case. Because the de novo standard grants no deference at all to the trial court,
arguments can be based entirely on the substantive law once the court has been told that a de novo standard
is in effect.
Throughout the brief (and in oral argument), describe the facts just as they were in the procedural posture
in the trial court. (That’s because the standard of review is geared to the procedural posture below.) If the
appeal is from the dismissal of a complaint, for example, describe the facts as allegations (“the complaint
alleges that the defendant struck the plaintiff”). Describe them as evidence (“Smith testified that the
defendant struck the plaintiff”) if the appeal is from a judgment resulting from a motion challenging the
quality of evidence. But if the facts are undisputed, describe the facts as truth (“it is undisputed that the
defendant struck the plaintiff”).
295
If you are unsure of how to do any of these things, take a look at several opinions in which the court for
which you are writing has used the same standard of review in appeals from the same procedural posture
involved in your case. Chances are that you’ll see them invoked near the beginning of the opinion and used
at logically appropriate spots thereafter. Look for a definition of the standard, try to learn its relationship to
other procedural rules, and get a feel for the court’s expectations about how the standard should be used.

§29.4 Limitations on Appellate Review
Appellate courts will reverse an order or judgment only if it’s based on reversible error. An appellate
court will affirm unless the appellant can point to a specific error by the trial court that the law considers
ground for reversal. In the absence of reversible error, an appellate court must affirm what the trial court did,
even if the result below seems unfortunate. That’s because an appeal is only a review for the kind of mistake
the law categorizes as error. Similarly, the appellate court must affirm even if it identifies an error, if that
error didn’t cause the order or judgment from which it was appealed. Even if the result below was
unfortunate, and even if the court below committed error, an appellate court will reverse only if the result
below is traceable to the error. Error that affected the result below is called material or prejudicial. Error
without such an effect is called harmless.
To identify error, and to figure out whether it was material or harmless, start with the procedural posture

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

223

in the trial court. For example, assume that the plaintiff has requested a particular jury instruction; that the
trial court denied the request and instead gave another instruction; that the jury returned a verdict for the
defendant; and that, on the basis of the verdict, the trial judge entered a judgment for the defendant. The
issue on appeal cannot be whether the plaintiff should have won below; rather, it is whether the trial court’s
instruction was so erroneous that the entire case should be tried again to a jury properly instructed. If the
instruction was error, but if the record shows that the error was not so material as to lead the jury astray, the
error was harmless and won’t be reversed. The error would be harmless, for example, if the evidence in
support of the verdict was so overwhelming that a properly instructed jury would have returned the same
verdict.
Appellate review is limited to issues that are actually raised on appeal. An appellate court doesn’t survey
the record below looking for error: in the adversary system, that’s the job of the appellant’s lawyer.
Appellate courts generally refuse to consider facts that don’t appear in the trial court’s record (also called
the record below). You can determine whether a fact is in the record by focusing on the procedural posture
in the trial court. If the order appealed from is one dismissing a complaint for failure to state a cause of
action, a fact is in the record if it’s alleged in the complaint. That’s because, for the purpose
296
of deciding a motion to dismiss a complaint, all facts properly pleaded are treated as though they could be
proved later at trial. (And, of course, on such a motion the only factual record before the trial court is the
complaint itself.)
But the situation is different where the motion in the trial court challenged a party’s evidence rather than
allegations. For example, assume that the appeal is from a summary judgment. If a fact appears as an
allegation in a pleading but doesn’t appear in any evidentiary form, it’s not ‘‘a fact in the record’’ because
the motion below tested evidence and not allegations.
There are two exceptions to the rule against considering facts outside the record. One involves the
doctrine of judicial notice, through which a court — trial or appellate — will, without evidence, accept as
proven certain facts that are beyond dispute. Do not make more of this than it really is. The following are
examples of the kinds of indisputable facts of which courts will take judicial notice: A meter equals 39.37
inches. Cleveland is in Cuyahoga County, Ohio. October 11, 2019, was a Friday.
The other exception is for what are called ‘‘legislative facts,’’ which are generalized social, economic, or
scientific information that guides a court in the development of law — as opposed to the ‘‘case facts’’ or
‘‘adjudicatory facts,’’ which are the specific events that transpired between the parties. Legislative facts can
include empirical data on the detrimental effects of racial segregation, or on the national deterioration of
groundwater quality, or on the ways consumers use smartphones — all useful in determining public policy.
Although the adversary system isn’t very efficient at collecting legislative facts, appellate courts need these
facts when making or changing law.
Although legislative facts can be placed in the trial record, a lawyer called in to handle an appeal
sometimes needs to put before the appellate court legislative facts not developed in the record below. The
appellate lawyer might include in the brief published empirical research that complements but does not
crowd out the legal analysis that is the core of argument. Empirical material added on appeal doesn’t need to
be set out in the Statement of the Case because it’s not part of the record below. Rather, it appears, with
citations, in the Argument, most often in support of policy contentions.
1. Some courts require additional material, such as a statement specifying how the court acquired jurisdiction over
the appeal in question.
2. In a criminal case, the accused is always the defendant — as in “Merritt Bresnahan, defendant.” The prosecution’s
trial court procedural designation is implicit and never expressed. It would seem silly to write “People of the State of
New York, Prosecution.” Phrases like “State v. Bresnahan,” “People v. Bresnahan,” “Commonwealth v. Bresnahan,” and
“United States v. Bresnahan” unambiguously communicate that Bresnahan is being prosecuted by whatever government
customarily uses the designation that precedes the “v.”
3. Some word-processing programs allow you to tag headings and citations and automatically generate the Tables.
4. See, e.g., Rule 52(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
5. This is required in federal appeals and in several states. For example, see Fed. R. App. P. 28(a)(9)(B) (The
appellant’s argument “must contain . . . for each issue a concise statement of the applicable standard of review (which

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

224

may appear in the discussion of the issue or under a separate heading placed before the discussion of the issues).”). Rule
28(b) permits the appellee to omit this statement “unless the appellee is dissatisfied with the statement of the appellant.”

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

225

297

30

Point Headings and Subheadings

§30.1 How Points and Headings Work
In a motion memo or appellate brief, the Argument sections are indicated by point headings. The point
headings use special formats such as capitalization and underlining to set off the major arguments or points
in your brief. To see what point headings look like, please quickly review the Table of Contents in the briefs
in Appendices G and H.
The point headings in a motion memo or brief are rhetorically important for several reasons. First, by
providing clear stopping points, they “chunk” information and provide the reader with a signal of what is
coming. Second, they provide visual cues about your organization through format emphasis (italics,
capitals). Usually format emphasis, such as capitals and italics, is discouraged in persuasive writing as the
last resort of a poor writer without the rhetorical skill to emphasize through vocabulary. But format emphasis
in point headings helps the reader see how a section fits into the Argument. Finally, the headings “prime” the
reader. Because the reader sees the argument in your heading before she reads the text that follows, she will
view the text that follows through the lens of the argument in that heading.
Because of their rhetorical importance, you can win or lose an argument based on your point headings.
Drafting point headings require that you think carefully about organization and language.
298

§30.2 The Basics
Headings have different levels. Point headings are indicated by roman numerals (I, II, III), and
subheadings by capital letters (A, B, C). You should check your local rules for how to format headings —
what kind of capitalization to use (all caps, title case) or other format (underline, italics). If your local rules
are silent, look at some winning briefs filed in that court and follow that format.
A point heading generally indicates an independent, complete, and free-standing ground for a ruling in
your favor. In other words, if the court accepts the premise in the point heading, you win. If it doesn’t, you
lose. See Chapter 26 on choosing which arguments to include in your brief.
You might have only one point heading, depending on the nature of the case. For example, in a tort case a
plaintiff will likely have only one point heading (alleging negligence) because she must prove all four
elements of the claim (duty, breach, causation, damages) to succeed. But the defendant in that same case
might have two, three, or four point headings depending on which elements the defendant is challenging.
The defendant can pick — for example, arguing all four elements, if there are good arguments to be made on
all of them, or arguing only on the elements where the plaintiff’s case is weak.
If a case has multiple causes of action, each claim should have a separate point heading, although this is

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

226

not a bright-line rule. Some cases present exceptions. For example, if a case is very complicated you can
have multiple major headings even if they are not all independent grounds for relief. Sometimes local rules
or practice conventions require a major heading for explaining the procedural standard (e.g., the grounds for
summary judgment, or motion to dismiss). You should discuss with your professor whether your case
presents such an exception.
Subheadings (A, B, C) underneath a point heading are arguments showing why the point heading is true.
If a subpoint is especially complicated, a further level of subdivision can be indicated with Arabic-numbered
headings (1 and 2, for example). In very simple form:
I. My Client wins because [independent ground for relief].
A. Reason/Argument A why point I is true.
B. Reason/Argument B why point I is true.
1. Reason/Argument 1 why B is true.
2. Reason/Argument 2 why B is true.

299
Here’s a good example:
I. Glitterati Casino’s Motion for Summary Judgment Should Be Denied Because the Policy Violates
Title VII’s Prohibition Against Sex Discrimination by Requiring Female, but Not Male, Employees to
Wear Makeup and Elaborately Styled Hair.
A. The Casino’s Policy Inflicts Demeaning Stereotypes on Women in Their Professional Roles in Violation
of Title VII.
1. The Casino’s Policy Sex Stereotypes Women Employees as Primarily Valuable for Their Looks, Not
Their Competence.
2. The Casino’s Policy Encourages Customers to Sexualize and Harass Female Employees.
B. The Casino’s Policy Violates Title VII Because It Is More Costly, Time-Consuming, and Restrictive for
Women Than for Men.

Between the “I” point heading and the “A” subheading, there should be an introduction that includes a
mini-roadmap setting up headings A and B. The reader should be able to see your theory of the case clearly
from this introduction. In the example above, the “A” subpoint is especially complicated and is subdivided
with the “1” and “2” headings. Between the “A” heading and the “1” heading should be a mini-roadmap
setting up headings “1” and “2.”
Here are a few more basic format pointers:
Headings in briefs generally are full sentences with periods at the end. They are not topical headings like
“Reasonableness” or “Negligence.” They are persuasive assertions.
If you make the decision to break a bigger point (a “I” or an “A” or “B”) into subheadings, that decision
signals to the reader that the argument has more than one part. Therefore, if you have an A, you must have a
B; if you have a 1, you must have a 2. (But for reasons discussed above, sometimes it is acceptable to have
only one point heading and thus acceptable to have a I without a II.).
Relatedly, if you decide to break a point heading into subheadings, you should insert an introductory
section in between to “set up” the headings below with a roadmap. See the example above. The introductory
section between a roman numeral and the first minor heading (I and A or II and A) traditionally explains the
law and pushes the theory of the case on that issue. Chapter 24 explains the concept of a theory of the case.
The point headings (I, II) should make clear the relief requested. In an appellate brief, point headings
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

227

should reflect the standard of review (see Chapter 29). In a motion memo, the requested relief should be
clear in all point headings (e.g., “Plaintiff Is Entitled to Summary Judgment Because . . .” or “Plaintiff’s
Motion for Summary Judgment Should Be Denied Because . . .”). This will help you make sure that your
major headings are stand-alone grounds for relief!
300
All headings are single spaced. In the Argument, they are indented and set apart spatially from the rest of
the argument. As noted above, check your local rules for any guidelines about format for headings. But keep
in mind that headings and subheadings should jump out to a reader who is skimming.
Be careful about the results of your word-processing software’s widow/orphan function. If you have only
an inch or two left at the bottom of a page in the Argument, don’t put a heading there; put it instead at the
top of the next page.

§30.3 The Process of Creating Point Headings: Brainstorming Arguments
Once you have your point headings and have decided on an initial organization, it is time to think about
what we call “the why.” Why should the court accept the propositions in your point headings? Let’s start
with our very rough point heading: “I. Glitterati Casino’s Policy Violates Title VII Because It Discriminates
on the Basis of Sex.” This is not an effective heading because it is so generic; except for the names of the
parties, it could be the point heading in any sex discrimination case. What makes your headings compelling
(and distinguishable from other cases in the same legal area) are your facts. Those facts tell your reader what
the case is about and provide an emotional and legal anchor for why you should prevail.
So, for your point heading, ask yourself, “What are my best facts that show that Glitterati Casino’s policy
discriminates?” These should be the facts that broadcast your theory of the case (see Chapter 24 about
persuasive theories). You don’t want to cram too many facts into the heading; instead, you want to choose
facts that give a general overview of your theory of the case.
All headings should address “the why.” Ask yourself: “what reasons can I give to convince the court to
accept my premise?” Again, brainstorm arguments. The reasons why your point heading I is true are the
subheadings under it. They can be the elements or factors that comprise the law behind the point heading.
For example, if your point heading asserts that the defendant was negligent, your subheadings might be
these: the defendant had a duty; the defendant breached that duty; the defendant’s breach proximately caused
the plaintiff’s injuries; and the plaintiff sustained damages. Or they might be different arguments about the
legal standard like subheadings A and B in the example earlier in this chapter. Or they might state a policy
argument or an argument about what the legal standard should be. One of the most challenging parts of brief
writing is deciding what arguments will be in the headings.
You may start out with many headings and subheadings. This is fine because it helps you organize your
thoughts. But be flexible about eliminating headings if need be. Not every argument needs to be a heading.
On the other hand, you’ll want to give your reader rest points in your text. Remember that headings help you
“chunk” information for the reader so that she gets the information in digestible amounts. A good rule is that
a heading should have at least two or three paragraphs of text beneath it. If it has less, perhaps consider
301
eliminating or combining headings. If it has much more than three or four paragraphs, consider breaking it
up with minor or subheadings.

§30.4 The Importance of Facts
All the headings, from the point headings down to the subheadings, should include facts from your case.
This is what gives your headings power. It is part of the “why.” The point headings, as discussed above,
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

228

should include a broad factual “because” statement that showcases your overall theory of the case.
The subheadings should also contain facts to show the reader why your subheadings are compelling. In
the headings, the facts should be legally relevant but also have a visceral, emotional appeal. The court will
often read the headings before reading any of the text, or even before reading any other part of the brief.
Don’t assume the court knows the facts or the law. That means the headings have to use the facts to give the
reader an intuitive feeling of rightness.
Look at the headings in the example earlier in this chapter. Also consider this example from a brief about
a Fourth Amendment search. You do not need to know the nuances of Fourth Amendment law to know this
sounds unreasonable:
A. By Executing the Search Warrant in The Middle of the Night for No Good Reason, the Police Acted
Unreasonably, Thereby Violating the Fourth Amendment

§30.5 How to Evaluate Your Headings for Effectiveness
To figure out whether you have drafted effective point headings and subheadings, ask yourself the
following questions.
Do your headings lay out a complete and persuasive outline of your Argument? Do they

30-A convey your theory? Even if a Table of Contents is not required in the document you are drafting,
you should create one so that you can look at your headings without the text beneath them. Doing this is an
essential part of the editing process. You may find gaps or inconsistencies. You may find repetition or other
areas that need redrafting.

Is each point heading an independent ground for a ruling in your favor? Ask yourself, “If the

30-B court accepts this premise, do I win the case? If the court does not accept it, do I lose the case?”

Do your headings persuade a judge who is unfamiliar with the facts and law in your case? Do

30-C your headings have an intuitive appeal to a reader without any knowledge of the case?
302

Is each point heading and subheading a single sentence that can be immediately understood?

30-D Conciseness in headings is the key to their persuasive strength. If you find yourself overstuffing your
headings, consider subheadings! For example, here is an overstuffed heading:
Because this state’s shield law provides no explicit
protection for the media against revealing
nonconfidential information or sources and because
the legislative history is silent, the scope of art. 9,
§ 765, is limited to protecting only confidential
information or sources, and this court should
therefore quash a subpoena that sought information
that the movant, a newspaper reporter, had obtained
through conversations in which he had not promised
to keep his informants’ identities in confidence.

Here is an example of better headings:
I. The deposition subpoena should be quashed because the evidence sought is not confidential and is
therefore not protected by this state’s media shield law.
A. Art. 9, § 765, permits a litigant to obtain information that the media has not treated as confidential.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

229

B. The appellant journalist concedes that he did not promise confidentiality to his sources.

30-E
30-F

Does each point heading identify the relief you want?
Do your headings combine law and fact to state your argument?
Are your headings forceful and argumentative? Your point headings and subheadings should

30-G state your contentions from your client’s point of view. Ideally, they should be something with
which the other side would disagree.

Does the text beneath the heading support the premise stated in the heading? Finally, check

30-H that what you have written beneath the heading supports the heading and that you haven’t let your
writing wander into other arguments or points irrelevant to the heading. If asked, you should be able to
articulate clearly how every sentence and paragraph beneath a heading supports the premise in that heading.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

230

303

31

Questions Presented

§31.1 Introduction
A Question Presented has several purposes. First, it defines the legal issue before the court. Second, it
clarifies the relief the court is being asked to grant. And third, within limits, it persuades by framing the issue
from your client’s point of view. In some courts, the Questions Presented section of a brief is called a
Statement of Issues. We say Question Presented in this chapter because it is the more commonly used term.
Statement of Issues appears in the briefs in Appendices G and H because that is the term used in the court in
which those briefs were filed. The two terms mean the same thing. A Question Presented is an appellate
Issue. You should use the term acceptable in the court where your brief will be filed.
A Question Presented is made up of (1) an explicit or implicit reference to the controlling rule of law, (2)
a precise legal question, and (3) a short list of the determinative facts that arguably affect the outcome:
Has the manufacturer of an acoustical keyboard breached the implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose
where the purchaser was injured when the keyboard exploded the first time it was plugged in?

Here the controlling rule is the implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose found in § 2-315 of the
Uniform Commercial Code. The legal question is whether a keyboard manufacturer is liable. The critical
fact is that the keyboard exploded the first time the purchaser plugged it in. All this adds up to the question
“presented” by the situation.
304
The Question Presented above is persuasive as well as informative. The reader feels immediately curious
about what happened as well as sympathy for the plaintiff. Why would a manufacturer not be liable in these
circumstances?
Under § 2-315, if the manufacturer had reason to know of any particular purpose for which purchasers like
the plaintiff buy its keyboards, and if the plaintiff relied on the manufacturer’s skill or judgment, a court will
hold that the manufacturer impliedly warrantied that the keyboard was fit for that purpose. What if the
plaintiff is a musician who performs in front of live audiences with dramatic fire and water stage effects?
What if the manufacturer had never heard of the plaintiff and had also never heard of anybody using one of
its keyboards that way? The manufacturer’s Question Presented might read something like this:
Should this Court refuse to find an implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose where the manufacturer did
not know that the plaintiff musician intended to expose the keyboard to water as part of his stage performances?

Notice how this Question Presented is different even though it’s in the same case. It contains the controlling
law and legal question but a different and arguably more determinative fact. Reading these Questions
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

231

together, it appears the case is likely to turn on what the manufacturer knew at the time of sale.

§31.2 Four Ways of Structuring a Question Presented
A Question Presented can be structured in four different ways. Each of them works better in some
situations than in others.
Beginning with the verb (or part of the verb): The following Questions Presented begin like the kind of
question you’re used to asking every day:
Has the manufacturer of an acoustical keyboard breached the implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose
where the purchaser was injured when the keyboard exploded the first time it was plugged in?
Should this Court refuse to imply a warranty of fitness for a particular purpose where the seller did not know that
the plaintiff musician intended to expose the keyboard to water as part of his stage performances?

The question can begin with whatever verb is most appropriate to the issue:
Does the First Amendment allow . . . ?
Did the defendant newspaper give publicity to private facts . . . ?

305
Beginning with “Under”: These Questions refer to the controlling rule before asking how it applies to the
determinative facts:
Under § 403 of the Traffic Code, is a driver guilty of failure to stop at a stop sign where the stop sign was hidden
behind tree branches that the county highway department had failed to prune?

This structure works especially well with statutory issues. But it doesn’t work well when the controlling
rule of law is more widely known by its name (“the implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose”)
than by its statutory section number (“§ 2-315”). Compare these:
Under § 2-315 of the Maryland Uniform Commercial Code, is the manufacturer of an acoustical keyboard liable to
a purchaser who was injured when the keyboard exploded the first time it was plugged in?
Has the manufacturer of an acoustical keyboard breached the implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose
where the purchaser was injured when the keyboard exploded the first time it was plugged in?

Many judges know about the implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose. But few of them can
remember its section number.
Beginning with “Whether”: A Question Presented can begin with the word Whether, even though the
result isn’t a grammatically complete sentence:
Whether the manufacturer of an acoustical keyboard breached the implied warranty of fitness for a particular
purpose where the purchaser was injured when the keyboard exploded the first time it was plugged in?

This structure is used by many lawyers — and in some states by most lawyers. But it’s often criticized. If the
same word begins most of the Questions a judge reads, few of those Questions will seem memorable.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

232

Whether-type Questions, however, are widely used, and you should structure your Questions this way if
preferred by your teacher or supervisor.
Reciting the determinative facts in complete sentences and then stating the issue, as a question, in a
separate sentence: In some cases, the determinative facts are so complex that they can’t be reduced to a
short list. That tends to happen where a set of determinative facts raises several independent issues, or where
the facts themselves are difficult to describe concisely. In such cases, lawyers sometimes use a different
format, expressing the determinative facts in complete sentences and then posing the issue in a final
sentence. Think of this as the multiple sentences format. For example:
306
This case involves the diversion of water from the Three Pines Wilderness Area. Plaintiff American
Environmental Association was formed for the purpose of preserving wilderness areas like Three Pines. Some of its
members who live nearby use Three Pines for weekend recreation while others visit it on annual camping trips. Like
other visitors, they depend on a plentiful supply of water within the wilderness area. The issue on this appeal is
whether the Association has standing to sue to enjoin the existing and threatened diversions.1

For comparison, here’s the same issue expressed in a single sentence, using the beginning-with-the-verb
format:
Does the American Environmental Association have standing to sue to enjoin existing and threatened diversions
of water from the Three Pines Wilderness Area where the Association was formed for the purpose of preserving
wilderness areas like Three Pines; some of its members who live nearby use Three Pines for weekend recreation
while others visit it on annual camping trips; and, like other visitors, they depend on a plentiful supply of water
within the wilderness area.

Which did you find easier to read?
Normally you should use one of the other formats. Use this one — the multiple-sentences format — only
when the other formats produce a sentence so complicated that a reader has to read it two or three times to
understand it.

§31.3 Writing an Effective Question Presented
First, write out the basic legal issue (“Is a manufacturer liable?” “Did police violate the Fourth
Amendment?” “Does Ohio recognize a cause of action for . . .?” “Under § 403 of the Traffic Code, . . .?”).
Second, make a list of the most determinative facts, omitting those that are merely explanatory or
coincidental (see Chapter 10, §10.2). While writing and rewriting your motion memo or brief, you’ll tinker
with this list by adding or subtracting facts as you come to understand the issue better, and you’ll gradually
refine the list’s wording as you learn the possibilities and limitations of each fact. But you can’t begin to
write a Question Presented without a list of determinative facts.
Third, choose a structure. Be prepared to change it later if it doesn’t work out. Fill out the structure by
combining the most determinative facts with the legal issue to form a single sentence.
Finally, review your Question Presented for effectiveness, using the criteria in the next section of this
chapter. You might need to do this several times.
307
Given its complexity and conciseness, the Question Presented is often the last part of a document to reach
its final form.

§31.4 How to Evaluate Your Questions Presented for Persuasiveness
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

233

To figure out whether you’ve written an effective Question Presented, ask yourself the following
questions.
Have you kept the Question concise? Trim the Question so that it contains as concise a summary

31-A of the law, the legal issue, and the determinative facts as possible. Your reader should be able to
digest it quickly on the first read.

Have you referred to or implied the controlling law and legal issue? The controlling law can be

31-B explicit or implicit, and the specificity required varies. For example, in a case involving the Fourth

Amendment alone, it might be adequate to say, “Did the officers have reasonable, articulable suspicion to
stop the suspect when . . . ?” But if the case involves a number of unrelated issues it might be necessary to
say, “Did the officers have reasonable, articulable suspicion under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution to stop the suspect when . . . ?”
Have you listed the facts in a way the reader can easily understand? Facts that don’t fit into the

31-C inquiry can be attached at the end of the Question in clauses that begin with “where” or “when.”
This example is from a different kind of acoustical keyboard case:
Is the manufacturer of an acoustical keyboard absolved of liability under an implied warranty of fitness for a
particular purpose where an ordinary consumer bought it in pieces from a street vendor and attempted to reassemble
it himself even though the words “Do Not Open or Attempt to Repair This Product” were engraved on the outside?

The legal issue — the inquiry — is best placed near the beginning of a Question Presented because a list
of determinative facts makes little sense until the reader knows the issue to which the facts relate. The
following, for example, are not easy to understand:
Facts before inquiry:

Where an ordinary consumer bought an acoustical keyboard in pieces from a
street vendor and attempted to reassemble it himself even though the words
“Do Not Open or Attempt to Repair This

308

Facts and
intermingled:

inquiry

Product” were engraved on the outside, is the manufacturer absolved of
liability under an implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose?
Is the manufacturer of an acoustical keyboard, which was bought from a
street vendor by an ordinary consumer who attempted to reassemble it
himself even though the words “Do Not Open or Attempt to Repair This
Product” were engraved on the outside, absolved of liability under an
implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose?

Have you stated the Question from your point of view suggesting a positive answer? Stating the

31-D Question from your point of view means stating it in a way that favors your client in both a legal

sense and an emotional sense. For example, a state prosecutor would want to admit incriminating evidence
and convict the defendant, but the defendant would want to exclude illegally obtained evidence and be
acquitted. Stating the question so that it elicits a “yes” answer helps you state it from your point of view and
is less confusing to the reader.
At the beginning of this chapter, the two exploding keyboard Questions are completely different. But both
ask a question to be answered in the affirmative:
Has the manufacturer of an acoustical keyboard breached . . . ?
Should this Court refuse to find . . . ?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

234

Because judges are inclined to think you want a positive response to your Question, avoid drafting Questions
where the answer you want is “no.” That will only confuse your reader.
Avoid using double negatives:
Was the officer’s conduct not unreasonable when . . . ?
Is a manufacturer not liable where it does not . . . ?

Double negatives are almost always confusing. They’re very common in first drafts as you work with
typical legal phrasing but can easily be removed to improve clarity and readability:
Was the officer’s conduct reasonable when . . . ?
Is a manufacturer absolved of liability where it . . . ?

Have you avoided begging the question? Don’t ask a question in which the “facts” are really

31-E assumed conclusions of law. For example, under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution,
evidence is
309

admissible in a criminal trial if the police seized it while stopping a defendant based on reasonable and
articulable suspicion. The case law defines reasonable and articulable suspicion as reason to know the
defendant was about to engage in criminal activity. This Question Presented begs the question:
Did the officer have reasonable and articulable suspicion to stop the defendant when the officer had reason to
believe the defendant was about to engage in criminal activity?

The answer to this Question must be yes, but that’s because a reason to believe the defendant was about to
engage in criminal activity is always reasonable and articulable suspicion. Thus, “the officer had reason to
believe the defendant was about to engage in criminal activity” is a conclusion of law masquerading as a
fact.
Remove the conclusion of law and replace it with real facts that suggest the reasonableness of the officer’s
suspicion. Let the facts speak for themselves:
Did the officer have reasonable and articulable suspicion to stop the defendant when the defendant paced in front of
a closed liquor store for 20 minutes, kept checking his cell phone, and kept one hand in his coat pocket at all times?

Have you presented the law in a balanced way? When phrasing the legal question, you can state it

31-F from your point of view, but you can’t distort the law. For example, several factors are used to

determine whether a defendant was in custody when he was interrogated. The following Question doesn’t
present the issue before the court in a balanced way:
Did the trial court err in excluding the defendant’s confession on the ground that he was in custody when the
defendant was repeatedly told he was free to leave the interrogation?

The writer has included the one fact most favorable to the prosecution in a way that suggests the only factor
relevant to the custody determination is what the police told the defendant. But that’s a distortion of the law.
The Question below accurately conveys the complexity of the issue before the court:
Did the trial court err in excluding the defendant’s confession on the ground that he was in custody when the
defendant was questioned for 30 minutes in a police interview room by a uniformed, unarmed officer but repeatedly
told he was free to leave the interrogation?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

235

Although some of these facts are unfavorable from the prosecutor’s perspective, this is a more honest
representation of the Question Presented. It also gives the prosecutor a chance to characterize the
unfavorable facts and work them into the theory of the case.
310
Have you included all determinative facts without exaggerating them? Include all facts likely to

31-G be determinative, both favorable and unfavorable. Don’t exaggerate or stretch the facts to your
benefit. Does the following Question sound like an exaggeration of the facts?
Is it in the best interest of a child to terminate her mother’s parental rights when the mother barely knows her own
daughter?

It may sound fair, but once you learn that the mother is in a rehabilitation hospital following a severe car
accident and has been unable to communicate with her daughter for three months, it no longer seems
accurate to say she “barely knows her.”
Do you sound strident or overly dramatic, risking your credibility? Lawyers should be zealous

31-H advocates. But don’t sound strident, use belligerent language, or write sarcastically. Any of these
will work against you. In the case of the exploding keyboard and the performing musician:
How could a manufacturer of an acoustical keyboard possibly be liable for such minimal injury to the plaintiff
“musician,” who can hardly expect to have been known to the manufacturer, where the manufacturer clearly had no
idea that the plaintiff would expose the keyboard to water?

If the case were that one-sided, the plaintiff’s lawyer would have settled it long ago. Adverbs like “possibly,”
“hardly,” and “clearly” don’t increase the persuasiveness of the Question. They tend to have the opposite
effect. Describing the plaintiff’s injury as “minimal” sounds disrespectful, and there’s no need for the
defendant to characterize the harm. Finally, using quotation marks to suggest the plaintiff isn’t much of a
musician is unprofessional. A simpler, less emotionally charged Question is far more effective.
Have you referred to the parties in a clear way? The least confusing references are generic (“a

31-I malpractice insurer,” “a prisoner,” “an employee,” “a manufacturer,” etc.).

Procedural designations such as “Appellant” and “Appellee” are often confusing (and several courts have
rules that prohibit using them). The same is true of “plaintiff” and “defendant” unless the issue is really
procedural or the Question itself makes clear what kind of plaintiff and what kind of defendant are involved.
Although most uses of “plaintiff” and “defendant” are confusing, this isn’t:
311
Has a defendant been properly served when the summons was handed to him in a plain manila envelope?

A lawsuit begins when a defendant is served with a summons. This is a procedural issue, which you’ve
probably studied in the course on Civil Procedure. What matters is the defendant’s role as a defendant.
In a criminal case it’s never confusing to refer to one party as the “defendant.” The other party is always
the prosecution, although different terms are used in different jurisdictions: “the State,” “the People,” or (in
federal courts) “the government.” A Question Presented might use one of those terms. Or if the issue is
whether a prosecutor personally behaved properly, it might refer to the prosecutor: “the U.S. Attorney,” for
example.
Although a busy judge can be confused when the parties are referred to by name only, it may be tactically

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

236

wise to try to personalize a party beset by some institutional opponent, if the context will make clear who is
who.
Exercise
G.G. v. Gloucester County School Board
Appendices G and H contain briefs in G.G. v. Gloucester County School Board, filed in the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. Before doing this exercise, go to those appendices and read each brief’s
Statement of the Case.
The defendant School Board lost in the Fourth Circuit and filed a petition for certiorari in the U.S.
Supreme Court. A petition for certiorari essentially asks for permission to appeal to the Supreme Court.
About 7,000 to 8,000 certiorari petitions are filed each year, but the Court grants only about 80 of them.2
In this exercise are the Statements of Issues or Questions Presented from
1. the plaintiff G.G.’s Fourth Circuit brief (Appendix G),
2. the defendant School Board’s Fourth Circuit brief (Appendix H),
3. the School Board’s certiorari petition in the Supreme Court, and
4. G.G.’s brief in opposition to the certiorari petition in the Supreme Court.
(On this book’s website are the full certiorari petition and the brief in opposition as well as other court filings
and opinions in the case.)
The Fourth Circuit briefs use the term Statement of Issues. The Supreme Court submissions use the term
Questions Presented. The two terms mean the same thing. Use the term required by or customary in the
court where you will file your brief.
312
Evaluate the following Statements of Issues and the Questions Presented. For each one, what are its
strengths and weaknesses?
1. Plaintiff G.G.’s Fourth Circuit brief (Appendix G) —
STATEMENT OF ISSUES
1. Should G. be granted a preliminary injunction to allow him to resume using the boys’
restrooms during the pendency of the case?
2. Should the court’s dismissal of the Title IX claim be reversed?
2. Defendant School Board’s Fourth Circuit brief (Appendix H) —
STATEMENT OF ISSUES
1. Whether the Fourteenth Amendment or Title IX requires the School Board to permit G.G.,
who was born and remains anatomically a female, to use the boys’ restroom because G.G.
identifies as a boy.
2. Should this Court affirm the District Court’s denial of G.G.’s Motion for Preliminary
Injunction?
3. The School Board’s certiorari petition in the Supreme Court —
(The Supreme Court appeal focused on a deference issue under Auer v. Robbins, 519 U.S. 452 (1997),
which isn’t included in the excerpts in Appendices G and H.)
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

237

QUESTIONS PRESENTED
Title IX prohibits discrimination “on the basis of sex,” 20 U.S.C. § 1681(a), while its implementing
regulation permits “separate toilet, locker rooms, and shower facilities on the basis of sex,” if the
facilities are “comparable” for students of both sexes, 34 C.F.R. § 106.33. In this case, a Department of
Education official opined in an unpublished letter that Title IX’s prohibition of “sex” discrimination
“include[s] gender identity,” and that a funding recipient providing sex-separated facilities under the
regulation “must generally treat transgender students consistent with their gender identity.” App. 128a,
100a. The Fourth Circuit afforded this letter “controlling” deference under the doctrine of Auer v.
Robbins, 519 U.S. 452 (1997). On remand the district court entered a preliminary injunction requiring
the petitioner school board to allow respondent — who was born a girl but identifies as a boy — to use
the boys’ restrooms at school.
The questions presented are:
1. Should this Court retain the Auer doctrine despite the objections of multiple Justices who
have recently urged that it be reconsidered and overruled?
313
2. If Auer is retained, should deference extend to an unpublished agency letter that, among other
things, does not carry the force of law and was adopted in the context of the very dispute in
which deference is sought?
3. With or without deference to the agency, should the Department’s specific interpretation of
Title IX and 34 C.F.R. § 106.33 be given effect?
4. G.G.’s brief in opposition to the certiorari petition in the Supreme Court —
QUESTIONS PRESENTED
1. Whether, in the absence of any “special justification,” this Court should depart from stare
decisis and overturn long-standing principles of administrative law embodied in Auer v.
Robbins, 519 U.S. 452 (1997), and similar precedent dating back to 1945?
2. Whether Auer deference applies to an agency’s interpretation of its own regulation when (a)
that interpretation is articulated in an opinion letter, a statement of interest and an amicus
brief, and (b) the interpretation is not a post hoc justification to defend an agency decision
under attack?
3. Whether a school board policy that categorically prohibits transgender students from using
restrooms consistent with their gender identity, effectively excluding them from using the
common restrooms used by other students, violates Title IX and its implementing
regulations?
1. Girvan Peck, Writing Persuasive Briefs 102–03 (1984).
2. These statistics are from the Supreme Court’s website: https://www.supremecourt.gov/faq.aspx#faqgi9.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

238

315

VIII
INTO THE COURTROOM

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:20 AM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

239

317

Copyright 2021. Aspen Publishing.
All rights reserved. May not be reproduced in any form without permission from the publisher, except fair uses permitted under U.S. or applicable copyright law.

32

Oral Argument

§32.1 Your Three Goals at Oral Argument
Whether you are arguing a motion to the trial court, or an appeal to an appellate panel, your goals will be
the same. First, you want the judges to remember your argument by getting them interested in your case and
motivated to rule in your favor. They’ll hear many other arguments on the same day, and they’ll read many
other briefs in the week they read yours. They’ll forget your theory of the appeal unless your argument
stands out.
Second, you want to focus the judges’ attention on the key aspects of your case that are most
determinative: the one or two issues that are fundamental, the facts that are most prominent in your theory,
the rule or rules for which a decision in your favor would become precedent, and the policy considerations
that most compel the result for which you argue. Judges expect oral argument to help them find the heart of
the dispute. That’s because oral argument works best when it concentrates on the few large ideas that are
most relevant, while details are best left to the briefs.
Third, you want to discover the judges’ concerns about your case so you can satisfy doubt and clear up
confusion. And you want to learn which issues the judges think are most important: if those are profitable
issues for you, you can concentrate on them, and if they’re the wrong issues, you can try to persuade the
court of that. When the judges interrupt, they usually aren’t trying to debate with you; they’re telling you
what troubles them and asking you to help them make the decision. You should welcome questions as an
opportunity to understand what is concerning the judges and address it.
318

§32.2 Structure of an Oral Argument
Motion arguments at the trial court take many different forms. They can be casual and take place inside a
judge’s chambers, or more formal and take place at counsel table or a podium in a courtroom. Appellate
arguments are formal, often with strict time limits for the parties. Local court rules often specify the format
for arguments. When the case begins, the moving party (motion)/ appellant (appeal) presents their case first,
followed by a response from the opposing party. In some cases, the moving party/appellant can argue again
in rebuttal.
Advocates typically begin with an opening statement that reminds the court of the nature of the case and
pushes their theory with a combination of facts and law. This is a reasonably effective opening:
Good morning, Your Honors. I’m Allison Korngold,
representing Andrea Pafko, the appellant here and the defendant

An alternate start — preferred in some
courts — would be “May it please the
court. I am . . . .” Notice how the lawyer

EBSCO Publishing : eBook Collection (EBSCOhost) - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN
AN: 2750409 ; Richard K. Neumann Jr, Ellie Margolis, Kathryn M. Stanchi.; Legal Reasoning and Legal Writing
Account: s2953473.main.ehost

240

below. We are appealing Ms. Pafko’s conviction for receiving
stolen property on the grounds that the State did not prove that Ms.
Pafko knew the property was stolen, an essential element of the
crime.
At trial, the only evidence the State produced was that Ms.
Pafko picked up a satchel that had been left in a street and that she
opened it, found $7,150, and took it home.

gets to the heart of the case — and her
theory — immediately. You don’t have
time to beat around the bush.

After the State rested, Ms. Pafko’s trial lawyer moved for a
directed verdict of acquittal on the ground that the State had
produced no evidence of a key element of the crime: that, at the
moment Ms. Pafko obtained the property, she knew that it had
been stolen or knew of circumstances that would lead a reasonable
person to believe that it must have been stolen.
Despite the State’s lack of evidence, the trial judge denied the
motion, and Ms. Pafko was convicted.

This part of the opening reiterates the
grounds for relief in more detail and
incorporates the legal rule at the heart of
the error asserted.

The lawyer begins by describing the
most critical aspects of the client’s story.
The story should be told concisely and
quickly. You do not have a lot of time.
If the judges have read the briefs
thoroughly and know the story, they
might cut her off and start asking
questions.

This is the error that is the basis for the
appeal.

319
Finding $7,150 in a satchel would not alone compel a reasonable person to believe
that the money had been stolen. It was in the street leaning against the curb, where
someone getting into a car could have dropped it. There was no evidence that Ms. Pafko
had any reason to believe that that person wasn’t the money’s owner.

Now the lawyer
begins explaining
the law and how
it
justifies
reversal.

The case law . . . .
Your organization should vary based on the nature of the issues. For example, your opening might
emphasize the procedural history or forego the facts and start with the legal issues. It really depends on what
is critical to your theory. The most important thing is to get your theory out there early. But remember that
the facts are often compelling, and they are an effective way to orient the court to the legal issues, especially
when woven together with your theory.
If you represent the opposing party, your opening should be designed to show the court vividly how your
theory differs from the appellant’s:
If the court please, I’m Allan Kuusinen, for the State.
The evidence shows that the defendant found an amount of money so large that the person who lost it would have
returned as fast as possible to retrieve it from the place where it was lost — unless that person was afraid to return.
The true owner would have nothing to fear. But a person who stole the money might. Without speculating, a jury
could have reasoned this way, which justified the trial court’s denial of the defendant’s motion for a directed
verdict.

When you are opposing the motion or appeal, you must balance making affirmative arguments against
responding to the arguments and questions you just heard. You should know your opponent’s argument from
the brief and plan what you want to say, but be ready to respond to issues that arise during the argument. If
the judges seem preoccupied with an issue you didn’t intend to focus on, you might want to shift and give
that issue more emphasis.
Unless the bench is “cold,”1 the judges’ questions and your answers will likely quickly fill up your
allotted time. Your time is finished when the chief or presiding judge, in a firm tone, says, “Thank you.”

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

241

When your time has expired, conclude with a brief sentence in which you specify the relief you seek
(“Therefore, the judgment below should be affirmed because . . .”). If you’re in the midst of answering a
question when your time runs out, ask for permission to finish the answer and, if permitted, finish quickly
and concisely.
320
If, on the other hand, the judges continue to ask you questions after your time expires, answer them fully.
The court has impliedly enlarged your time. If you complete your argument before your time is up, pause to
see whether you’ll be asked further questions, and, if not, conclude and sit down. Whatever the situation, you
can signal your intent to finish by using an introductory phrase such as “In conclusion, . . .”
If you are given the opportunity for rebuttal,2 you can use that time, after your opponent’s argument, to
reply to points your opponent made in her argument that you think particularly damaged your position or to
correct inaccurate or misleading statements. A court considers its time wasted if you use rebuttal to reiterate
arguments already made or to raise new arguments for the first time. You can usually make only one or two
quick points on rebuttal. You can appear petty if you try to rebut every minor point your opponent made and
you probably don’t have time anyway. If it turns out that there’s no need for rebuttal, you can make a
confident impression by waiving it. A rebuttal ends with a sentence reminding the court of the relief sought.

§32.3 Questions from the Bench
You should welcome questions as an opportunity to engage with the judges and advance your arguments.
You should try to figure out why the judge is asking the question and how to best answer it while moving
your argument forward. Some questions are neutral requests for information about the record, the law, or the
procedural posture. Some questions test your position, asking you how you would overcome an adverse
policy or equity argument or a contrary interpretation of authority or the record. Sometimes a judge wants
you to address a concern, and sometimes a judge asks you to elaborate on a point the judge believes to be
particularly persuasive. Some questions are neutral, aimed at getting you to move to a new point in your
argument. Some questions raise concerns the judge has after reading your brief, while others grow out of the
spontaneity of the moment.
When you hear a question, listen to it carefully, and don’t be afraid to pause for a moment to think before
answering. Never interrupt a question. Try to figure out the question’s purpose and exactly what’s troubling
the judge. Then craft your answer to satisfy the skepticism or curiosity implied by the question. Start your
answer by stating your position on the question (“No, your honor, the Smith case doesn’t undermine my
point.”) and then give your reasoning succinctly. Try not to ramble; just make your best points and wrap up.
As you’ve seen in so many ways, the law-trained mind most easily understands discourse that lays out a
conclusion before proving it. If you get wrapped up in a lot of preliminary material before you state a
conclusion, the conclusion can be obscured or even lost.
321
Don’t leap to big assumptions about a judge’s predispositions from the questions the judge asks. A neutral
judge might ask challenging questions just to see whether your theory will hold up. A friendly judge might
ask challenging questions to cause you to argue matters that the judge believes might persuade others on the
bench. And an adverse judge might ask friendly or neutral questions out of politeness and a sense of fairness.
Always answer the question directly and immediately. Never defer a judge’s question (“I’ll get to that
later.”). It is disrespectful and you may never get there because of other questions. And the answer will be
most persuasive immediately after the question is asked. If a judge asks you to discuss an entire issue earlier
than you had planned, do it and rearrange the order of your presentation to accommodate the judge’s needs.
Later, when you reach the spot where you had intended to discuss the issue, skip what you’ve already
covered.
Answer the question you are asked, not one you wish had been asked. A judge will be frustrated if you try
to dodge the question. Every case has weaknesses and you should be prepared to address them. If your side
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

242

of the case didn’t have them, your adversary would have given up long ago. Where a judge has truly
identified a point of weakness, face it and give a realistic counter-argument. Here are three examples:
I agree, Your Honor, that in that hypothetical the police would have had probable cause, but the facts of the
hypothetical differ in significant ways from this case. . . .
Yes, Soares did hold that, but later rulings of this court have impliedly undermined Soares . . . .
Certainly, the record does reflect two isolated events that might be construed as evidence of good faith by the
defendant, but the record also includes many, many events, stretching over several years, that show exactly the
opposite. . . .

Hedging and lack of candor harm your credibility. If you can project an aura of honesty and forthrightness,
your arguments will be all the more persuasive.
During the answer, build a bridge to the rest of your argument. If the question causes you to make part of
your planned argument out of order, you can return to your argument at a point that’s logically related to the
answer. If the answer covers material that you hadn’t planned to speak about, use the answer to lead back to
your planned argument. If you do this smoothly, it may be hard for a listener to tell when the answer has
ended and you’ve returned to your planned presentation. Practice moving from one point to another in a
variety of orders. Make a list of transition phrases and points (e.g., “Your Honor, that leads me to my second
point, which is . . .” or “The fact you bring up, your Honor, is also central to my second point, which is . . .”)
Your theory of the case can serve as a bridge to help you link your arguments together.
322
You’ll be better able to manage questions if you develop what one judge calls “controlled flexibility”: “a
relaxed resilience allowing one to respond to a judge’s question, coupled with an internal gyro compass
enabling one to return gracefully to a charted course.”3 How do you develop this? Practice, practice,
practice. Make up a list of flash cards with the most likely hard questions on them. Ask a friend to shuffle
them and ask the questions in random order. The more you speak about the case, the easier it will be to do so
flexibly.
If you are asked a question to which you don’t know the answer, the best thing to say is exactly that.
Judges are skilled interrogators, and you’ll quickly be found out if you try to fake your way through an
answer. If you once knew the answer, you might feel a little better saying something like “I’m sorry, Your
Honor, but I don’t recall.” Judges know that you’re human, and, unless the point you don’t know is a big
one, you gain credibility by admitting that you cannot answer.
If you think you understand the question but aren’t certain, say that in your answer so the judge can help
you out in case you have missed the gist of the question:
If your Honor is asking about the possibility that the issue hasn’t been preserved for review — and please correct
me if I’ve misunderstood — trial counsel made a timely objection and moved for . . .

If you plainly don’t understand the question, ask for clarification:
I’m sorry, Your Honor; are you asking about whether the order appealed from is final?

This is one of the very few kinds of questions that you might ask during an oral argument.

§32.4 Delivery, Affect, and Style

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

243

There is no one right style for oral argument. You will need to find what works for you based on your
personality, the nature of the case, and the formality of the court before which you are appearing. You
should always treat the court with respect, but remember that although judges may be expert in procedure,
they may not know the substantive law as well as you do, and they certainly don’t know your client’s
situation and your theory of the case as well as you do. Your job is to educate and persuade respectfully.
The best oral arguments are conversations in which you take the initiative — talking with the judges, not
at them. It is a somewhat unusual
323
conversation, constrained by the formal argument structure and focus on the decision the judges must
make, but it’s a conversation nonetheless. If you do the following, you can create for yourself a persuasive
presence that helps you to reach and engage the bench:
Look straight at the judges — preferably making eye contact — throughout the argument. Use notes only
to remind yourself of the next subject for discussion, and even then get your eyes off your notes and back to
the bench as quickly as possible. Whenever you look away from the judges, their attention can wander,
partly tuning you out. And judges become annoyed with lawyers who read their arguments to the court.4
Don’t distract the court with restless or anxious movement. Don’t play with a pen, shuffle your papers
around frequently, put your hands in your pockets, or sway forward and back. Limit your gestures to those
that naturally punctuate your argument. A visually busy lawyer radiates nervousness, rather than the
confidence needed to establish psychological leadership. It is natural to feel nervous, but try not to let nerves
get in your way. Many lawyers find that the nerves fade once a judge asks a question and the conversation
begins. The more arguments you do, the less nervous you will feel. Even the most experienced advocates can
feel nervous before a big argument, but they learn how to keep those nerves from showing.
Speak loudly enough that the judges don’t have to strain to hear you. If you’re soft-spoken by nature,
breathe in deeply before you begin and make an effort to project your voice. If you already have a powerful
voice, don’t get carried away. Nobody likes to listen to shouting.
Use the tone and volume of your voice to emphasize the more important things you say. It is difficult to
stay focused on someone speaking in a monotone. Vary your pace and volume to emphasize or deemphasize
your points. Pause before or after your most important remarks. Watch a tendency to speak quickly,
especially if you are nervous. Don’t be afraid to pause and compose your thoughts. The judges won’t mind a
second or two of “dead air” while you do so.
Communicate tenacity and what one judge has called “disciplined earnestness”: “a communicated sense
of conviction that pushes a case to the limits of its strength but not beyond. One somehow brings together
one’s words and body language, facial expression and eye contact, to radiate a sense of conviction without
making every point a life-and-death issue.”5
Unless asked, avoid extensive detail in discussing authority. Because oral argument works best when
focused on the big ideas in the appeal, you’re better off concentrating instead on rules of law, policy
arguments, and broad descriptions of authority. Citations and the minutiae of authority are very hard to
324
follow when delivered orally. That’s what your brief is for. If your case is built on a synthesis of authority,
describe it generally (“the majority of jurisdictions,” “the recent trend of cases in other states,” “seven of the
federal circuits,” “this court has previously held”). If one key case deserves attention, refer to it by name and
provide the important details. The name and sometimes the year of a case are enough — you don’t need to
provide the full citation. And if you must quote — as you might with a crucial statute or holding — limit
yourself to the essential words that the court must interpret.
Know your record thoroughly, use it to its full advantage, and don’t discuss “facts” outside the record.
Concentrate on the few facts that are most determinative, and mention along the way one or two facts that
most bring the story to life. Some facts don’t logically have legal significance, but they help the judges “see”
the story and put the case into a realistic perspective.

§32.5 Formalities and Customs of the Courtroom
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

244

Dress in court-appropriate attire. Generally, that means a suit or business clothes, though it may vary
depending on court and jurisdiction.
An oral argument is not a jury trial. Stay in one place rather than moving around.
Don’t directly address your opposing counsel. In court, lawyers speak only to the bench and — when the
bench gives permission — to witnesses and juries. Because there are no witnesses or juries in oral
arguments, you’ll speak only to the judges.
Although the level of formality varies in different courts, avoid speaking in slang, in emotional rhetoric, or
in terms that unnecessarily personalize the lawyers or judges. Even when discussing your adversary’s
arguments, refer to them as the party’s, rather than as the lawyer’s. There is a world of tonal difference
between “The plaintiff mistakenly relies . . .” and “Mr. Maggione has mistakenly told you . . .” Similarly,
don’t speak to the bench in flattering language. Judges are satisfied with respect; they’re offended by
obsequiousness.
While your adversary argues, listen attentively and without facial expressions that could convey your
opinion of what is transpiring. Make whatever notes you’ll need to help you respond in your own argument
(if you’re the appellee) or in rebuttal (if you’re the appellant). Don’t interrupt your adversary’s argument.

§32.6 Preparation for Oral Argument
The best way to prepare for oral argument is to identify the key points you want the judge to take away
from your argument; anticipate questions and practice your answers; and make sure you are intimately
familiar with the
325
facts, the law, and your opponent’s argument. Prioritize your key points and think about how you will
address them at different levels of depth. That way, whether you get a hot bench that peppers you with
questions, or a cold bench that asks almost none, you will be able to use your time effectively.
There are many ways to prepare notes to use during your argument. After you’ve argued several times,
you’ll figure out which type and style of notes work best for you. Remember that this is not a speech, and
writing out sentences that you plan to read verbatim will not be an effective strategy. You need to be
prepared to be flexible, because judges might ask questions in a different order than you had planned to
argue. Prepare notes that allow you to look quickly, find your point, and look back up at the judges. If you’re
well prepared, you’ll know your case so well that a few bullet points or a broad outline of your points will be
enough.
In addition to your main points, you may want the names and citations of key authority, some key facts
and their citation to the record, and key phrases you intend to use. You may want to write some notes to
yourself, such as “slow down” and “breathe.” Have the record and briefs close at hand in case you are asked
about their contents. Especially with the record, use tabs to mark for quick reference passages that the judges
might want explained.
Plan your argument by weaving together policy, the facts, and the controlling rules of law into the
seamless theory enunciated in your brief. Show how policy and the facts compel your conclusion, while the
law can be used to justify it. If the standard of review and the procedural posture place procedural burdens
on you — requiring you to plead certain facts or produce evidence of them — be sure to show the court how
you have carried those burdens. If the burdens rest on your adversary, show instead how your adversary
failed to carry them.
Remember that you can’t cover all the arguments you made in the brief. Focus on the most important
material.
Make a list of every weakness in your case and every question that you would be tempted to ask if you
were a judge — and prepare an answer to each of those questions. What rule will a decision in your favor
stand for? It would become precedent. The judges will care deeply about policy concerns: how will the law
in the future treat facts that are similar to — but not exactly the same as — yours? What would be the
practical effects in the courts, in the economy, and in society as a whole? Why is the rule you advocate better
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

245

than the one your adversary urges? Imagine hard questions that you might be asked. Then study your
adversary’s brief and the precedents that are contrary to your position.
Try also to predict which concessions you’ll be asked to make. Figure out which concessions you cannot
afford to make and which you’ll have to make in order to protect the reasonableness of the rest of your case.
If you think about this for the first time when you’re actually asked to make the concession, a very large part
of your case could easily disappear in a snap misjudgment.
326
Finally, check your research the day before you argue. In the time between submission of the brief and
oral argument, the law might have changed. Check to see whether controlling statutes have been amended or
repealed, whether any of the key cases have been overruled, and whether any of the recent precedents has
been reversed or affirmed. You need not check every citation in your brief, but you don’t want to discover in
the courtroom that some important texture of the law has changed.

§32.7 State v. Dobbs and Zachrisson: An Oral Argument Dissected
To help you understand how oral argument influences judicial decision-making, this chapter concludes
with a dissection of the arguments in a real appeal,6 comparing them to the decision subsequently made by
the court to whom the arguments were addressed.
In the city where this case arose, Dobbs operated an illegal gambling business in one neighborhood, and
Zachrisson ran a similar enterprise in another area. Dobbs and Zachrisson were each indicted on 16 counts of
bribery and 1 count of conspiracy to bribe. (They weren’t indicted for illegal gambling, perhaps because the
police lacked the evidence required by the gambling statute.) At trial, a police officer named Porfier testified
that Zachrisson had given her money for not enforcing the law against him and Dobbs, and for arresting their
competitors instead. The prosecution also introduced tape recordings of conversations between Porfier and
the defendants. Dobbs and Zachrisson testified in their own defense. A jury convicted on all 34 counts.
At trial, Zachrisson and Dobbs each asserted the defenses of entrapment and coercion, which are
separately defined in the state’s Criminal Code:
§ 32. Defense of Entrapment
In a prosecution for any crime, it is an affirmative defense that the defendant engaged in the prohibited conduct
because he was induced or encouraged to do so by a public servant, or by a person acting under a public servant’s
direction, where the public servant or the person acting under his direction acted for the purpose of obtaining
evidence against the defendant for the purpose of a criminal prosecution, and where the methods used to obtain that
evidence created a substantial risk that the crime would be committed by a person not otherwise disposed to commit
it. Conduct that merely provides a defendant with an opportunity to commit a crime is not entrapment.

327
§ 963. Bribery; Defense of Coercion
(a) In a prosecution for bribery, it is a defense that the defendant conferred a prohibited benefit on a public
servant as a result of that public servant’s coercion of the defendant.
(b) For the purposes of this section, a public servant coerces a defendant by instilling in the defendant a fear that
if the defendant does not comply with the public servant’s wishes, the public servant will cause physical injury to
the defendant or another, cause damage to property of the defendant or another, cause criminal charges to be
brought against the defendant or another, or otherwise abuse the public servant’s power as an official of the
government.

Porfier testified that initially she approached Zachrisson in an attempt to recruit him and perhaps others as
informants. She suggested that Zachrisson set up a meeting with any other bookies that Zachrisson thought
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

246

might be interested. Zachrisson suggested Dobbs. A meeting of the three of them was arranged, but Dobbs
didn’t show up. At this and other meetings, Porfier wore a “body wire” (a hidden microphone that transmits
to a nearby receiver). Zachrisson told Porfier that he needed police protection from aggressive gamblers with
mob connections who were moving into his territory. The jury heard a recording of Zachrisson telling
Porfier that if she made it easier for him to make a profit, he could “send some money your way.” Porfier
told him that she would have to think it over, and that he should find out whether Dobbs wanted to make the
same arrangement.
A week or so later, Zachrisson and Porfier met again. Porfier told Zachrisson that she would accept money
from Zachrisson and Dobbs, that she wouldn’t arrest them or their employees, and that she would arrest their
competitors. Zachrisson told her that Dobbs was “interested.” Zachrisson began making periodic payments
to Porfier of $100 to $200 (all of which Porfier turned over to the police department). Zachrisson and Dobbs
continued their operations without police interference, and some of their competitors were arrested.
A few months after this arrangement began, Zachrisson told Porfier that he and Dobbs — whom Porfier
had still not yet met — wanted to expand their gambling enterprises and were willing to bring in Porfier as a
silent partner. Zachrisson told Porfier that she would receive a percentage of the profits in exchange for
police protection for Zachrisson and Dobbs. Porfier and Zachrisson met one more time, and that was the
only meeting attended by Dobbs. Dobbs stated that he agreed with Zachrisson’s goals, but Porfier did not
start receiving a share of the profits until a few weeks later.
Zachrisson testified that he paid Porfier because he was afraid that he would be arrested if he did not, and
he presented evidence that during the time these payments were being made he had complained to others that
Porfier was “shaking me down.” Dobbs testified that Porfier had threatened to put him out of business if he
did not agree to pay her off.
328
Both defendants moved for directed verdicts of acquittal on the grounds of coercion and entrapment. The
trial court denied the motions. On appeal to the state’s supreme court, both defendants argued in their briefs
that their convictions should be reversed because the motions should have been granted.
Dobbs asserted two additional grounds for reversal. First, he argued that the trial court committed
reversible error in instructing the jury that if they convicted him of conspiracy, they could also convict him
of bribery because of the acts of a co-conspirator (Zachrisson).
Second, Dobbs argued that his rights to a speedy trial had been violated. Delay in coming to trial might
arise from prosecutorial tardiness, from tardiness on the defense side of the case, from court congestion, or
from some combination of these sources. When a defendant moves to dismiss an indictment for lack of a
speedy trial, the trial court tries to determine the sources of delay. Delay due to defense tardiness is ignored
as “excludable time.” Otherwise, defendants would profit from procrastination by their own lawyers. Delay
caused by prosecutorial tardiness is “chargeable time” because prosecutors are expected to take the initiative
in moving cases to trial. You’ll see in a few moments whether this state treats court congestion delay as
excludable or chargeable time.
Reproduced below is a condensation of the transcript of the oral arguments in the state supreme court.
Immediately after the transcript is a synopsis of the court’s opinion. When you compare the oral arguments
to the court’s decision, try to understand the cause-and-effect relationship: how do the arguments seem to
have influenced what the court did?
THE CHIEF JUDGE: Mr. Womack?
WOMACK [for Zachrisson]: May it please the court. I’ll argue the issues of
coercion and entrapment. My brief sets out the statutory definition of coercion in a
bribery case. The evidence at trial was that Zachrisson, after he had made one or
two payments, went to a friend of his and complained about the police. The friend
then went to a judge in a neighboring county and reported that Zachrisson was being
“shaken down” by the police — that over a period of months the police had been
intimidating Zachrisson and asking him for money in exchange for favors. You
can’t read the summary of the meetings

What do you think of
this opening? Does it
suggest immediately
that what happened
in the trial court
should make us
uncomfortable? How
would you have
improved it?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

247

329
here and not be convinced that the police were the principal participants: instigators and
initiators of all the activity that led up to the money changing hands. It’s a question of
law as to whether this was voluntary.
JUDGE BECENTI: The police denied it, didn’t they?
WOMACK: Yes.
JUDGE BECENTI: Doesn’t that make it a question of fact, to be resolved by a jury?
WOMACK: No. Entrapment can be decided on the undisputed, undeniable facts here.
JUDGE BECENTI: As a matter of law?
WOMACK: As a matter of law. Porfier has known the defendants for approximately six
years, knew that they were small-time gamblers, and knew that they were involved with
after-hours bars, having dealings with them for over a year and a half. Those are
misdemeanors, but bribery is a felony. The testimony was that everybody knew the
defendants were gamblers. Yet the police spent all that time, seeing them on a regular
basis and never arrested them for any gambling offenses.
JUDGE BECENTI: They investigated organized crime and gambling, didn’t they — an
ongoing thing?
WOMACK: If they were investigating organized crime, what came of it? Why did it
take them almost two years to get the defendants for bribery?

Generally,
rhetorical
questions do not
persuade. It is
more effective to
lay out each step
of the argument.

JUDGE STEIN: Doesn’t that argument cut both ways because if it took that long, the
coercion wasn’t very effective?
WOMACK: I disagree. Porfier exacted promises of a hundred dollars a week from these
defendants. Porfier manufactured a crime. She got very little money from Zachrisson
and then pressured him to introduce her to Dobbs. And that in itself was improper
conduct.
330
JUDGE BECENTI: You’d have to argue that that’s
entrapment as a matter of law, wouldn’t you? The facts
were decided against you in the trial court, and we’re
bound by that.
WOMACK: Yes, I would argue that it was entrapment as
a matter of law and that coercion was proved. Porfier
engaged in improper conduct because she decided that
she wanted to get the defendants for a higher crime than
gambling. And in this way Zachrisson’s reluctance to
commit the crime was overcome by persistence. I
believe, in this case, that’s obvious. Zachrisson resisted
making payments, and the payments did not begin until
long after the demands had started. Profier just kept
going because she wasn’t satisfied with arresting the
defendants on petty gambling charges.

Do you find this theory persuasive? If you don’t, is
that because the theory is faulty or because it isn’t
being adequately supported by the facts and law at
the lawyer’s disposal?

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

248

JUDGE STEIN: Is there anything wrong about that, as
long as it doesn’t amount to entrapment? If something is
going on, is there any reason why police can’t wait
before arresting until they accumulate more evidence?
WOMACK: No, Your Honor, if it’s indeed going on, but
in this case it wasn’t going on when Porfier first got
involved. I see my time is up. Thank you.
THE CHIEF JUDGE: Ms. Underwood?
UNDERWOOD [for Dobbs]: Your Honors, Johnny
Dobbs met with this police officer only once, and that
was after the officer demanded that Dobbs be there. He
came only after she made five separate demands that he
meet with her. Dobbs met with the officer on one
occasion and never saw her again. There was no
evidence in this trial that he had anything else to do with
Officer Porfier. And at that one meeting, he said only one
thing of any substance. When the officer suggested that
she should arrest some competing gamblers to shake
them down,

Has the lawyer persuaded you? Why or why not?

Notice how this lawyer starts off with her best facts
to undermine the bench’s confidence that whatever
happened in the trial court was probably not unjust.
(Remember that appellants have the burden of
demonstrating error and that appellate courts are
affirmance-prone). This presentation paints a vivid
picture with a few, very carefully selected facts. As
you read the synopsis of the state supreme court’s
decision, try to figure out what effect that picture
had on the bench. (The synopsis is printed at the
end of this transcript.)

331
Dobbs said, “Do we really have to arrest people? I don’t want that to happen.” He disagreed
with the plan proposed. And when somebody said, “Johnny, you’re not saying much,” he
replied, “You don’t learn anything by talking.” These are not words of joining a conspiracy.
These are not words of attempting to bribe anyone. And if this is the only evidence in the
case, he cannot be considered to have joined a conspiracy. He certainly didn’t do it through
his own words. The law is clear and settled that the words of somebody else cannot bind a
defendant to a conspiracy. There was no evidence that he ever committed any other act in
this whole scheme. On this kind of record, the jury should not have been instructed that they
could convict Dobbs of bribery.
In fact, Porfier tried five times to get Dobbs to meet with her. And when he finally did meet
with her — and this leads into the issues of coercion and entrapment — the first thing she
said was “I can put you out of business; I can go into your neighborhood tomorrow and
arrest your people and close you down.” These words are coercive as a matter of law. And it
is also entrapment as a matter of law because the police officer forced the meeting where
she made these coercive statements. Here, the police officer created the crime of bribery . . .

JUDGE ORTIZ [interrupting]: You haven’t mentioned your speedy trial issue, which you
argue in your brief. You still press it?
UNDERWOOD: Yes, absolutely, every point in the brief. In the trial court we tried to
demonstrate — and the court wouldn’t permit us — that other cases that had been indicted
after Dobbs were tried before him, even though those other defendants were not in jail.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

This
transition is
smooth but
also clearly
announced
so that the
bench can
follow the
lawyer’s
organization.

Notice how
the lawyer
picks up the
questions
and uses it
as
a
springboard
f o r
argument.

249

332
JUDGE ORTIZ: You consistently answered ready?
UNDERWOOD: Every time.
JUDGE ORTIZ: There was an 18-month delay?
UNDERWOOD: Yes, Your Honor.
JUDGE ORTIZ: The only excuse given in the trial court
was calendar congestion?
UNDERWOOD: Yes.
JUDGE ORTIZ: And you sought no continuances or
adjournments during this period?
UNDERWOOD: Not one.
JUDGE ORTIZ: When you made your motion for speedy
trial relief, you claimed both a constitutional violation
and a violation of our speedy trial statute?
UNDERWOOD: Yes, both issues raised below . . .
JUDGE BECENTI [interrupting]: Were there extensive
plea bargaining negotiations?

Are Judge Ortiz’s questions hostile? Or does he
seem to be helping the
lawyer make clear that the delay
was not caused by the defense and that the
question has been properly preserved for appellate
review?

This exchange seems to have sparked the interest
of Judges Becenti and Stein. What do you think
Judge Ortiz was trying to accomplish?

UNDERWOOD: Not one minute of it, Your Honor.
JUDGE STEIN: Has there been any showing of
prejudice?
UNDERWOOD: Yes, in the human sense, but not in the
sense that we couldn’t find any evidence.
JUDGE BECENTI: Any lost witnesses, anything like
that?
UNDERWOOD: No.
JUDGE STEIN: Were the defendants in jail during this
time or were they out on bail?
UNDERWOOD: No, Dobbs was not in jail.
JUDGE STEIN: Have you read our opinion in Weatherby
?
333
UNDERWOOD: Yes, Your Honor, I know . . .
JUDGE STEIN [interrupting]: That must not have
disappointed you.
UNDERWOOD: Well, . . .
JUDGE ORTIZ [interrupting]: You say this was 18
months?
UNDERWOOD: Yes.
JUDGE ORTIZ: Weatherby was 18 and a half months.
UNDERWOOD: Yes, I know, Your Honor.
JUDGE ORTIZ: And Weatherby is now at home.

Weatherby seems at least superficially to
favor Dobbs. If Judges Stein and Ortiz had
to make a decision on this issue right now,
how do you think they would rule? Why do
you think so? As you later read the
argument for the State and the synopsis of

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

250

the court’s decision, remember
prediction you made here.
UNDERWOOD: If the court please, I chose to concentrate
today on the other grounds for reversal because I know
Your Honors were aware of that, and I feel that that was an
argument I didn’t need to press any further. I think I’ve
taken all my time. Thank you very much.
THE CHIEF JUDGE: Mr. Lysander?
LYSANDER [for the State]: May it please the court . . .
JUDGE STEIN [interrupting]: What about Weatherby, Mr.
Lysander, isn’t that dispositive of the speedy trial issue?
LYSANDER: Your Honor, in this case, the speedy trial
motion was made orally and not in writing. It was made on
the eve of trial and without any prior notice to the
prosecution. Weatherby is distinguishable because there
the issue was raised in the trial court in a way that
permitted the prosecution to find out the reason for every
delay and to put that reason in the trial court record. That
didn’t happen here.
JUDGE STEIN: In this appeal, did the prosecution oppose
the motion in the trial court on the ground that it needed an
opportunity to prove that each delay was justified?

the

Judge Stein has gotten very interested in the
speedy trial aspect of the case.
Do you think this lawyer was prepared to answer
questions on the speedy trial issue?

334
LYSANDER: I’m not sure, Your Honor.
JUDGE STEIN: Perhaps the motion should
have been made in writing and with prior
notice to the prosecution, but if it were not and
if the prosecution didn’t object to that, I would
think that your procedural objection would
have been waived.
LYSANDER: Your Honor, this was a preBachman case. Before your holding in State v.
Bachman, both the prosecution and defense
were presenting their arguments in trial courts
under somewhat lax procedural standards.
However, . . .
JUDGE STEIN [interrupting]: But the
defendant shouldn’t be prejudiced then by that
fact, if there were relaxed standards.
LYSANDER: That’s correct, Your Honor, but
I’m simply saying that the prosecution would
be prejudiced in that we were never given the
opportunity to have a hearing to develop a
complete factual record for the reasons for each
delay.
JUDGE STEIN: But wasn’t the only excuse
advanced trial court congestion?
LYSANDER: The prosecution answered ready
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

251

for trial for the first time only three months
after the indictment, and there was difficulty
getting a free courtroom on that date.
JUDGE STEIN: And we held in Weatherby
that courtroom congestion is no excuse.
LYSANDER: But you also held in Green-field
that the trial court’s inability to schedule a trial
was an excuse. And there has never been an
allegation of prejudice to Dobbs because of the
delay, and Dobbs was the only defendant to
raise this issue in the trial court.

Read coldly in a transcript, this answer might seem flippant.
But if it is spoken in the proper tone of voice, it becomes
exactly the ‘‘respectful intellectual quality’’ that persuades.
We can never know how much the court was influenced by
this answer (or by the prosecution’s brief), but compare the
answer to the court’s decision on this issue.

335
JUDGE ORTIZ: But the question is now before us, and it was raised below —
although you say it was raised orally instead of on papers —.
LYSANDER: That’s correct.
JUDGE ORTIZ: The only excuse the prosecution offered is calendar congestion,
is that correct?
LYSANDER: That is the only excuse I am aware of, but we never had an
opportunity for a hearing, so I don’t know what would have developed had there
been a hearing.
JUDGE ORTIZ: At the time the motion was made, there was no excuse given
other than that?
LYSANDER: No, but as a practical matter, when a motion like that is made on
the eve of trial all of a sudden — just before a three-and-a-half-week trial that
everybody has been preparing for — on the eve of trial when the defendant
suddenly claims his speedy trial rights have been violated, the prosecutor would
have to do an investigation in order to be able to account for each and every
continuance that happened in the past.
JUDGE STEIN: Was there any request by the prosecutor for additional time to
answer the motion — so the prosecutor could develop the record that you’re now
suggesting could have been developed?
LYSANDER: I don’t believe that there was, Your Honor, but if there had been,
that would have defeated the ends of getting the trial completed as soon as
possible. [pauses] Concerning the question of
whether the defendants were entrapped by the police. . . .

Has this lawyer had any
effect at all on Judges
Ortiz and Stein? When
you read the synopsis of
the court’s decision,
notice how they vote.

(The remainder of the
State’s argument is
omitted here.)

336
STATE v. DOBBS AND ZACHRISSON
BECENTI, J.
Dobbs’s bribery convictions are reversed. His conspiracy conviction is affirmed. All of Zachrisson’s
convictions are affirmed.
Dobbs’s bribery convictions are reversed because the trial court erroneously instructed the jury that they
could convict him of bribery for the payments made by Zachrisson. There was no evidence that Dobbs
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

252

actually made any bribe payments. Guilt of a substantive offense like bribery may not be predicated solely
on a defendant’s participation in an underlying conspiracy.
A conspirator is not necessarily an accessory to a crime committed in furtherance of the conspiracy. Under
section 129 of the Criminal Code a person is criminally responsible, as an accessory, for the act of another if
the person “solicits, requests, commands, importunes, or intentionally aids” the other person to engage in
that offense. Conspicuously absent from the statute is any reference to one who conspires to commit an
offense. That omission cannot be supplied by construction. It may be true that in some instances a
conspirator’s conduct will suffice to establish liability as an accessory, but the concepts are different. To
permit mere guilt of conspiracy to establish the defendant’s guilt of the substantive crime without any
evidence of further action on the part of the defendant would be to expand the basis of accessory liability
beyond the legislative design.
But we reject Dobbs’s further claim that his statutory and constitutional rights to a speedy trial were
violated by the delay between his indictment and his trial. Dobbs does not claim to have been prejudiced by
the delay in coming to trial. He was not incarcerated, and he does not assert that any of his witnesses
disappeared or suffered a fading of memory. State v. Weatherby is therefore distinguishable from this appeal.
Moreover, when Dobbs moved in the trial court to dismiss for lack of a speedy trial, court congestion was
assigned as the reason for the delay, and the prosecution was ready for trial within three months of the
indictment. Thus, Dobbs is not entitled to dismissal pursuant to our speedy trial statute, which requires that
the prosecution be ready on time but places no corresponding obligation on the trial court. See State v.
Greenfield.
Finally, both defendants urge that the prosecution failed to disprove the bribery defense of coercion
beyond a reasonable doubt and that the evidence establishes the affirmative defense of entrapment as a
matter of law. The record does not support these contentions.
337
The defendants’ motions were correctly denied, and the issues were properly submitted to the jury.
The record before us presents a conflict between the prosecution’s version of events and that of the
defendants. The defendants asserted that the police officers induced their participation in the bribery scheme
and employed coercive tactics to ensure compliance. Although the record does reveal some evidence of
conduct that might be construed as harassment, there is also evidence of mutual cooperation. Hence,
resolution of the issues was a purely factual matter within the province of the jury.
[There were no dissents.]
1. A “hot” bench is one that erupts with questions. A “cold” bench is one that listens impassively.
2. The time reserved is subtracted from the time allowed for the appellant’s main argument. You can reserve time by
telling the court after you introduce yourself in the opening to your main argument.
3. Frank Morey Coffin, The Ways of a Judge 131 (1980).
4. See U.S. Sup. Ct. R. 28.1 (“Oral argument read from a prepared text is not favored”) and Fed. R. App. P. 34(c)
(“Counsel must not read at length from briefs, records, or authorities”).
5. Coffin, supra, n. 5 at 132.
6. The names of the parties, judges, and lawyers and the citations to local authority have all been changed. The
wording of the local statutes has been altered slightly for clarity. To make the story easier to follow, many of the facts
have been simplified, but not in ways that are relevant to the court’s analysis. Some of the people described here are
composites from a larger cast of characters in the original appeal.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

253

339

APPENDICES

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

254

341

Appendix

A

Statute Analysis Exercises
This appendix includes two exercises.
Exercise A
Plagiarism and the Board of Bar Examiners
Hardy and Tisdale were enrolled in a law school course in which students write and submit papers. They
were given identical assignments. Tisdale wrote a draft of the first half of his paper before Hardy did, and
Hardy asked to see it. That was forbidden by the course rules. Tisdale showed Hardy what he had written
anyway and sent him a copy of the wordprocessing file as an email attachment.
Hardy downloaded the attachment and changed as many of the words as he could. When he was finished,
the first half of the two papers had approximately the same organization, although about 80 percent of the
words were different — similar, but different.
Tisdale and Hardy then got into an argument insulting each other’s taste in music, one of them saying
unkind things about Coldplay and the other saying unkind things about Foo Fighters. They stopped speaking
to each other. Tisdale wrote the rest of his paper and didn’t show it to Hardy. Hardy researched to find what
he would need for the second half of his paper. On the due date, they submitted their papers.
But a paper derived from another can never really be purged of all noticeable traces of the original. The
teacher instantly recognized the similarity between the first half of Hardy’s paper and the first half of
Tisdale’s.
In the second half of Hardy’s paper, the teacher also noticed phrases that didn’t “sound like” him. The
teacher had a vague memory of having seen those phrases previously somewhere else. To design
assignments and to keep up in their field,
342
teachers read cases, articles, and books constantly. The teacher logged onto LEXIS and then onto
WESTLAW, typed the suspect phrases from Hardy’s paper, and searched for all the sources in which they
appeared. In this way, a teacher can easily check a student’s paper for plagiarism. The teacher found a
number of instances where Hardy had copied passages word-for-word from sources he did not cite and
without quote marks around the copied words.
When confronted with all this, Hardy claimed that by changing most of the words in Tisdale’s draft he had
not misrepresented someone else’s work as his own, and that the plagiarism in the second half of his paper
was not deliberate. He said that while researching he must have copied into his notes the phrases in question
and then forgot that they came from the sources he had read. When writing the paper, he assumed that the
words in his notes were his own. The teacher rejected that explanation and gave Hardy a failing grade for the
course. The law school suspended him for a year.
Tisdale was also punished, but it’s Hardy who poses the issue in this Exercise.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

255

Hardy tried to transfer to another law school. But law schools do not consider transfer applications from
students who are in trouble for academic dishonesty. After a year, Hardy returned to the law school that had
suspended him. Last spring, he graduated. He has applied for admission to the Wisconsin bar.
In every state, an applicant for admission to the bar must prove to the bar examiners that she or he has the
type of character needed to practice law. The applicant must fill out a detailed character questionnaire and
submit supporting documents, including an affidavit from the applicant’s law school. A false, misleading, or
incomplete answer on the questionnaire is itself grounds for denying the application for admission. Every
state’s questionnaire asks, among other things, whether the applicant has ever been accused of academic
dishonesty, and the law school’s affidavit must answer the same question.
On his questionnaire, Hardy described what he had done and what the school had done. And in its
affidavit, the law school reported — as it must — the same thing.
After admission to the bar, a lawyer can be professionally disciplined if the lawyer commits misconduct in
violation of the state’s code governing lawyers’ ethics. In most states, one agency reviews the character of
bar applicants, and a different agency investigates complaints of unethical conduct by lawyers. Admission to
the bar and discipline of already-admitted attorneys are two separate processes, although the two have the
same goal of protecting the public from unethical lawyers.
As a practical matter, a failing grade in a course can seriously damage a student’s chances of finding a
good job. Character trouble with the bar examiners or suspension from law school would make a student
extremely unattractive to employers. After admission to the bar, the same is true of professional discipline,
even if the discipline falls short of disbarment or suspension.
Provisions governing admission to the bar are usually found in a state’s court rules as well as in the bar
examiners’ own rules. A state’s ethics code, too, is often found in the state’s court rules. All these rules
resemble statutes and are interpreted the same way statutes are.
343
Your research has found the following: two Wisconsin Supreme Court Rules governing admission to the
bar; three Wisconsin Board of Bar Examiners Rules; a Wisconsin case interpreting one of the Bar
Examiners’ Rules; and three cases from other states, each interpreting another state’s statute or court rule.
Will Hardy be admitted to the Wisconsin bar?
Wisconsin Supreme Court Rules
SCR 22.46. Character and fitness investigations of bar admission applicants
(1) . . .
(2) [T]he applicant shall make a full and fair disclosure of all facts and circumstances pertaining to
questions involving the applicant’s character and fitness. Failure to provide information or
misrepresentation in a disclosure constitutes grounds for denial of admission.
SCR 40.06. Requirement as to character and fitness to practice law
(1) An applicant for bar admission shall establish good moral character and fitness to practice law. The
purpose of this requirement is to limit admission to those applicants found to have the qualities of
character and fitness needed to assure to a reasonable degree of certainty the integrity and the competence
of services performed for clients and the maintenance of high standards in the administration of justice.
...
(3) An applicant shall establish to the satisfaction of the board that the applicant satisfies the
requirement set forth in sub. (1). The board shall certify to the supreme court the character and fitness of
qualifying applicants. The board shall decline to certify the character and fitness of an applicant who
knowingly makes a materially false statement of material fact or who fails to disclose a fact necessary to
correct a misapprehension known by the applicant to have arisen in connection with his or her application.
...
(5) The dean of a law school in this state shall have a continuing duty to report to the board any
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

256

information reflecting adversely upon the character and fitness to practice law of an applicant for bar
admission under SCR 40.03.
Rules of the Wisconsin Board of Bar Examiners
BA 6.02 Relevant conduct or condition.
The revelation or discovery of any of the following should be treated as cause for further inquiry before
the Board decides whether the applicant possesses the character and fitness to practice law:
...
344
(b) academic misconduct
...
(d) acts involving dishonesty or misrepresentation
...
BA 6.03 Use of information.
The Board will determine whether the present character and fitness of an applicant qualifies the
applicant for admission. In making this determination through the processes described above, the
following factors should be considered in assigning weight and significance to prior conduct:
(a) the applicant’s age at the time of the conduct
(b) the recency of the conduct
(c) the reliability of the information concerning the conduct
(d) the seriousness of the conduct
(e) the mitigating or aggravating circumstances
(f) the evidence of rehabilitation
(g) the applicant’s candor in the admissions process
(h) the materiality of any omissions or misrepresentations
(i) the number of incidents revealing deficiencies
IN RE RADTKE v. BOARD OF BAR EXAMINERS
601 N.W.2d 642 (Wis. 1999)

PER CURIAM.
We review . . . the decision of the Board of Bar Examiners (Board) declining to certify that
Terry George Radtke satisfied the character and fitness requirement for admission to the
Wisconsin bar. . . .
[T]he Board properly concluded . . . that Mr. Radtke failed to meet his burden . . . to establish
the requisite moral character and fitness to practice law. . . . Prior to his graduation from Marquette
University School of Law in May 1998, Mr. Radtke was a lecturer in the Department of History at
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) from August 1984 to May 1991. [I]n the fall of 1990
he had prepared a paper and submitted a version of it for publication to a number of journals,
including the Business History Review. He explained that the paper . . . “did not include several
key cites to secondary sources in the bibliography and paraphrased several sources that were not
quoted.” He stated that he “simply forgot to include the necessary footnotes in the paper” and
asserted that the allegation that he had engaged in “professional plagiarism” arose from a letter the
editors of Business History Review sent to the UWM History Department chair about the missing
citations. . . .
. . . In respect to the alleged plagiarism, Mr. Radtke asserted that he had not provided source

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

257

citations to materials quoted in his paper and to various facts . . . , most of which he had taken
from secondary articles. He acknowledged that he should have mentioned those articles as sources.
345
. . . Mr. Radtke’s descriptions of his paper were at variance with the evidence. . . . Mr. Radtke
deliberately had copied a substantial portion — more than half — of his article from other people’s
work, presented it as his own, and lied to the Board.
. . . Mr. Radtke minimized his conduct by characterizing what he did as “paraphras[ing] several
sources that were not quoted” and having “simply forgot[ten] to include the necessary footnotes”
and “several key cites to secondary sources in the bibliography.” The argument that if he had
intended to plagiarize, he would not have set forth text from scholarly journals verbatim, thereby
running the risk of detection by any person knowledgeable in the field, is disingenuous. . . .
Mr. Radtke has failed to establish that any of the Board’s findings is clearly erroneous. Each of
the foregoing findings of fact is adequately supported by the credible evidence and the reasonable
inferences that can be drawn from it. . . .
Mr. Radtke’s final argument . . . asserted that the Board erred in concluding that his
unprofessional conduct and incomplete and untruthful disclosures were relevant to his character
and fitness because it failed to take into consideration each of the nine factors listed in BA 6.03.
We find no merit to that argument. First, Mr. Radtke incorrectly stated that the Board considered
only two factors — the seriousness of his conduct and his candor in the admission process. In fact,
the Board also explicitly considered the lack of evidence of his rehabilitation and the materiality of
his omissions in the admission process. Second, we rejected the same argument in Saganski v.
Board of Bar Examiners, 595 N.W.2d 631 (Wis. 1999), holding that it is sufficient that the Board
consider those BA 6.03 factors that are applicable to the conduct of the applicant.
[W]e affirm the Board’s determination declining to certify Mr. Radtke’s character and fitness
for bar admission. [In considering] the effect Mr. Radtke’s conduct in the plagiarism incident and
in the bar admission application process has on his eligibility to reapply for bar admission . . . , we
take into account Mr. Radtke’s professional record during the eight years following the plagiarism
incident. Mr. Radtke . . . admitted his mistake in the submission of his article for publication and
took full responsibility for it, subsequently published the article with proper footnotes, published a
book, completed his doctoral thesis and obtained his doctorate, and earned a law degree. He did all
of that without any allegation of questionable conduct.
While Mr. Radtke’s recent characterizations of the plagiarism incident and the impact it had on
his professional employment cause great concern . . . , we determine that Mr. Radtke should be
permitted to reapply for bar admission. [A] one-year period is the appropriate time for him to wait
before reapplying.
IN RE ZBIEGIEN
433 N.W.2d 871 (Minn. 1988)

PER CURIAM.
[The petitioner has graduated from law school and has applied for admission to the bar of this
state.]
346
[In a law school seminar in products liability, the petitioner submitted a draft paper that] was
plagiarized in large part from the works of other authors. Nearly all of the first 12 pages were
taken verbatim or nearly verbatim from a number of law review articles without proper citation in
the endnotes. In addition, some endnotes were taken from other sources in such a way as to give
the appearance that they were petitioner’s own work. Several other portions of the paper were
paraphrased or had words or phrases omitted or substituted for the originals as they appeared in
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

258

various published sources. Again, no proper citation was given. . . . [The petitioner received] a
course grade of “F”. . . .
[The petitioner] admitted the extensive plagiarism . . . both in the form of direct quotes not
properly indented and footnoted and paraphrased passages not appropriately credited to the
original sources. [He said that his computer printer had not been printing properly, and he did not
proofread the paper as it came out of the printer because at the time his wife was disabled from an
auto accident, and his teenage son had ran away from home.] . . .
The [State Board of Law Examiners, however,] found that . . . petitioner plagiarized a
substantial amount of text and footnotes taken verbatim, or nearly verbatim, from various
published sources without proper identification [and] that the alleged computer problems did not
explain away the plagiarism. . . .
Petitioner appeals from that determination. . . .
Rule II.A of the Minnesota Rules of the Supreme Court for Admission to the Bar provides that
an applicant must establish good character and fitness to the satisfaction of the Board.
“Good character” is defined as “traits that are relevant to and have a rational connection with the
present fitness or capacity of an applicant to practice law.” Definition 4, Minn. R. Admis. Bar
(1986). . . .
Plagiarism, the adoption of the work of others as one’s own, does involve an element of deceit,
which reflects on an individual’s honesty. . . . The petitioner clearly plagiarized large sections of
his paper. [Plagiarism] is an affront to honest scholars everywhere and to other members of [a law
school] class whose legitimate pursuits would be weighed against this appropriated material.
Petitioner was guilty of this act. . . .
It is the view of this court that [this] petitioner’s conduct, wrongful though it was, does not
demonstrate such lack of character that he must be barred from the practice of law. He has been
punished [already in practical terms because the Board’s investigation has delayed his admission
to the bar] for over a year. [In dealing with law school officials and when testifying before the
Board, the petitioner was filled with genuine remorse and shame.] We . . . believe that this conduct
will not be repeated. We hold that, under the facts and circumstances of this case petitioner will
not be barred from the practice of law. . . .
347
KELLEY, J [dissenting].
. . . When this court admits an applicant to the practice of law, it certifies to the public that . . . it
knows of no reason why the applicant-admittee does not possess the character which the
profession demands of all admitted attorneys in this state. We judge an applicant’s character by the
standard that it must reflect those traits of integrity, honesty and trustworthiness necessary for a
lawyer to possess when he or she represents clients, when dealing with professional peers, and
when appearing before the courts. Yet, in this case, notwithstanding that we know that this
petitioner has . . . recently engaged in outright dishonesty by plagiarizing and claiming as his own
the intellectual works of others with no attempt at appropriate attribution of source, the majority
would conclude, even as it condemns the petitioner’s conduct, that he has been “punished” enough
by the delay in his admission. . . .
[D]enial of admission . . . has not as its purpose punishment but rather protection of the public
and the integrity of the legal system. . . .
Even though I would deny the petition, I would not foreclose forever, petitioner’s admission to
the Bar. I would, however, require that he prove that after a reasonable period of time had elapsed
he then . . . demonstrates that from the experience he has learned to conduct his affairs in a manner
that this court can, with confidence, certify to the public that his character does reflect traits of
integrity and trustworthiness.
IN RE LAMBERIS
443 N.E.2d 549 (III. 1982)
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

259

SIMON, J.
[The respondent is a lawyer admitted to the bar of this state.]
In writing a thesis which he submitted to [a law school] in satisfaction of a requirement for a
[post-J.D.] master’s degree in law, the respondent [while a member of the bar] “knowingly
plagiarized” . . . [i]n preparing pages 13 through 59 of his 93-page thesis [by using two books’
words] substantially verbatim and without crediting the source. . . .
The purpose for which respondent used the appropriated material . . . displays a lack of honesty
which cannot go undisciplined, especially because honesty is so fundamental to the functioning of
the legal profession. . . .
[Under] DR 1-102(A)(4) of the [Illinois Code of Professional Responsibility] “[a] lawyer shall
not . . . engage in conduct involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation.” . . .
Having decided that the respondent’s conduct warrants some discipline, we must decide whether
to impose disbarment, suspension or censure. The Hearing Board recommended censure; the
Review Board recommended suspension for six months; and the Administator argues here for
disbarment. . . .
348
[I]n the 10 years since respondent entered private practice, no client has ever complained about
his conduct, professional or otherwise. . . .
[Although] the respondent’s conduct undermined the honor system that is maintained in all
institutions of learning[, the law school involved] has already . . . expelled [him], an act which will
also undoubtedly ensure that the respondent will be hereafter excluded from the academic world.
In view of the respondent’s apparently unblemished record in the practice of law and the
disciplinary sanctions which have already been imposed by [the law school], we choose censure as
the most appropriate discipline for the respondent.
IN RE WIDDISON
539 N.W.2d 671 (S.D. 1995)

GILBERTSON, J.
[The applicant has graduated from law school and applied for admission to the bar of this state.]
[During his] second year of law school, he wrote and submitted a casenote for law review
publication [which] included . . . material from secondary sources which he had failed to cite. . . .
The faculty advisor . . . assigned [the applicant] a failing grade in the law review course. . . .
[After the applicant took the final exam in the course on Worker’s Compensation, the professor
discovered two students’ examination answers] were strikingly similar. . . . [T]he professor
assigned a failing grade to each examination[, one of which was the applicant’s].
[The applicant] has the burden of proving by clear and convincing evidence his qualifications
for admission to practice law in this state. . . . One of those qualifications is that he “be a person of
good moral character.” SDCL 6-16-2. SDCL 16-16-2.1 defines “good moral character” as
including, but not limited to, “qualities of honesty, candor, trustworthiness, diligence, reliability,
observance of fiduciary and financial responsibility, and respect for the rights of others and for the
judicial process.” That statute also provides that “[a]ny fact reflecting a deficiency of good moral
character may constitute a basis for denial of admission.” SDCL 16-16-2.1 (emphasis added).
Good moral character is a prerequisite to practice law in every state. . . .
“The state bears a special responsibility for maintaining standards among members of the
licensed professions” such as attorneys at law. [Citations omitted.] . . . The same zeal to protect the
public from the unfit within the bar must also be applied to the unfit who would seek to enter the
bar. . . .
[The applicant] has not met his burden of proving good moral character. [We affirm the order

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

260

denying his application for admission to the bar], with leave to reapply at a future date provided
[the applicant] is able to rectify his character deficits and show he has gained an understanding of,
and the ability to put into practice, the qualities of honesty, candor, and responsibility required [of
lawyers].
349
Exercise B
The Ironwood Tract
Fourteen years ago, Palo Verde Development Corporation purchased a deed to an Arizona parcel known
as the Ironwood tract. The tract is unimproved terrain. It has never been fenced, and nobody has ever
constructed a building or anything else on it. It is one mile from a paved road and 65 miles from downtown
Phoenix.
Today, the nearest residential development is Verde River Estates, nine miles from the tract, toward
Phoenix along the same road. From the date of the purchase until this past September, no employee of Palo
Verde had set foot on the tract.
Palo Verde built Verde River Estates during the last two years. The company had planned to build next on
the Ironwood tract. When the last Verde River Estates units were sold in September, the company sent a
surveying team to the Ironwood tract, but they were chased off the land by Homer Chesbro, whose Black
Canyon Ranch adjoins the Ironwood tract.
Chesbro bought the Ranch eleven years ago from a person who told him that he was buying both the
Ranch and the tract. Although the metes and bounds description in Chesbro’s deed does not include the tract,
that together with most of the rest of the deed is in language that only lawyers can understand.
For the past eleven years, Chesbro and his employees have grazed cattle on the Ironwood tract two or
three times a month throughout the year. The land cannot support more grazing, and the soil will not support
farming or other intensive agriculture, although luxury housing could be built on it.
Chesbro had no idea that Palo Verde had a deed to the property. And Palo Verde didn’t know that Chesbro
was using the tract or that he thought his deed included it.
If Chesbro claims that he acquired title by adverse possession, will Palo Verde succeed in an action to
eject him and quiet its own title? Your research has uncovered three statutes and five cases.
ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES
§ 12-521. Definitions
A. In this article, unless the context otherwise requires:
1. “Adverse possession” means an actual and visible appropriation of the land, commenced and
continued under a claim of right inconsistent with and hostile to the claim of another.
2. “Peaceable possession” means possession which is continuous, and not interrupted by an adverse
action to recover the estate. . . .
§ 12-526. Real Property in Adverse Possession and Use by Possessor; Ten-Year Limitation . . .
A. A person who has a cause of action for recovery of any lands, tenements or hereditaments from a
person having peaceable and adverse possession thereof,
350
cultivating, using and enjoying such property, shall commence an action therefor within ten years after
the cause of action accrues, and not afterward. . . .
§ 12-527. Effect of Limitation on Title
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

261

When an action for recovery of real property is barred by any provision of this article, the person who
pleads and is entitled to the bar shall be held to have full title precluding all claims.
[These sections are descended from provisions in the Arizona Civil Code of 1901. The Arizona Supreme
Court has held that what is now § 12-527 provides a cause of action through which a person who occupies
land through adverse possession can obtain title to it after the requisite number of years have passed. Work v.
United Globe Mines, 100 P. 813 (Ariz. 1909), aff’d, 231 U.S. 595 (1914). Because the Arizona statutes
reproduced above were modelled after Texas statutes, the Work court relied on a Texas case, Moody v.
Holcomb, which interpreted those Texas statutes. Moody was decided before 1901. Compare Work to the
first two cases below, Arizona Superior Mining Co. v. Anderson and State v. McDonald. Added together,
these three cases tell you how the Arizona courts will react to the other out-of-state cases in this exercise.]
ARIZONA SUPERIOR MINING CO. v. ANDERSON
262 P. 489 (Ariz. 1927)

[The parties disagree over whether this case should be tried in Pima County or Maricopa
County. The relevant Arizona venue statute is ambiguous.]
Counsel . . . have directed our attention to decisions [interpreting similar statutes in other states,
but we are free to disregard precedent from states where] the language of the statute . . . is different
from the language of our statute. [The situation is different where the other state’s statute is the one
from which our statute is drawn. In adopting our statute] from another state, we took it with the
construction theretofore placed upon it [by the courts of that state].
STATE v. MCDONALD
352 P.2d 343 (Ariz. 1960)

[The issue is whether the plaintiff can be made to pay the fees and expenses of the defendant’s
expert witnesses. The relevant Arizona statute, A.R.S. § 12-1128, is ambiguous.]
A.R.S. § 12-1128 was adopted from California [in 1901. After that date, two California cases
interpreted the original California statute to mean] the usual costs attending trial allowed by
statute. [Citations omitted.] . . .
351
Although we are not bound to follow the interpretation [afterward] placed on a statute by [the]
state from which our statute [had earlier been] adopted, it is persuasive. [Citation omitted.] . . .
ADAMS v. LAMICQ
221 P.2d 1037 (Utah 1950)

This action was commenced by the appellant to quiet title to an eighty acre tract of land in
Duchesne County, Utah. . . .
[T]he respondents claimed title to the land . . . by virtue of seven years’ adverse possession[,
during which they used the land as a winter range for sheep].
The . . . tract in question consisted of unbroken and unimproved brush lands suitable only for
grazing. . . . The property was [not inclosed by a fence. T]he respondents during the winter grazed
all of the eighty acres . . . , entering thereon in November and remaining until April, at which time
they moved their sheep onto higher grazing lands in Colorado for the summer and early autumn.
The respondents did not leave anyone upon or in charge of the eighty acres during the summer
months while they were away. . . .
. . . Sec. 104-2-9, Utah Code Annotated 1943, provides: “For the purpose of constituting an
adverse possession . . . , land is deemed to have been possessed and occupied in the following

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

262

cases: . . . (3) Where, although not inclosed, it has been used for the supply of fuel, or of fencing
timber for the purposes of husbandry, or for pasturage, or for the ordinary use of the occupant.”
(Italics added.)
In Kellogg v. Huffman, 137 Cal. App. 278, 30 P.2d 593, it was held under Sec. 323, subd. 3, Cal.
Code Civ. Proc., which is identical to Section 104-2-9, subd. 3, quoted above, that pasturing during
the entire grazing season of each year during which feed is available, if done to the exclusion of
others, is a sufficient use and occupation of land, which is reasonably fit for grazing purposes only,
to constitute the occupation and possession necessary to establish title by adverse possession. . . .
Thus we conclude that the respondents . . . had continuously claimed, occupied, and used [the
property] for at least seven years prior to the commencement of this action. . . .
KELLOGG v. HUFFMAN
30 P.2d 593 (Cal. Ct. App. 1934)

This is an action to quiet title to 160 acres of land in the Kettleman Hills in Fresno county. . . .
This property was rough and arid and was situated in what was, until about 1929, a sparsely settled
country used only for grazing purposes. . . .
The appropriate portion of section 323 of the Code of Civil Procedure reads as follows: “ . . .
For the purpose of constituting an adverse possession . . . land is deemed to have been possessed
and occupied in the following cases: . . . (3) Where, although not inclosed, it has been used for the
supply of fuel, or of fencing-timber for the purposes of husbandry, or for pasturage, or for the
ordinary use of the occupant.”
352
. . . To establish adverse possession it is only necessary that land be put to such use as can
reasonably be made thereof, and such a use is sufficiently continuous if, during the required time,
it be so used at all times when it can be used for the purpose to which it is adapted. [Citations
omitted.] It is well settled in this state that pasturing during the entire grazing season of each year
during which feed is available, if done to the exclusion of others, is a sufficient use and occupation
of land, which is reasonably fit only for pasturage purposes, to constitute the occupation and
possession necessary to establish a title by adverse possession. [Citations omitted.] . . . “. . . It is
sufficient that the use is in accordance with the usual course of husbandry in the locality.”
[Citation omitted.]
[There was ample evidence of adverse possession through use of the land for grazing purposes.]
DE LAS FUENTES v. MACDONELL
20 S.W. 43 (Tex. 1892)

This was an action on trespass to try title. . . .
Appellants . . . complain that the court erred in sustaining the defendant’s plea of the statute of
limitations of five years. . . . The [land] was never inclosed [by fences]. It is fit only for grazing
purposes. There have never been any houses upon it. No part of it has ever had any inclosures
upon it, except small pens, made of posts and brush, for the purpose of penning sheep. These were
renewed every year. . . . The land was used for “grazing and lambing purposes.” How many sheep
were kept upon it does not appear. One witness states that in 1871 there were 13,000 sheep upon
the land. . . . Cattle belonging to others were permitted to graze upon the land. . . .
There have been several cases decided in this court in which the effort has been made to show
an adverse possession of land by merely grazing cattle and horses upon it, but it has uniformly
been held that the possession was not sufficient to meet the requirements of the statute. [Citations
omitted.]
[T]he mere occupancy of land by grazing live stock upon it, without substantial inclosures or
other permanent improvements, is not sufficient to support a plea of limitation under our statutes.
Uninclosed land, in this state, has ever been treated as commons for grazing purposes; and hence
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

263

the mere holding of live stock upon it has not been deemed such exclusive occupancy as to
constitute adverse possession. . . . There must be “an actual occupation of such nature and
notoriety as the owner may be presumed to know that there is a possession of the land” [citation
omitted]; “otherwise, a man may be disseised without his knowledge, and the statute of limitations
run against him, while he has no ground to believe that his seizure has been interrupted” [citation
omitted].
We think the testimony insufficient to show adverse possession. . . .

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

264

353

Appendix

B

Precedent Analysis Exercise
Emil Risberg’s Diary
Returning from an expedition across the Arctic ice cap in the nineteenth century, Emil Risberg and his
companions became stranded at the northern tip of Greenland. After several weeks they all died of scurvy
and exposure. A few years later, their hut was found, their bodies were buried at sea, and their possessions
were returned to their families. Emil Risberg’s widow received, among other things, his diary.
Risberg had measured the group’s geographic position every day during the expedition, and he recorded
those measurements, as well as a mass of other detail, in his diary. His measurements showed that he and the
group he led had travelled farther north than anyone else had gone at the time. The diary brought Risberg
much posthumous fame, and it wasn’t until early in the twentieth century that any explorer got closer to the
north pole. The diary was passed on in Risberg’s family through inheritance. Four years ago, when the diary
became controversial, it was owned by Risberg’s great-granddaughter, Olga Risberg.
Controversy began when a researcher named Sloan announced that Risberg had faked his measurements
and that he could not possibly have gotten as far north as the diary showed. Sloan supported his argument
with a large amount of scientific evidence involving things like the ocean currents that shift the ice pack and
the distances that can be travelled in a day over ice. Olga Risberg took this very badly.
354
Within a month or two, she went to the officers of the New York Geographical Society, whom she had
never met before. She gave them the diary, together with a letter that contained the following sentence:
I donate my great-grandfather’s diary to the Society because I believe the Society is best situated to evaluate the
measurements recorded in it and to establish once and for all that Emil Risberg went where he claimed to have
gone.

No officer of the Society signed a contract obligating it to do the study in exchange for the gift. The
Society had not asked Olga Risberg to make a gift of the diary, and no one at the Society said anything to her
about conducting a study or about her motivation for the gift. At the time, the diary had an appraised value
of $15,000.
Olga is an architect living in a suburb of Minneapolis. The total value of her home, car, and savings
greatly exceeded (and still greatly exceeds) $15,000.
The Society did nothing to evaluate the diary. Two years ago, Olga demanded that the Society either
resolve the controversy or return the diary to her. The Society replied in a letter that, among other things,
stated the following:
When you donated the diary to the Society, you expressed some hope that it would be evaluated. But the Society
made no promise — orally or in writing — to study the controversy surrounding the diary. If and when our board of
directors chooses to go ahead with a study, we will do so, but you made a gift, which we accepted without
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

265

conditions.

Sloan has just died. In his papers are notes showing that he had faked his own measurements, that he had
started the controversy to build his reputation, and that all along he had believed that Risberg’s diary was
accurate. Olga has been besieged with offers to buy the diary from people who were unaware that she had
donated it to the Society. All of the offers are well into six figures.
Olga Risberg is your client. She wants the Society either to complete an objective and thorough study very
soon or to reconvey title to the diary back to her so that she can either sell it or have somebody else do the
study. She will be satisfied with either, and she is willing to sue.
You have concluded that the gift cannot be set aside on the grounds of fraud. You are now exploring
whether Olga Risberg will be able to persuade a court to impose a constructive trust on the Society’s title to
the diary. You have learned from Sharp v. Kosmalski that the elements of a constructive trust are “(1) a
confidential or fiduciary relation, (2) a promise, (3) a transfer in reliance thereon and (4) unjust enrichment.”
All four elements are disputed because the Society concedes none of them. But for this exercise, we’ll
focus on the first element alone — whether the relationship between Olga Risberg and the Society was
“confidential or fiduciary.”
Of all the cases you found while researching, the three in Parts 1, 2, and 3 below are most closely on
point.
355

Part 1
Read Sharp v. Kosmalski below. On the question of what a “confidential or fiduciary relationship” means,
what rule or rules does Sharp stand for? What policy or policies does it stand for?
SHARP v. KOSMALSKI
351 N.E.2d 721 (N.Y. 1976)

GABRIELLI, J.
Upon the death of his wife of 32 years, plaintiff, a 56-year-old dairy farmer whose education did not go
beyond the eighth grade, developed a very close relationship with defendant, a school teacher and a woman
16 years his junior. . . . Plaintiff came to depend upon defendant’s companionship and, eventually, declared
his love for her, proposing marriage to her. Notwithstanding her refusal of his proposal of marriage,
defendant continued her association with plaintiff and permitted him to shower her with many gifts, fanning
his hope that he could induce defendant to alter her decision concerning his marriage proposal. Defendant
was given access to plaintiff’s bank account, from which . . . she withdrew substantial amounts of money.
Eventually, plaintiff . . . executed a deed naming her a joint owner of his farm. . . . [N]umerous alterations . .
. were made to plaintiff’s farmhouse in alleged furtherance of “domestic plans” made by plaintiff and
defendant.
In September, 1971, while the renovations were still in progress, plaintiff transferred his remaining joint
interest to defendant. . . . In February, 1973, . . . defendant ordered plaintiff to move out of his home and
vacate the farm. Defendant took possession of the home, the farm and all the equipment thereon, leaving
plaintiff with assets of $300.
Generally, a constructive trust may be imposed “[w]hen property has been acquired in such circumstances
that the holder of the legal title may not in good conscience retain the beneficial interest” [citations omitted].
In the development of the doctrine of constructive trust as a remedy available to courts of equity, the
following four requirements were posited: (1) a confidential or fiduciary relation, (2) a promise, (3) a
transfer in reliance thereon and (4) unjust enrichment [citations omitted].
. . . The record in this case clearly indicates that a relationship of trust and confidence did exist between
the parties and, hence, the defendant must be charged with an obligation not to abuse the trust and
confidence placed in her by the plaintiff. . . .
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

266

. . . Even without an express promise . . . courts of equity have imposed a constructive trust upon property
transferred in reliance upon a confidential relationship. In such a situation, a promise may be implied or even
inferred from the very transaction itself. As Judge Cardozo so eloquently observed: “Though a promise in
words was lacking, the whole transaction, it might be found, was ‘instinct with an obligation’ imperfectly
expressed (Wood v. Duff-Gordon, 222 N.Y. 88, 91)” (Sinclair v. Purdy, 235 N.Y. 245, 254 . . . ). . . .
356
. . . Indeed, in the case before us, it is inconceivable that plaintiff would convey all of his interest in
property which was not only his abode but the very means of his livelihood without at least tacit
consent upon the part of the defendant that she would permit him to continue to live on and operate the
farm. . . .
The salutary purpose of the constructive trust remedy is to prevent unjust enrichment. . . . A person
may be deemed to be unjustly enriched if he (or she) has received a benefit, the retention of which
would be unjust. . . . This case seems to present the classic example of a situation where equity should
[impose a constructive trust in response to] a transaction pregnant with opportunity for abuse and
unfairness. . . .

Part 2
Read Sinclair v. Purdy, below. On the question of what a “confidential or fiduciary relationship” means,
what rule or rules does Sinclair stand for? What policy or policies does it stand for?
SINCLAIR v. PURDY
139 N.E. 255 (N.Y. 1923)

CARDOZO, J.
. . . Elijah F. Purdy [owned a half] interest in real estate in the city of New York. . . . Elijah was a
clerk of what was then known as the Fifth District Court. His ownership of real estate subjected him to
constant importunities to go bail for those in trouble. The desire to escape these importunities led him to
execute a deed conveying his undivided half interest to his sister Elvira[, who already owned the other
half]. . . . The relation between [brother and sister] was one of harmony and affection, and so continued
till the end. . . . There is evidence of repeated declarations by Elvira that, though the [whole] title was in
her name, a half interest was his. . . . Elijah died at the age of 80 in 1914. [A niece, who would have
inherited from Elijah, brought this suit to establish a trust in favor of Elijah — and thus in favor of the
niece — over the property deeded to Elvira.]
. . . The sister’s deposition shows that her brother disclosed his plan to her before the making of a
deed. . . . It was an expedient adopted to save him the bother of going upon bonds. She does not
remember that she made any promise in return. He trusted, as she puts it, to her sense of honor. A little
later she learned that the title was in her name.
We think a confidential relation was the procuring cause of the conveyance. The grantor could not
disclose the trust upon the face of the deed. If he had done so, he would have defeated the purpose of
the transfer, which required that title, to outward appearance, be vested in another. He found, as he
thought, in the bond of kinship a protection as potent as any that could be assured to him by covenants
of title. . . . “The absence of a formal writing grew out of that very confidence and trust, and was
occasioned by it.” [Citation omitted.]
357
In such conditions, the rule in this state is settled that equity will grant relief. [Citations omitted.] . . .
. . . Here was a man transferring to his sister the only property he had in the world. . . . He was doing
this, as she admits, in reliance upon her honor. Even if we were to accept her statement that there was
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

267

no distinct promise to hold it for his benefit, the exaction of such a promise, in view of the relation,
might well have seemed to be superfluous. . . . Though a promise in words was lacking, the whole
transaction, it might be found, was “instinct with an obligation” imperfectly expressed (Wood v.
Duff-Gordon, 222 N.Y. 88, 91). It was to be interpreted, not literally or irrespective of its setting, but
sensibly and broadly with all its human implications. . . .

Part 3
Read Tebin v. Moldock below (two opinions). The first opinion is from an intermediate appellate court.
The second is from the state’s highest court. On the question of what a “confidential or fiduciary
relationship” means, what rule or rules does the case stand for? What policy or policies does it stand for?
TEBIN v. MOLDOCK
241 N.Y.S.2d 629 (App. Div. 1963)

BREITEL, J.P.
. . . Plaintiffs are the son, sister and two brothers of a New York decedent, all of whom are residents
of Poland. Defendant is decedent’s niece, and a native-born American. Decedent emigrated to the
United States from Poland in 1913. She died in 1956, a widow, leaving only plaintiff son as a surviving
descendant. The action was to impose a constructive trust, in favor of plaintiffs, of certain funds
deposited in savings institutions, and a multiple dwelling. The assets had once belonged to decedent but
she, in the last five years of her life, had transferred them to defendant niece. . . .
[We hold that] a constructive trust [must] be imposed on the . . . assets of decedent in the hands of
defendant niece. While the evidence does not establish fraud or undue influence, it does inescapably
establish that the assets were transferred on certain promises to hold for the benefit of the son, which
promises were made in a confidential relationship. These promises were relied upon, and for their
breach equity is bound to provide appropriate relief.
Hermina Tebin, the decedent, was born in Poland in 1882. She married there, but later separated from
her husband, left her two sons with her parents, and emigrated to the United States in 1913. One son
died in 1920 without issue. The other, who was born in 1904, is the first-named plaintiff in this action.
358
Since coming to this country decedent lived in New York, earned her livelihood as a midwife,
acquired the lower east side multiple dwelling in which she lived, and accumulated cash funds in the
amount of about $19,000. During this period of over 40 years, she saw her son in Poland once when she
travelled there in 1928, and stayed for some two months. She maintained an intermittent
correspondence with him throughout and until the end of her life. . . .
In 1920, decedent brought her sister Aniela to the United States. . . . Defendant niece is Aniela’s
daughter, whom decedent knew as a growing child, befriended and assisted as a young woman training
for an educational career, and who, in decedent’s later years, handled her moneys and affairs when
illness and age closed in.
[Decedent’s health began to deteriorate in 1947. In 1951, she gave bank accounts and a deed to the
multiple dwelling to the niece, who signed an] agreement [providing] that decedent should retain the
use, free, of her apartment, and receive for her life the net income from the property less a management
fee to the niece. The [agreement] recited that the niece was the sole and entire owner of the property.
In August 1951 decedent made a will in which the niece was named as the sole beneficiary of her
estate. It contained the following clause:
Third: I have given certain oral instructions to my said niece, with respect to my son
Kazimierz Tebin, and having full faith and confidence in her honesty and integrity, I feel
certain that she will carry out my instructions. Nonetheless, in the event that she fails to carry
out my instructions, it shall be a matter for her own conscience and not otherwise.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

268

As decedent’s end approached, the niece handled more and more of the aunt’s affairs, faithfully, and
paid all her expenses of living, hospitalization and medical services, out of the funds theretofore
transferred to the niece. After the aunt’s death, the niece from the same sources paid the funeral
expenses. . . .
Presently, the niece holds the real property and about $14,000 of roundly $19,000 transferred to her.
Plaintiffs assert that the niece and her mother frightened decedent with the representation that if any
assets were ever received by the son, he being in a Communist country, the assets would be taken from
him and that Stalin would kill him. . . .
Plaintiffs also claim that the assets were transferred to the niece on her promise that she would hold
them for decedent’s son and advance funds as he needed and could profitably use them.
The niece and her mother assert that the relation between the decedent and her son was not a close
one, the decedent often complained of the greediness of the son and his persistent and exclusive interest
in receiving remittances and gifts. Moreover, it is asserted that the niece was to send moneys to the son
only in her exclusive discretion and judgment, and never in excess of $25 in any one month. . . .
359
In July, 1952 decedent came to Mr. Solon, a lawyer, and retained him to recover her property. . . .
Decedent had told Mr. Solon the Stalin story and that she had transferred the assets to the niece to
provide her lifetime needs and take care of her son. While there were some ensuing conversations about
bringing a lawsuit nothing further was done to prosecute the matter. . . .
The niece testified that decedent told her:
that she was an older woman, that she wanted someone . . . who would look after her needs
while she was alive [and] that all during her lifetime [her son] had always written to her and
asked her to help, and that since she was giving me everything she had, she thought that he
probably would, after her death, seek me out and ask me for help, and she asked me to see
that he never got his hands on any lump sum of money. That is why she was giving it to me.
But she knew that if he would write to me and ask me for help, and if I felt that he needed it,
that I would help him. . . .
In August, 1952 decedent wrote to her son in Poland:
I was very sick with my heart [because] Aniela and her daughter Janina scared me by telling me
that if I leave my estate to you Stalin will take it away from you after I die and that . . . you may be
shot to death. So I gave all to Janka — $14,000 and a house and now they are trying to commit me
to an insane asylum so they could keep everything for themselves. I will try to have you come here
and take it all back because they stole it from me by fraud and they bribed the lawyer.
Keep this letter so that you could appear as a witness if necessary. . . .
It is evident . . . that a secret agreement had been effected between aunt and niece for the benefit of
the aunt during her lifetime, and the son. . . .
[A constructive trust will be imposed where] the one who entrusted property did so because of
certain understandings, and the one to whom the assets are given acquiesced even in silence (e.g.,
Sinclair v. Purdy, 235 N.Y. 245, 253-254 . . . ). . . .
In dealing with the problem of a secret trust or the breach of a confidential relationship the
ordinary rules imposed by the Statute of Frauds . . . are not applicable. Equity in this area has
always reached beyond the facade of formal documents, absolute transfers, and even limiting
statutes on the law side. . . .
Accordingly, the judgment . . . should [provide] for a constructive trust in [the son’s] favor. . . .

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

269

360
TEBIN v. MOLDOCK
200 N.E.2d 216 (N.Y. 1964)

PER CURIAM.
[On appeal, the] judgment should be modified to limit the scope of the constructive trust
imposed on defendant Janina Moldock to an obligation to pay $25 a month for the benefit of
Kazimierz Tebin. . . .
[W]e conclude the record supports a finding that defendant, occupying a relationship of
confidence and trust with decedent, undertook to devote a small part of the property given to her
for the benefit of plaintiff. On the basis of defendant’s own testimony this would approximate $25
a month. No such breach of confidence or of fiduciary obligation, either before or after decedent’s
death, has been established as would warrant forfeiture by defendant of the major interest in
decedent’s property which it was clearly decedent’s intent that defendant should have.

Part 4
Is there a way of synthesizing some or all of these cases so that they stand for a unified view of the law?
Don’t feel bound to your previous answers about the rules and policies that each case stands for. When you
think about the three together, you might — or might not — see a bigger picture.

Part 5
Compare Olga Risberg’s facts to those in each case in this Exercise. Are they analogous? Distinguishable?

Part 6
Based on your answers to Parts 1 through 5, how do you think a court would rule on the issue of whether
Olga Risberg and the Society had a “confidential or fiduciary relationship”? This is your tentative prediction.

Part 7
Will the tentative prediction you made in Part 6 seem reasonable, just, and realistic to a judge on a human
level?

Part 8
Based on your answers to Parts 1 through 7, how will the court resolve the issue of whether Olga Risberg
and the Society had a “confidential or fiduciary relationship”? This is your final prediction.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

270

361

Appendix

C

Sample Office Memorandum
This appendix contains an office memorandum of the type described in Chapter 16.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

271

362
To:
From:
Date:
Client:
Re:

Theresa Wycoff
Christine Chopin
March 1, 2020
Eli Goslin
constructive trust
ISSUE

Will a constructive trust in favor of Eli Goslin be imposed on the title to his home and only asset, where (1) he
deeded the home over to his nephew after the nephew promised to make the remaining three years of payments to
prevent foreclosure, (2) Goslin made no statement at the time that would reveal his reasons for giving the deed, and
(3) the nephew has since then threatened to throw Goslin out of the home?
BRIEF ANSWER
A New York court will probably impose a constructive trust in Goslin’s favor on the nephew’s title to the house.
Goslin is able to prove each of the four elements of the New York test for a constructive trust: (1) a confidential or
fiduciary relationship between Goslin and his nephew; (2) a promise, implied by the nephew’s actions, to hold title
while allowing and helping Goslin to live in the house; (3) Goslin’s transfer of title to the nephew in reliance on
that promise; and (4) unjust enrichment by the nephew if the promise is broken. New York courts have uniformly
held these elements to be satisfied where — as happened here — a person in a vulnerable situation deeds the bulk
of her or his assets to someone like a trusted relative who pays either nothing or a fraction of the property’s fair
value.
FACTS
Eli Goslin, the client, is a 74-year-old arthritic widower who has been retired for 12 years and whose only
income is from Social Security. His sons are both in the military and are frequently stationed for long periods
overseas. His daughter lives in Singapore.
Until last year, he also had income from an investment, but when that business went bankrupt, he became unable
to meet the mortgage payments on his house. The house was Goslin’s only asset. He has lived there for 24 years,
and when these events occurred, the mortgage had only three more years to run. He has no other place to live.
After Goslin found that he could no longer pay, the mortgage, Herbert Skeffington, a nephew, offered to make
the remaining $11,500 in payments as they became due. Within a few days afterward, Goslin, without stating his
purpose to anyone, gave a deed to the property to Skeffington and got
-1-

363
the bank to agree to transfer the mortgage to him. At the time, the house was worth approximately $95,000 and
was unencumbered except for the mortgage that Skeffington had offered to pay. Aside from the promise to make
mortgage payments, Skeffington gave no value connected to the deed.
Goslin has told us that he made the deed for the following reason: ‘‘At the time, it seemed like the right thing to
do. He was going to pay the mortgage, and after a certain point — maybe after I’m gone — the place would
become his. I didn’t think it would end up like this.’’ Skeffington had not asked for a deed, and Goslin arranged for
the deed before telling the nephew about it. Goslin knew at the time that Skeffington would not need a deed to

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

272

make the mortgage payments. The bank would have been willing to accept Skeffington’s check if it were
accompanied by Goslin’s payment stub, or, alternatively, Skeffington could simply have given the money to
Goslin, who could in turn have paid the bank.
As far as Goslin knows, Skeffington has made the payments as they have become due.
At the time of the deed, neither party said anything about changing the living arrangements in the house. Goslin
continued to live alone there until a few weeks ago, when Skeffington’s rental apartment was burned out and he
moved, along with his wife and two children, into the house. Goslin neither agreed to nor protested this. A few
days later, Skeffington ordered Goslin to move out, which Goslin has refused to do. Since then, Skeffington has, at
the top of his voice, frequently repeated the demand. While yelling at Goslin, Skeffington has twice, with the heels
of his palms, suddenly shoved Goslin in the chest and sent him staggering. Skeffington has threatened to strike
Goslin again and to pack up Goslin’s belongings and leave them and Goslin on the sidewalk. Skeffington takes the
position that his family has no other place to go, and that the house is the only thing he owns.
Skeffington is 36 years old, and throughout Skeffington’s life he and Goslin have seen each other at least
monthly at family get-togethers, including each other’s weddings. Seventeen years ago, Goslin contributed $3,200
to Skeffington’s college tuition. The two of them have never discussed whether this was to be treated as a gift or a
loan, and Goslin does not recall which he intended or even whether he had an intent at the time. He says that he
considered both the tuition money and his nephew’s offer to pay the mortgage to be ‘‘the sort of thing people in a
family do for each other.’’ In any event, except for the mortgage payments, the nephew has never given Goslin
money directly or indirectly, and he has not announced an intention to compensate Goslin for the tuition money.
DISCUSSION
Goslin will probably be able to get a constructive trust imposed on his nephew’s title to the house.
Under New York law, a constructive trust will be imposed where the record shows ‘‘(1) a confidential or
fiduciary relation, (2) a promise, (3) a transfer in reliance thereon, and (4) unjust enrichment.’’ McGrath v. Hilding
, 363
-2-

364
Headings here show
where each element
is discussed. Under
the first heading, the
first sentence states
the first element’s
subconclusion and
the second sentence
states its supporting

N.E.2d 328, 330 (N.Y. 1977); Beason v. Kleine, 947 N.Y.S.2d 275, 277 (App. Div. 2012).
These elements are flexible, however, and New York courts will impose a constructive trust
even if not all of the elements are established. Simonds v. Simonds, 380 N.E.2d 189, 193-94
(N.Y. 1978); Rowe v. Kingston, 942 N.Y.S.2d 161, 163 (App. Div. 2012).

rule.
A substantiating
proof of the rule,
synthesizing three
holdings, Sharp,
Falise, and Rowe.

Goslin’s relationship with his nephew satisfies the first element. A confidential or
fiduciary relation exists where one person is willing to entrust important matters to a second
person. Sharp v. Kosmalski, 351 N.E.2d 721, 723 (N.Y. 1976); In re Estate of Falise, 863
N.Y.S.2d 854, 860 (App. Div. 2008). Family relations are routinely held to be confidential,
including those between aunts or uncles and nieces or nephews. See, e.g., Rowe, 942
N.Y.S.2d at 163 (finding a confidential relation between the plaintiff and his aunt and uncle
where they lived together in plaintiff’s home); Falise, 863 N.Y.S.2d at 860 (finding a
confidential relation between the decedent and his nephew where they “maintained a father
and son relationship”).
Although Goslin and Skeffington had not lived together prior to the deed, as in Rowe, or
behaved as father and son, as in Falise, their relationship should qualify as confidential.
Goslin and his nephew have seen each other at least monthly at family get-togethers since
the nephew was a boy, they attended each other’s weddings, and Goslin contributed to the
nephew’s college tuition.

A counter-analysis,
smoothly
introduced. It would
have been awkward
to begin
‘‘Skeffington’s

Confidential or Fiduciary Relationship

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

273

lawyer might argue .
. .’’
Implied Promise by the Transferee
The sub-conclusion
for the second
element.
The supporting rule,
synthesized from
three cases. Because
it’s at least a little
surprising, it needs
an extended
explanation and
proof. Some
corollary rules
explain the meaning
of ‘‘All that is
required is a
promise.’’ (The first
corollary rule tells
you that the promise
need not be written.)

A court will probably find a promise by the nephew to permit Goslin to continue to live in
his home. All that is required is a promise, and it need not be written. The Statute of Frauds,
which generally requires that contracts for
land transfers be in writing, will not prevent a constructive trust. Sharp, 351 N.E.2d at
723-24; Pattison v. Pattison, 92 N.E.2d 890, 894 (N.Y. 1950); Tebin v. Moldock, 241
N.Y.S.2d 629, 638 (App. Div. 1963) (“Equity in this area has always reached beyond the
facade of formal documents, absolute transfers, and even limiting statutes on the law side”).

The promise need not be express if it “may be implied or inferred from the very
transaction itself.” Sharp, 351 N.E.2d at 723. In Sharp, a 56-year-old farmer conveyed his
farm to a 40-year-old woman who had declined his offer of marriage but lived with and
accepted gifts from him. After the transfer, the woman ordered the farmer off the property.
Although the record contained no evidence of an express promise, the Court of Appeals held
that a promise could be inferred from the parties’ behavior because it was “inconceivable
that plaintiff would convey all of his interest in property which was not only his abode but
the very means of his livelihood without at least tacit consent upon the part of the defendant
that she would
-3-

365

permit him to continue to live on and operate the farm.” Id. at 724; see also Falise,
863 N.Y.S.2d at 860-61 (finding a nephew’s implicit promise to pay money from
bank accounts titled in his name to his uncle’s children); Johnson v. Lih, 628
N.Y.S.2d 458, 459 (App. Div. 1995) (finding a nephew’s implicit promise to deed his
uncle’s property not only to himself but his sister too).
Like the farmer in Sharp, Goslin owned nothing of substance other than his home.
At the time of the transfer, he had already been retired for nine years, and his only
income was from Social Security. Thus, as in Sharp, it is inconceivable that Goslin
would have transferred his property to Skef-fington without the understanding that he
would permit Goslin to continue to live there.
Skeffington could claim the transfer was an outright gift, but New York
courts have been reluctant to accept such claims under suspect circumstances. See
Sharp, 351 N.E.2d at 724; Sinclair v. Purdy, 139 N.E. 255, 258 (N.Y. 1923). In
Sinclair, a brother, who was employed as a court clerk and continually being asked to
pledge his property for other people’s bail, deeded it over to his sister, receiving
nothing in return. The Court of Appeals held that the circumstances implied a promise
that the sister would hold her brother’s share for his benefit, and Judge Cardozo
wrote:

Rule application begins.
This element is the heart
of Goslin’s controversy,
and the reader needs an
extended explanation of
why the rule will
be applied this way.
The rule application
centers on analogies to
Sharp and Sinclair. Notice
how the reader is given
the holding and enough of
the facts to understand the
comparison.

Here was a man transferring to his sister the only property he had in the world. . .
. Even if we were to accept her statement that there was no distinct promise to
hold it for his benefit, the exaction of such a promise, in view of the relation,
might well have seemed to be superfluous.
Sinclair, 139 N.E. at 258. Here, too, a distinct promise would have been superfluous
given the nature of Goslin and Skeffington’s relationship and Goslin’s financial

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

274

circumstances. Skeffington offered to pay the mortgage because Goslin could no
longer afford it. Goslin has no other place to live, and the house is his only asset. It
would make no sense for him to give it away without an implied promise that he
could continue to live there.
Nor can Skeffington’s promise to make the mortgage payments be considered
payment for the title in lieu of a promise to permit Goslin to stay in his home.
Skeffington offered to make the payments before Goslin deeded him the property, and
if Skeffington took clear title at that time, the mortgage payments would benefit him,
not Goslin. Moreover, the
amount remaining on the mortgage was far below the market value of the home and
would not have been adequate compensation for it.
Of all the facts here, the most troubling is that Goslin was not required to deed the
home to Skeffington in order to accept his nephew’s offer to pay the mortgage.
Skeffington could have made the payments for Goslin without owning the home.
Presumably, Goslin gave Skeffington the deed

These paragraphs include
counter-analyses.

-4-

366

to motivate Skeffington to pay the mortgage while Goslin continued to live there, honoring his
relationship with his nephew. It seemed “the sort of thing people in a family do for each other.”
This is a case where equity will likely step in to accomplish “that which should have been done.”
Simonds, 380 N.E.2d at 193.
Transfer in Reliance on the Promise
The nephew
must concede
part of this
element, and
the rest is
proved
through the
explanations
of the first two
elements.

Goslin should be able to meet the requirements of the third element. The transfer to Skeffington
is not in dispute, and even though Goslin deeded the property to his nephew without his
knowledge, that will not prevent the imposition of a constructive trust. See Falise, 863 N.Y.S.2d
at 861 (imposing a constructive trust based on an uncle’s transfer of title to bank accounts to his
nephew without the nephew’s knowledge).

Unjust Enrichment
The
sub-conclusion
for the final
element.

An analogy to
Falise.

Goslin should also be able to establish the fourth element. Unjust enrichment occurs where
“property has been acquired in such circumstances that the holder of the legal title may not in
good conscience retain the beneficial interest.” Sharp, 351 N.E.2d at 723 (quotations omitted); see
Falise, 863 N.Y.S.2d at 859. In Falise, the decedent titled two bank accounts containing roughly
$500,000 in his nephew’s name and, in a note opened after his death, asked his nephew to
distribute the money equally among the decedent’s children. In turn, the nephew claimed the
money belonged solely to him. Even though the nephew had helped care for his uncle, the court
held he would be unjustly enriched by keeping the money. Falise, 863 N.Y.S.2d at 860-62.
Similarly, Skeffington helped care for his uncle by making mortgage payments, but he would
be unjustly enriched by acquiring a home worth $95,000 in exchange for $11,500 in remaining
mortgage payments. A court will probably find that Skeffington has tried to convert his
assumption of a family responsibility into a windfall. Skeffington’s offer to pay the remaining
mortgage could be seen by both parties as reciprocation for Goslin’s help in putting the nephew
through college, although that finding is not necessary for a ruling in Goslin’s favor.
CONCLUSION

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

275

Goslin can likely demonstrate all the elements of a constructive trust. He had a relationship of
trust and confidence with his nephew, and they have maintained a lifelong friendship. Under these
circumstances, a court is likely to find that Skeffington “promised” to permit Goslin to live in the
home in exchange for the deed to the property, and Goslin acted accordingly. Given Goslin’s dire
finances, it makes no sense to assume he gave the
-5-

367
property to Skeffington outright. Finally, Skeffington would be unjustly enriched because he would have clear title
to a $95,000 asset in exchange for $11,500 in mortgage payments. The only way to rectify this situation is to
impose a trust.

-6-

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

276

369

Appendix

D

Sample Email Memo
This appendix contains an email memo of the type explained in Chapter 17.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

277

370
From:
To:
Date:
Subject:

Matthew Donohoe <MDonohoe@lms.law.com>
Cheryl Lopez <CMLopez@lmslaw.com>
Thurs., Feb 25, 2021 at 1:44 PM
Alisha Singh/Hostile Work Environment Claim

Hi, Cheryl.
As you requested, here is the summary of my research on the Singh case so you can update the client when you
meet with her tomorrow. I think that she has a viable Title VII sexual harassment claim against her employer, NRG
Designs, under a hostile work environment theory.
The facts she presents satisfy the five factors established in Andrews v. City of Philadelphia, 895 F.2d 1469, 1482
(3d Cir. 1990), which is still cited as the controlling case. Following is a brief summary of the factors and how
Singh satisfies them:
•

•
•

•

•

The employee suffered intentional discrimination because of the employee’s sex. Sexually explicit
conduct and pornographic materials in the workplace satisfy this requirement. Koschoff v. Henderson, 109
F.Supp.2d 332, 347 (E.D. Pa. 2000) (citing Andrews, 895 F.2d at 1482 n.3). The pornographic emails sent to
all employees and the coworkers teasing Singh for being uptight satisfy this requirement.
The discrimination was pervasive and regular. Because the conduct Singh describes occurred at regular
intervals over an extended period of time, it should satisfy this factor despite the fact that no one incident
was severe. See Spain v. Gallegos, 26 F.3d 439 (3d Cir. 1994).
The discrimination detrimentally affected the plaintiff. Singh can show that she is detrimentally affected
based on her perception of the workplace as hostile and abusive. See Spain, 26 F.3d at 449. Her account is
corroborated by her requests to be removed from the email list and complaints to an upper-level supervisor
about the conduct.
The discrimination would detrimentally affect a reasonable person of the same sex in that position.
The ongoing nature of the harassment and the fact that it has affected her relationships with her coworkers,
as reflected in her performance evaluation should meet the requirement that a reasonable person would be
detrimentally affected. In addition, Singh might be able to show that her promotion denial stemmed directly
from her reaction to the emails and teasing. This would provide concrete evidence of objective harm. Spain,
26 F.3d at 450.
The existence of respondeat superior liability. NRG is liable for the actions of Singh’s supervisor as well
as those of her coworkers. NRG is liable for her supervisor’s actions because his conduct caused a tangible
employment action (the promotion denial). See Durham Life Ins. v.

371
Evans, 166 F.3d 139, 152 (3d Cir. 1999). NRG is liable for her coworkers’ actions because management had
been aware of the problem for eighteen months and has failed to address the allegations promptly and
adequately.
I have attached the key cases, and I am in the process of drafting a longer memorandum of law with supporting
authority, which I will get to you by next week as we agreed, but I hope this gives you enough information for your
meeting.
Take care,
Matt

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

278

Matthew Donohoe, Esq.
Lopez, Moritz and Smith LLP
MDonohoe@lms.law.com
(555) 740-4531
This e-mail message and any attached files are confidential and are intended solely for the use of the addressee(s)
named above. This communication may contain material protected by attorney-client, work product, or other
privileges. If you have received this confidential communication in error, please notify the sender immediately by
reply e-mail message and permanently delete the original message.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

279

373

Appendix

E

Sample Client Advice Letter
This appendix contains a client advice letter of the type described in Chapter 19.
The client is Ada Warren of Lincoln Notch, Vermont. She is in her late fifties. When the Lincoln
Creamery fell on hard times a few years ago, she lost her job as office manager and lived thereafter on
savings. When her cousin Virgil died last year, she inherited his farm near Grafton, which she sold to a
Boston developer for a half million dollars. She then booked a cruise on the Pride of Seaside, a six-cabin
sailing yacht.
The degree of formality in a client letter will differ according to the client’s expectations. A corporate
client expects formality. An individual client might not. Contractions, for example, are appropriate in a letter
to Ms. Warren. They might not be appropriate in a letter from your law firm to General Electric’s general
counsel.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

280

374
Huber & Stanislaw
Attorneys at Law
6 Front Street
Seaside, ME 01203
(603) 555-1111
March 22, 2021
Ada Warren
22 Green Mountain Road
Lincoln Notch, VT 05862
Dear Ms. Warren:
As I promised when we met last week, I’ve researched your rights against Seaside Cruises and the state Marine
Police. I believe that you probably would win a lawsuit against Seaside but lose a suit against the police. In the
second half of this letter, I’ll explain why.
After you and I spoke last week, I examined the police logs and talked to some of the passengers. I was able to
get some information (though not much) from the police officers and the captain of the Pride of Seaside. My
advice later in this letter is based on my understanding of the facts, which are described in the next few paragraphs.
If I’ve gotten any of the facts wrong, please tell me so that I can determine whether the law would treat the
situation differently.
Facts
You boarded the Pride of Seaside at 8:30 in the evening. The boat left the dock at 9:00 P.M., and you went below
at about 9:30 and were asleep by about 10:15. You had felt ill earlier in the evening and had wanted to rest. At
10:40 P.M., the boat was boarded by Officers Magrane and Kroyer of the State Marine Police, who suspected that a
sailor had marijuana hidden behind his bunk. They found what they were looking for, arrested the sailor, and
ordered the captain to sail to the Marine Police dock. There, the boat was impounded and the sailor was taken away
by the police. The other passengers and the rest of the crew were awakened by the ruckus and came on deck, where
they were told by Officer Kroyer that they would have to leave the boat. Officer Magrane drove the passengers
(except you) in a police van to a hotel, where they slept.
Neither the crew nor the police searched the boat to make sure no one else was aboard. The police officers didn’t
ask for a list of passengers. The crew didn’t offer a passenger list to the police or compare the passengers on deck
with the boat’s passenger manifest. The police say they thought it was the crew’s responsibility to get everyone off
the boat. The captain says that he thought the police were doing that.
You slept soundly through the night. At 12:15 A.M., Officer Kroyer sealed the boat. He locked every outer door
and hatch, removed the gangway, locked it in a shed, and went home. As a result, you wouldn’t have been able to
get to the deck because all the doors and hatches were locked from the outside, and even if you had been able to
get to the deck, you wouldn’t have been able to leave the boat.
-1-

375

No one else was at the dock until Officer Tedescu arrived at about 6:30 A.M. Tedescu found a note
from Kroyer that the boat had been impounded but not yet been searched except for the sailor’s
bunk. He rolled out the gangway, walked on board, and at 6:45 unlocked the door to the passageway
outside your cabin. You awoke at about 7:00 A.M., opened your cabin door, and found Officer
Tedescu standing in the passageway. Officer Tedescu explained what had happened, and you
suddenly felt light-headed and fell to the floor of the passageway. In his written report, Officer
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

281

Tedescu used the word ‘‘fainted’’ to describe this. You revived in a moment or two, and he drove
you to a hospital, where an emergency room physician decided that you needed no treatment.
You were shocked at the indignity of learning that you had spent the night locked up in a police
boat yard rather than cruising at sea as you thought you had been. For you, this was the same as
being locked up in a jail cell overnight. Both are shameful, treating you like a criminal. Except for
collapsing or fainting, you didn’t suffer physically from these events. Seaside Cruises has refused to
refund the $3,500 that you paid for this two-week cruise. They have not provided any passenger
with a refund.
Possible Lawsuits
When we met last week, you said that you aren’t sure that legal action would be worth the effort,
but that you feel taken advantage of and wanted to know what your rights are. I’ll explain what I
think would happen if you were to sue Seaside Cruises and the Marine Police.
Seaside Cruises: The law considers Seaside to be a common carrier. Airlines, railroads, and bus
companies are also common carriers. Common carriers owe a very high degree of care to their
passengers, including the duty to rescue a passenger from harm. Based on the facts we have at this
point, I think you would probably win on this claim. Seaside’s employees should have made sure
you were off the boat before it was locked up or at least have told the police that you were aboard.

But it’s harder to predict how much money a jury would award on this claim. It might be small on
the ground that you were unaware at the time that you were locked into the boat. Or it might be
larger if the jury can appreciate the depth of the indignity.
On the other hand, Seaside Cruises does owe you a refund of $3,500. You paid for a service (a
cruise) that Seaside did not provide. The law is clear that they aren’t entitled to keep the money,
even though the cruise was prevented by police seizure of their boat.
You can bring both claims against Seaside — for the refund and for failing to get you off the boat
— in a single lawsuit.
The Marine Police: If you were to sue the state for false imprisonment, I believe that you
wouldn’t succeed. In this state, a false imprisonment claim can succeed only if the person confined
knew of the confinement while it was occurring or was harmed by it. The law defines ‘‘harm’’ in
this sense as economic loss or physical injury.

Common
carriers are
explained in
a
nontechnical
way so the
client will
understand.

Here the
prediction is
negative.

You did suffer an economic loss (the $3,500 that Seaside has not refunded), but not because you
were locked in the boat. If the police had driven you to a hotel, Seaside still would have refused to
refund the money.
-2-

376

The
analogy
can
help
the
client
accept
the bad
news.
A

Because you learned of your confinement only after Officer Tedescu had unlocked the boat, the only
way of succeeding in a suit against the police would be to show that the confinement caused you physical
injury. The only physical injury is your collapse when Officer Tedescu told you that you had been
confined. But a jury could conclude that you collapsed because you were still ill from the night before.
Moreover, in a case called Osborne v. Floyd, our state supreme court recently decided that the physical
injury must be caused by the confinement itself. It isn’t enough for the harm to be caused by knowledge
of the confinement. In Osborne, a man was comatose and unaware he had been locked into a cellar. His
medical condition didn’t deteriorate before rescuers broke down the door. But after he regained
consciousness and learned what had happened, he experienced nightmares. The court held that the
nightmares weren’t sufficient, and an injury would have to be physical for him to recover. I think the
courts would treat your collapsing onto the floor the same way, especially because the emergency room
physician decided that you needed no medical treatment.
I wish this weren’t so, but unfortunately, it is.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

282

useful
thing to
say
with
bad
news.

Let’s talk further in a few days. If, after thinking this over, you’re interested in suing Seaside Cruises, I
can explain what a lawsuit would cost so you can decide whether to go ahead. It might be possible to
reduce the expense of suing if other passengers join with you and sue to get the refunds they’re entitled
to. Please call my office when you feel ready.
Sincerely,
Gary Stanislaw
-3-

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

283

377

Appendix

F

Sample Motion Memorandum
This appendix contains a motion memorandum of the type described in Chapter 23.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 7:40 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

284

378
IN THE
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE EASTERN DISTRICT OF PENNSYLVANIA

BRIEF OF PLAINTIFF
In opposition to the motion for partial summary judgment filed January 12, 2018, by Defendant Ellis Carver, in the
District Court of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania, docketed at 17-007.

Alison Slaughter
Civil Action No. 17-007
1315 Walnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103
555-555-1234
Counsel of Record for
Beatrice Russell

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

285

379
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Statement of the Case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A. Statement of Facts .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1. First Debt Collection Action. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. Carver Hired to Represent Midland in Debt Collections. . . .
3. Carver Assigned His Secretary To Conduct a Single Search for Ms. Russell. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
................
4. Carver Filed a Second Debt Collection Action Against Ms. Russell on the Same Debt.. . . . . . . . . . . .
............
B. Procedural Background .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
1
1
2
2
3
4

Argument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
I. The Defendant Is Not Entitled To Summary Judgment Because Conducting a Single Search in a Lawsuit 4
Database the Defendant Knows To Be Unreliable Is Not a Reasonable Way To Avoid a Repetitive and
Abusive Lawsuit
A. The Defendant Violated the FDCPA Because Filing a Lawsuit That He Should Have Known Was
5
Barred by Res Judicata Is Deceptive
B. The Defendant’s Filing of a Deceptive Claim Cannot Be Excused by Good Faith Because His
6
Information About the Claim Came From a Source That He Knew Was Unreliable
1. The Defendant Provided No Proof of Any Agreement With Midland That It Would Not Refer
6
Uncollectable Claims to Him.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2. The Defendant Pursued Midland’s Claim Against Russell Despite Knowing That Midland Had
7
Previously Sent Him Uncollectable Claims.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
C. Performing a Single Search in a Database Defendant Knew To Be Unreliable Cannot Satisfy the
8
Defendant’s Statutory Obligation to Avoid Filing Baseless Claims. . . . . . .
1. The Defendant’s Search Resulted in the Exact Error for Which the Database Was Known.. . . . . . . . 8
.........
2. The Defendant Failed to Perform a Docket Search in Compliance With Common Industry
9
Standards.. . . . . . . . .
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
-i -

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

286

380
INTRODUCTION
In this case, the Defendant Ellis Carver filed a debt collection claim against Ms. Beatrice Russell that he should
have known, through minimal investigation, was barred by res judicata. Carver’s filing of the unenforceable claim
caused Ms. Russell anguish and financial harm.
By filing a claim he should have known was barred, Carver violated the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act
(FDCPA). Carver is not entitled to the FDCPA’s bona fide error defense because he has not demonstrated that he
used reasonable procedural safeguards to prevent filing a barred lawsuit. Carver’s only “procedures” amount to
unreasonable reliance on information from a client he knew to be unreliable and a single search in an error-prone
outdated online Court of Common Pleas docket. Because neither of these steps is sufficient to guard against the
filing a res judicata barred lawsuit, they cannot not extinguish Carver’s liability. Therefore, Carver is not entitled to
summary judgment on a bona fide error defense.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
A. Statement of Facts
This case arises because Ellis Carver filed an unenforceable debt collection claim against Ms. Beatrice Russell,
an unemployed, disabled, single mother who has been unable to work after she was seriously injured on February
10, 2016. An uninsured driver ran a red light and hit her with his car. (Russell Dep. at 1.) Before the accident, Ms.
Russell held a housekeeping position at Chestnut Hill Hospital, earning approximately $26,000 annually. (Russell
Dep. at 4.) Since the accident, Ms. Russell’s income has been drastically reduced to $1,000 in disability and $450
in food stamps each month. (Russell Dep. at 4:9-10.) At the time of her accident, Ms. Russell had a credit card
account with Citibank and has paid minimum payments since she opened the account five years ago. (Russell Dep.
at 1:15-18.) However, after the accident, Ms. Russell was unable to afford the minimum payments. (Russell Dep.
at 2:9.) Ms. Russell acknowledges that she owes money to Citibank and is willing to continue making payments
after she is able to return to work and can afford the payments. (Russell Dep. at 2:17.) On September 10, 2016,
Citibank assigned its right under its contract with Ms. Russell to Midland Funding. (Compl. Ex. A.) Midland
Funding then filed a debt collection action against Ms. Russell in the Philadelphia County Court of Common Pleas
on February 6, 2017. (Compl. Ex. B.)
1. First Debt Collection Action
Midland’s claim sought to recover the amount of the debt plus attorneys’ fees, an amount totaling $8,725.37.
(Compl. at ¶7; Carver Answer at ¶7.) Midland’s claim failed to include a statement of account and the cardholder
agreement, which would prove that Midland owned the debt. (Compl. Ex. A.) Therefore, on or about June 20,
2017, Judge Idee Fox of the of the Court of Common Pleas of Philadelphia County, dismissed the February
complaint with prejudice because Midland failed to provide the required documents. (Compl. at ¶8; Carver Answer
at ¶8.)
-1-

381
2. Carver Hired to Represent Midland in Debt Collections
Ellis Carver began his debt collection litigation practice six years ago in 2012, which became the main part of
his practice in 2016. (Carver Dep. at 5:3.) He is well versed in the FDCPA provisions and the reputations of the
largest debt collectors because he regularly attends the Pennsylvania Bar Institute’s annual FDCPA training and is

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

287

a member of Credit Collections Attorneys of America. (Carver Dep. at 4:7-8.) Carver began representing Midland
in June 2017 and filed about 50 state court collection actions on its behalf. (Carver Dep. at 1:21-25.) Midland
referred Ms. Russell’s case to Carver in July 2017. (Carver Dep. at 1:3.)
Midland usually provides Carver with only a printout that lists the account number and amount of the debt.
(Carver Dep. at 2:23.) Carver then files a complaint without attaching the statement or account or cardholder
agreement, despite knowing that, at a minimum, the cardholder agreement is required. (Carver Dep. at 2:29.) As a
result, Carver has on several occasions had to withdraw complaints referred to him by Midland because he was
unable to obtain these documents. (Carver Dep. at 2:9-11.)
Carver testified that he was aware that Midland engages in pervasive abusive collection practices and as a result
it entered into a consent decree with the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau. (Carver Dep. at 4:23.) Despite
Midland’s habitual abusive collection practices, Carver nevertheless testified that he relies on Midland’s referrals
as proof that the cases are enforceable. (Carver Dep. at 4:1.) Carver claims to have “an agreement with Midland
that all files it transmits to [him] for collection are legitimate, collectible debts with no bankruptcy discharges or
any other type of problem” but provided no proof of this agreement. (Carver Dep. at 4:1-3.) Carver has not
provided any written agreement with Midland, nor has he provided any additional evidence or details regarding the
provisions of such an agreement. (Carver Dep. at 4.)
Moreover, Carver acknowledged in his deposition that Midland has referred to him debts that were not
legitimate, collectible debts. (Carver Dep. at 3:24.) At least once, Midland referred a debt to Carver for which it
had already sued the debtor. (Carver Dep. at 4:24-25.) Further, Carver admitted that Midland does not provide the
documents required to collect on a debt through litigation in Pennsylvania. (Carver Dep. at 2:9-29.) Carver does
not specifically ask Midland to verify it has not sued a particular debtor before because even the “Common Pleas
Court docket is more reliable” than Midland. (Carver Dep. at 3:26-27.)
debtor before because even the “Common Pleas Court docket is more reliable” than Midland. (Carver Dep. at
3:26-27.)
3. Carver Assigned His Secretary to Conduct a Single Search for Ms. Russell
When Midland refers a new case to Carver, he instructs his assistant, Ms. Rhonda Pearlman, to conduct a single
search in a single Court of Common Pleas docket. (Carver Dep. at 2:3.) Pearlman searches only in the Court of
Common Pleas in the county the debtor currently lives in, but does not search any surrounding counties or check
the file to determine if the debtor has lived elsewhere. (Pearlman Dep. at 2:5-7.) Pearlman searches only for the
debtor’s
-2-

382
name, but does not perform a phonetic search of the debtor’s name, which would reveal names similar to the
searched name. (Pearlman Dep. at 2:23-3:2.) Further, Pearlman does not search for any cases filed by Carver’s
client, Midland Funding, much less for the creditor from whom Midland purchased the debt. (Pearlman Dep. at
3:9-11.)
After Midland referred Ms. Russell’s case to Carver, Pearlman searched the civil docket on the Philadelphia
Court of Common Pleas website for Ms. Russell’s last name. (Pearlman Dep. at 2:24.) Pearlman did not identify
Midland’s February 2017 lawsuit naming Ms. Russell as the defendant in her single search of the Philadelphia
Court of Common Pleas online docket. (Pearlman Dep. at 2:16.) The docket had “the wrong name—it says
‘Brussell’ not ‘Russell.’ ” (Pearlman Dep. at 2:22.) However, if Pearlman had looked more closely, she would have
seen Beatrice Russell’s name correctly identified in the case parties, docket entries, and complaint filed in February
2016. (Compl. Ex. A; Compl. Ex. B.)
Carver acknowledged that there are alternatives to using the Court of Common Pleas online docket search,
including fee-based online legal search resources, such as Bloomberg Law. (Carver Dep. at 4:12-13.) However,
Carver does not subscribe to any of these resources. (Carver Dep. at 4:10.) Carver does not want to pay the $500
monthly subscription fee. (Carver Dep. at 4:12-13.) Carver does this despite knowing that the docket contains
errors, because, as Pearlman puts it, “that’s life.” (Carver Dep. at 3:29; Pearlman Dep. at 3:13.)
4. Carver Filed a Second Debt Collection Action Against Ms. Russell on the Same Debt.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

288

On or about July 13, 2017, Carver, representing Midland, filed a debt collection complaint against Ms. Russell.
(Compl. at ¶9; Carver Answer at ¶9.) Ms. Russell was upset and confused when she was sued a second time, only
months after the first suit was dismissed. (Russell Dep. at 3:8-12.) Ms. Russell explained that she “thought this was
over once we won the first lawsuit. I couldn’t believe I got sued again. I was worried they could just keep suing me
forever.” (Russell Dep. at 3:46.) This caused Ms. Russell so much stress and embarrassment that she suffered from
insomnia, headaches, nausea and stomach pain. (Russell Dep. at 3:4; Compl. at ¶13.) Her anxiety was so severe
that Ms. Russell’s physician prescribed her Valium, which cost $20.00 for each prescription. (Russell Dep. at
3:19-22.)
Ms. Russell was able to obtain free counsel, but meeting with her attorney caused Ms. Russell significant
hardship. Because Ms. Russell was unable to use public transportation due to her injury, her sister had to drive her
to meetings, which was costly in gas and parking. (Russell Dep. at 3:16-17.)
After speaking with Ms. Russell, her attorney sent Carver a letter on September 30, 2017, setting forth the two
preliminary objections filed in the Court of Common Pleas. (Carver Dep. Ex. P-1.) First, the complaint Carver filed
failed to comply with Pa. R. Civ. P 1019(i). (Carver Dep. Ex. P-1.) Second, Midland Funding had already sued Ms.
Russell on the same debt, and the first lawsuit was dismissed with prejudice. (Carver Dep. Ex. P-1.)
Carver waited twelve days withdraw the suit against Ms. Russell after receiving the letter from Ms. Russell’s
attorney. (Compl. at ¶12.) Carver only withdrew after his secretary verified the information in the letter. (Carver
Dep. at 1:15.)
-3-

383
B. Procedural Background
On December 7, 2017, Ms. Beatrice Russell filed a complaint for damages under 15 U.S.C. § 1692 against Mr.
Ellis Carver and Midland Funding, LLC. (Compl. at ¶1.) Russell and Defendant Midland Funding entered into a
Settlement Agreement on January 7, 2017, and thereafter the action against Midland Funding was dismissed.
(Midland Funding Stip.) On January 2, 2018, Carver filed an answer to the complaint. (Carver Answer.) Carver
filed a motion for partial summary judgment on January 12, 2018. (Carver Mot. Partial Summ. J.)
ARGUMENT
I. The Defendant Is Not Entitled to Summary Judgment Because Conducting a Single Search in a Lawsuit
Database the Defendant Knows To Be Unreliable Is Not a Reasonable Way To Avoid a Repetitive and
Abusive Lawsuit.
The purpose of the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA) is to “eliminate abusive debt collection
practices by debt collectors.” 15 U.S.C. § 1692(e) (2012). The FDCPA provides consumers with a civil cause of
action when a debt collector engages abusive debt collection practices. Because the FDCPA is remedial, its
language is construed “broadly, so as to effect its purpose.” Tatis v. Allied Interstate, LLC, 882 F.3d 422, 427 (3d
Cir. 2018). Accordingly, an alleged violation is evaluated from the perspective of the least sophisticated debtor to
“protect the gullible as well as the shrewd.” Id. at 427.
The FDCPA provides a narrow affirmative defense for debt collectors only “if the debt collector shows by a
preponderance of evidence that the violation was not intentional and resulted from a bona fide error
notwithstanding the maintenance of procedures reasonably adapted to avoid any such error.” § 1692k(c). Thus, to
establish a bona fide error defense, the Defendant must demonstrate that the error occurred despite procedures
reasonably designed to avoid such an error. Beck v. Maximus, Inc., 457 F.3d 291, 297-99 (3d Cir. 2006).
Here, the Defendant violated the FDCPA when he filed a lawsuit barred by res judicata. The Defendant’s
conduct is not protected by the bona fide error defense because the Defendant’s procedures are not reasonable
safeguards to prevent filing a barred lawsuit. First, the Defendant unreasonably relied on a client who was known
to conduct abusive collection practices. (Carver Dep. at 3:2-3.) Second, the Defendant conducted only a single
search in notoriously error-prone county court online docket. (Carver Dep. at 2-4.) These allegedly preventative
procedures are cursory at best, and amount to insufficient procedural safeguards to establish a bona fide error
defense.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

289

The Defendant is not entitled to summary judgment because summary judgment is only granted when there is
“no genuine issue as to any material fact and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Fed. R.
Civ. P. 56(c). Because she is the non-moving party, all facts and inferences must be viewed in the light most
favorable to Russell. Moody v. Atl. City Bd. of Educ.,
-4-

384
870 F.3d 206, 213 (3d Cir. 2017). Here, the Defendant asserted an affirmative defense. The bona fide error
defense is a “narrow exception to the FDCPA . . . so [the Defendant bears] the burden of proof at summary
judgment.” Clark v. Capital Credit & Collection Servs., Inc., 460 F.3d 1162, 1177 (9th Cir. 2006). Accordingly,
the Defendant must demonstrate he used reasonable procedural safeguards to prevent filing a barred lawsuit. The
Defendant has not met his burden of proof; rather Russell has demonstrated that none of the Defendant’s
procedures were sufficiently reasonable to prevent the violation, filing a res judicata barred lawsuit.
A. The Defendant Violated the FDCPA Because Filing a Lawsuit That He Should Have Known
Was Barred by Res Judicata Is Deceptive.
The Defendant’s act of filing a res judicata barred lawsuit is deceptive under the FDCPA. Filing a barred lawsuit
leads the consumer to believe that she is potentially liable when, as a matter of law, she is not. A debt collector is
deceptive when it falsely represents “the character, amount, or legal status of any debt.” § 1692e(2)(A). It is well
settled that filing a barred lawsuit is deceptive. Huertas v. Galaxy Asset Mgmt., 641 F.3d 28, 33 (3d Cir. 2011)
(letter seeking payment on time barred debt).
A debt collector may only seek repayment on a time-barred debt so long as it “does not initiate or threaten legal
action in connection with its debt collection efforts” from the perspective of the least sophisticated debtor. Id. at
32-33. Filing a time-barred lawsuit implicitly misrepresents the status of the debt and therefore deceives the debtor
as to the legal status of the debt. Kimber v. Fed. Fin. Corp., 668 F. Supp. 1480, 1489 (M.D. Ala. 1987) (filing a
lawsuit on a time-barred debt). Accordingly, filing a barred lawsuit is deceptive. Here, similar to Huertas and
Kimber, the Defendant’s lawsuit represented to an unsophisticated debtor that he could recover in the lawsuit
when, as a matter of law, he could not. Accordingly, the complaint filed by the Defendant was deceptive.
Moreover, “a debt collector may not use unfair or unconscionable means to collect or attempt to collect any
debt.” § 1692f. Filing a time-barred lawsuit is “unjust and unfair, and in violation of public policy” because “even
if the consumer realizes that she can use time as a defense, she will more than likely still give in rather than fight
the lawsuit.” Kimber, 668 F. Supp. at 1447-48. The Defendant’s act of filing a res judicata barred lawsuit was
unfair means because Ms. Russell is an unsophisticated consumer who, like the debtor in Kimber, is likely unaware
that the defense of res judicata is available to her.
B. The Defendant’s Filing of a Deceptive Claim Cannot Be Excused by Good Faith Because His
Information About the Claim Came From a Source That He Knew Was Unreliable.
The Defendant’s reliance on Midland was unreasonable and therefore is insufficient to establish a bona fide
error defense. A debt collector is not shielded from liability under the bona fide error defense when it unreasonably
relies on a creditor’s representation, even though the FDCPA does not require
-5-

385
a debt collector to independently verify each debt. Clark, 460 F.3d at 1176 (9th Cir. 2006). Unreasonable reliance
also extends to attorney-debt collectors who file barred lawsuits. McCollough v. Johnson, Rodenburg & Lauinger,
LLC, 637 F.3d 939, 949 (9th Cir. 2011). Here, the Defendant unreasonably relied on Midland because he knew
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

290

Midland was unreliable. (Carver Dep. at 3:27.)
Cir. 2011). Here, the Defendant unreasonably relied on Midland because he knew Midland was unreliable.
(Carver Dep. at 3:27.)
1.

The Defendant Provided No Proof of Any Agreement With Midland That It Would Not Refer
Uncollectable Claims to Him.

The mere fact that the Defendant alleges that there was an agreement with Midland that it would not refer debts
with problems is insufficient to establish a bona fide error defense because he has not provided any evidence of
such an agreement. A debt collector must provide evidence that its reliance on a creditor is reasonable to discharge
its liability through the bona fide error defense. Bacelli v. MFP, Inc., 729 F. Supp. 2d 1328, 1336 (M.D. Fla. 2010)
(finding MFP was not entitled to the bona fide error defense where it asserted that it relied on its client to provide
bankruptcy information but did not present any evidence of an agreement with the creditor). Id. at 1336.
Further, an alleged agreement is insufficient to establish a bona fide error defense when it is not based on a
written agreement or oral understanding. Turner v. J.V.D.B. & Assoc., Inc., 318 F. Supp. 2d 681 (N.D. Ill. 2004).
JVDB sent Turner a collection letter on a debt discharged in bankruptcy, but asserted that it relied on its client to
provide bankruptcy information. Id. at 684. However, this was “merely an unfounded assumption,” as JVBD never
even affirmatively asked the creditor whether the debt was valid, much less had a contractual obligation for the
creditor to inform it of debts discharged in bankruptcy. Id. at 686. Thus, JVDB was not entitled to the bona fide
error defense.
Here, unlike Heintz and Transworld, the Defendant has not provided any proof of any agreement other than his
self-serving testimony and has provided no details about the alleged agreement with Midland or what duties it
required Midland to perform. Because the existence and parameters of the alleged agreement are so murky, this
case is similar to Turner and Bacelli, where the debt collector failed in his bona fide error defenses. Because a
reasonable jury could conclude on these facts that the Defendant’s reliance on Midland was unreasonable, the
Defendant is not entitled to summary judgment on a bona fide error defense.
Only in those rare cases where there is an “elaborate and significant” procedure to avoid filing invalid claims
can a debt collector establish a bona fide error defense. Hyman v. Tate, 362 F.3d 965, 697 (7th Cir. 2004)
(evidence at bench trial showed agreement with creditor not to refer stale debts was reasonable). For example, a
debt collector is entitled to the bona fide error defense when it requires its client to verify the debt under oath.
Jenkins v. Heintz, 124 F.3d 824, 834 (7th Cir. 1997). In Jenkins, the debt collector filed a debt collection lawsuit
which included fees that were not authorized by the debtor’s agreement with the creditor. Id. at 826. However, the
debt collector required its client to “verify under oath that each of the charges was true and correct,” which was an
elaborate and significant procedure to prevent collecting unauthorized
-6-

386
charges. Id. at 834. Thus, the debt collector’s reliance on its client was reasonable and it was entitled to the bona
fide error defense. Id. at 835-36. Because the Defendant’s approach does not come close to the procedures
followed by the debt collector in Jenkins, Jenkins does not apply here.
2.

The Defendant Pursued Midland’s Claim Against Russell Despite Knowing That Midland Had
Previously Sent Him Uncollectable Claims.

The Defendant’s reliance on Midland to refer only valid debts to him, when he knew that Midland often sent
him unenforceable debt claims, undercuts his bona fide error defense. Even reliance on a trustworthy creditor does
not “establish that reliance in the present case was reasonable” and cannot replace procedures to prevent mistakes.
Reichert v. Nat’l Credit Sys., Inc., 531 F.3d 1002, 1006 (9th Cir. 2008). And in this case, Midland was far from a
reliable source and the Defendant knew it. When a debt collector has reason to know that the creditor is unreliable,
reliance on the creditor is unreasonable. See Clark, 460 F.3d at 1177.
In Clark, the debt collector relied on the creditor’s report of the debt, although it was aware of the creditor’s
billing and booking inconsistencies. Id. at 1176. The Court denied the debt collector’s motion for summary
judgment because the debt collector’s reliance on the creditor’s representation of the debt was unreasonable given
the creditor’s history. Id. at 1177.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

291

Similarly, when a debt collector relies on the creditor, giving it the benefit of the doubt in the face of conflicting
evidence, its reliance is unreasonable. McCollough, 637 F.3d at 949. In McCollough, software flagged the debtor’s
case as possibly being past the statute of limitations, but the creditor told the debt collector that the statute of
limitations had been extended. Id. at 945. The Court held that the debt collector’s reliance on the creditor was
unreasonable and it was not entitled to the bona fide error defense because the information was inconsistent and the
creditor expressly did not warrant the accuracy of its information. Id. at 949.
Here, the Defendant acknowledged that Midland is unreliable. (Carver Dep. at 3:26-27.) Similar to Clark, where
debt collector knew of the creditor’s billing and bookkeeping inconsistencies, the Defendant knew that Midland
was unreliable and that it “entered into a consent decree with the Consumer Finance Protection Bureau because of
its abusive collection practices.” (Carver Dep. at 4:23.) The decree describes that Midland engages in “scattershot
litigation,” filing hundreds of thousands of lawsuits and discouraging its attorneys from requesting documentation.
Id. at 13. Thus, the Defendant knew, or should have known that Midland engages in abusive debt collection
practices and regularly does not provide its attorneys with the information required to properly pursue a debt
through litigation. Therefore, a jury could find the Defendant’s reliance on Midland was unreasonable.
Indeed, there is evidence in the record that Midland referred the Defendant a res judicata barred debt once
before. The Defendant has offered no evidence to counter this. (Carver Dep. at 4:24-25.) Taken in the light most
favorable to Russell, a reasonable jury could conclude that Russell’s case was not the first res judicata barred case
Midland referred to the Defendant, making the Defendant’s reliance on Midland far more unreasonable than the
reliance in any of the precedent.
-7-

387
Even if the Defendant had evidence that Russell’s case predated the other res judicata barred case Midland
referred to the Defendant, he is still not entitled to the bona fide error defense. First of all, there is ample other
evidence of Midland’s unreliability. Moreover, as established by Reichert, the Defendant is not entitled to wait
until Midland makes a mistake before it begins to institute procedures to prevent filing a res judicata barred
lawsuit. Reichert, 531 F.3d at 1007. Rather, the Defendant has an “affirmative obligation” to institute procedures to
prevent errors. Under Reichert, he cannot simply rely on Midland, even if they had always provided reliable
information.
C. Performing a Single Search in a Database the Defendant Knew To Be Unreliable Cannot Satisfy
the Defendant’s Statutory Obligation to Avoid Filing Baseless Claims.
The Defendant’s procedure of performing a single search in the Philadelphia Court of Common Pleas docket
was not reasonable because it allows only limited searches in an error-prone docket. This made the Defendant
susceptible to the error of filing a res judicata barred lawsuit, which is, in fact, what happened here. A debt
collector has an “affirmative statutory obligation to maintain procedures reasonably adapted to avoid readily
discoverable errors.” Owen, 629 F.3d at 1277. Here, the Defendant acknowledges that the Common Pleas docket
contains errors and that alternatives were available, but he failed to use these alternatives. (Carver Dep. at 4:10-13.)
This does not meet his burden at summary judgment.
1.

The Defendant’s Search Resulted in the Exact Error for Which the Database Was Known.

The Defendant’s procedure of performing only a single search in an error-prone database is not reasonable
because his method of searching is susceptible to the type of error that occurred. When a debt collector chooses to
rely on a specific software to prevent an error, it “is obligated to use that software in an effective manner.” Regan
v. Law Offices of Edwin A. Abrahamsen & Assocs., P.C., No. 08–5923, 2009 WL 4396299, at *10 (E.D. Pa. Dec.
1, 2009). In Regan, the debt collector relied on computer software to alert it of debtors who are represented by
counsel so that it did not violate the FDCPA by contacting the debtor directly. Id. at *8. However, the debt
collector used the software by deleting and reentering diary codes rather than using the adverse attorney feature
which prevents automated letters from being sent to the debtor. Id. at *9. Thus, the debt collector’s method of
using the software was “susceptib[le] to the kind of error that occurred” because if the diary code is inadvertently
deleted, it would not alert the debt collector as intended. Id. at *9. Thus, the debt collector was not entitled to
summary judgment on the bona fide error defense. Id. at *10.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

292

Here, the Defendant acknowledges that the docket he relied upon is error prone. (Carver Dep. at 3:29.) However,
the Defendant did nothing to fulfill his “affirmative statutory requirement” to alleviate the potential for “readily
discoverable” errors. He did not search for his client’s name, Midland, in the docket system. (Pearlman Dep. at
3:9-11.) He did not employ the use of the Philadelphia
-8-

388
Common Pleas docket’s option to use a phonetic search or search for similar names to the debtor. (Pearlman Dep.
at 2:23-3:2.) Thus, similar to Regan, the Defendant relied on a computer software to prevent violating the FDCPA,
but failed to use features which would have prevented the error at issue.
2.

The Defendant Failed to Perform a Docket Search in Compliance With Common Industry Standards.

The Defendant’s search within a single error-prone online court docket is unreasonable in light of alternative
databases that are reasonably adapted to find previously filed lawsuits. These databases are widely used in the legal
industry. Although the FDCPA does not require that a debt collector use a state of the art methodologies, it does
require a debt collector to use reasonable methodologies. Ross v. RJM Acquisitions Funding LLC, 480 F.3d 493,
497-98 (7th Cir. 2007).
In Ross, the court held that the debt collector did not have to use complex searches or algorithms because the
FDCPA’s reasonableness requirement does not require the debt collector to use “state of the art” technology. In
Ross, the debt collector sent a dunning letter to the debtor regarding a debt that had been discharged in bankruptcy.
Id. at 496. The debt collector had hired an outside firm to perform a computerized search of bankruptcies to
confirm that debts it seeks to collect have not been discharged. Id. at 497. However, the debtor had incorrectly
listed her name as Delisa Ross, rather than Lisa Ross, the name under which she accrued debt. Therefore, the
search for Lisa Ross did not reveal Ross’ bankruptcy. Id. at 497. Ross opined that using complex searches and
algorithms which would have identified Lisa Ross as Delisa Ross were unnecessary. Id. at 497-98.
Docket searching databases, such as Bloomberg Law, are not state of the art, but rather they are widely used in
the legal industry. A 2006 survey showed 82.9% of all attorneys use a fee-based online legal research resource. 4
Am. Bar Ass’n, Legal Technology Resource Center Survey Report: Online Research 59 (2006). Even in small
firms with 2-9 attorneys, such as the Defendant’s firm, 89% of attorneys use a fee-based online legal research
resource. Id. at 59. Accordingly, a fee-based online legal research resource, such as Bloomberg, is not state of the
art when, even 12 years ago, more than 80% of all attorneys used these resources.
Fee-based online legal research resources allow users to perform comprehensive docket searches which would
have identified Ms. Russell’s first lawsuit. Bloomberg’s docket search allows a user to include multiple criteria
within a single search. Bloomberg Law, Dockets Search, bloomberglaw.com, https://www.bloomberglaw.com
/page/law_school#advanced-search/dockets (last accessed February 23, 2018). For example, users can search
within one or more courts and search for multiple parties, combinations of parties and the role of each party. Id.
Users can also search for keywords both within the docket itself and documents within the documents filed in a
case. Id. Here, a fee-based online legal research resource, such as Bloomberg, likely would have identified Ms.
Russell’s previous lawsuit because Midland was correctly identified in the caption, and Ms. Russell was correctly
identified in the case parties, docket entries, and complaint filed in February 2016. (Pearlman Dep. at 2:22; Compl.
Ex. A; Compl. Ex. B.)
The single search performed by the Defendant is significantly inferior to the debt collector’s much more
thorough search in Ross. Unlike the debt collector
-9-

389
in Ross, the Defendant did not hire a professional service specifically adapted to identify accounts that have been
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

293

discharged through bankruptcy using multiple variables. In contrast, the Defendant likely spent no more than 15
minutes on his single search. Further, the search conducted by the Defendant, unlike the one in Ross, allows the
searcher to search only for a single party in a search or by docket number, which would require a searcher to
already know that a suit had been filed. Accordingly, the search conducted by the Defendant is significantly
inferior to that in Ross, and the holding in Ross should not control here.
The cost of using a fee-based search tool is not so excessive that it is disproportionate to the potential harms
done. Ross estimated that obtaining a credit report on each debtor would cost $1.5 million per year and therefore it
would be unreasonable to require a debt collector to do so given the “relative . . . harm caused by the dunning
letters mailed in error.” Ross, 480 F.3d at 497. In sharp contrast, access to a search tool would cost the Defendant
$500 per month ($6,000 per year). (Carver Dep. at 4:12-13.) This is less than 0.5% of the cost of credit checks
estimated by Ross. Further, the harm in filing a second lawsuit against Russell was very high. She was so upset that
she had to go see a physician who prescribed her Valium. (Russell Dep. at 3:19-20.) Further Russell had to pay $20
for each prescription and the incurred the cost of gas and parking to meet with attorneys. (Russell Dep. at 3:16-22.)
While this may seem insignificant to most, these additional costs placed a serious financial burden on Russell
whose only income is $1,000 in disability and $450 in food stamps. (Russell Dep. at 4:9-10.) Accordingly, a jury
could find that the cost of using Bloomberg, or another fee-based search tool, would have been reasonable given its
low cost and ability to prevent significant harm caused by the error of filing a res judicata barred lawsuit.
CONCLUSION
For the all the foregoing reasons, Beatrice Russell respectfully requests that this Honorable Court not award
partial summary judgment to Ellis Carver.
Respectfully Submitted,
Alison Slaughter
Alison Slaughter
1315 Walnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19103
555-555-1234
Counsel of Record for
Beatrice Russell

-10-

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

294

391

Appendix

G

Excerpts from Appellant’s Fourth Circuit Brief in
G.G. v. Gloucester County School Bd. (2016)
This appendix includes excerpts from the Appellant’s brief. Appendix H includes excerpts from the
appellee’s brief in the same case. On this book’s website are the complete briefs, which are about twice the
size of the ones in these appendices and address a number of issues not in these appendices.
The appellant is a young transgender man. At the time of the lawsuit, he was a high school student. The
Gloucester County School Board had forbidden him to use the boys’ restroom in his school. In the litigation
documents, he was identified by his initials for privacy reasons.
G.G. argued that the School Board had discriminated against him in violation of Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972 as well as the Equal Protection Clause in the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution. In the District Court he moved for a preliminary injunction that would require his high school
to allow him to use the boys’ restroom. The District Court denied the motion and dismissed his Title IX
claim.1
392
G.G. appealed to the Fourth Circuit. This appendix includes excerpts from his brief there as the appellant.
The Fourth Circuit reversed,2 but the Supreme Court vacated that decision in 2017 and remanded “for
further consideration in light of” changes in policy by the U.S. Department of Education and Department of
Justice.3
In June 2020, the Supreme Court held, in Bostock v. Clayton County, that firing an employee “for being
gay or transgender” violates Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.4 Two months later, the Fourth Circuit
ruled again that the School Board had violated Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 and the
Constitution’s Equal Protection Clause when it discriminated against G.G., who by then had passed his 18th
birthday and was known in litigation by his full name — Gavin Grimm. The Fourth Circuit said this on the
Title IX issue:
After the Supreme Court’s recent decision in Bostock v. Clayton County, . . . we have little difficulty
holding that a bathroom policy precluding Grimm from using the boys restrooms discriminated
against him “on the basis of sex.” Although Bostock interprets Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of
1964, . . . it guides our evaluation of claims under Title IX. See . . . Fitzgerald v. Barnstable Sch.
Comm., 555 U.S. 246, 258 (2009) (“Congress modeled Title IX after Title VI . . . and passed Title IX
with the explicit understanding that it would be interpreted as Title VI was . . .).5
The briefs in this appendix and in Appendix H are governed by Rules 28(a) and 28(b) of the Federal Rules
of Appellate Procedure:
Rule 28. Briefs
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

295

(a) Appellant’s Brief. The appellant’s brief must contain, under appropriate headings and in the
order indicated:
(1) a disclosure statement if required by Rule 26.1;
(2) a table of contents . . . ;
(3) a table of authorities . . . ;
(4) a jurisdictional statement . . . ;
(5) a statement of the issues presented for review;
(6) a concise statement of the case setting out the facts relevant to the issues submitted for
review, describing the relevant procedural history, and identifying the rulings presented for
review, with appropriate references to the record . . . ;
393
(7) a summary of the argument, which must contain a succinct, clear, and accurate statement
of the arguments made in the body of the brief, and which must not merely repeat the argument
headings;
(8) the argument, which must contain:
(A) appellant’s contentions and the reasons for them, with citations to the authorities and
parts of the record on which the appellant relies; and
(B) for each issue, a concise statement of the applicable standard of review (which may
appear in the discussion of the issue or under a separate heading placed before the discussion
of the issues);
(9) a short conclusion stating the precise relief sought; and
(10) the certificate of compliance, if required by Rule 32(a)(7).
(b) Appellee’s Brief. The appellee’s brief must conform to the requirements of Rule
28(a)(1)–(8) and (10), except that none of the following need appear unless the appellee is
dissatisfied with the appellant’s statement:
(1) the jurisdictional statement;
(2) the statement of the issues;
(3) the statement of the case; and
(4) the statement of the standard of review.
To make these appendices more helpful to students, the briefs have been edited to reduce their size.
Among other things, the appellant’s jurisdictional statement and both parties’ corporate disclosures have
been omitted. Also omitted are certificates of compliance and service, the appellant’s request for oral
argument, and issues concerning the District Court’s exclusion of various evidence, the appellant’s request
for reassignment to another District Court judge, and deference to administrative agencies’ interpretation of
their own regulations under Auer v. Robbins, 519 U.S. 452 (1997). To adjust for these omissions, some point
headings are renumbered in the appendices, and some subheadings are relettered. To streamline the briefs for
students, the Statements of the Case, Summary of Argument, and Argument have been shortened. In
addition, the following are omitted: footnotes, citations not necessary to the argument, and some attorney
details. A few typographical and grammatical incongruities have been resolved, and citations have been
conformed to the Bluebook (20th ed.), sometimes by substituting a complete cite for a short-form one. In a
very few instances, a word, such as the conjunction “and,” has been inserted as a consequence of a deletion.
To preserve readability, deletions have not been marked with ellipses or brackets.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

296

394
No. 15-2056
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
__________________________________________________________
G.G., by his next friend and mother, DEIRDRE GRIMM
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
GLOUCESTER COUNTY SCHOOL BOARD
Defendant-Appellee.
__________________________________________________________
On Appeal from the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia Newport News Division
__________________________________________________________
BRIEF OF PLAINTIFF-APPELLANT
__________________________________________________________
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION OF VIRGINIA FOUNDATION, I
NC.,
Rebecca K. Glenberg
Gail Deady
Richmond, Virginia

AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION F
OUNDATION

Joshua A. Block
Leslie Cooper
New York, New York

Counsel for Plaintiff-Appellant

395

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

297

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Authorities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ii

Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement of Issues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement of Case. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gender Dysphoria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

G.’s Gender Dysphoria. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

School Response. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

Aftermath. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

Procedural History. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Summary of Argument. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Argument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

I.

Preliminary Injunction Standard.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

II. G. Has Established a Likelihood of Success on His Title IX Claim.. . .
......................................
A. Excluding Transgender Students from Using the Same
Restrooms as Other Students Discriminates Against G. on the
Basis of Sex.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

1

7

Notice that the two briefs
don’t tackle the Title IX
and Equal Protection

8

arguments in the same
sequence. The School
Board’s brief in App. H

III. G. Has Established a Likelihood of Success on His Equal Protection
Claim. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

addresses Equal Protection
first and then Title IX.

IV. G. Has Satisfied the Remaining Preliminary Injunction Factors.. . . . . . .
..........................................
A. An Injunction Is Necessary to Prevent Irreparable Harm to G. . .
........................................
B. The Balance of Hardships Weighs in Favor of an Injunction.. . . .
.......................................
C. An Injunction Is in the Public Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

B.

Excluding G. from Using the Same Restrooms as Other Students
Deprives Him of Equal Access to Educational Opportunity. . . . . .
...........................

11
11
12

-i-

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

298

396
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES
Cases
Centro Tepeyac v. Montgomery Cty., 722 F.3d 184 (4th Cir. 2013) . . . . . . .

12

Cohen v. Brown Univ., 991 F.2d 888 (1st Cir. 1993). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

Davis ex rel. LaShonda D. v. Monroe Cnty. Bd. of Educ., 526 U.S. 629 (1999). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
..................

9

Finkle v. Howard Cty., 12 F. Supp. 3d 780 (D. Md. 2014). . . . . . . . . . . . .

7–8

Glenn v. Brumby, 663 F.3d 1312 (11th Cir. 2011) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8,
10
7

Hart v. Lew, 973 F. Supp. 2d 561 (D. Md. 2013). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Kastl v. Maricopa Cty. Cmty. Coll. Dist., 2004 WL 2008954 (D. Ariz. 2004) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.....................

9

League of Women Voters v. North Carolina, 769 F.3d 224 (4th Cir. 2014). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
...................

7

Lewis v. High Point Reg’l Health Sys., 79 F. Supp. 3d 588 (E.D.N.C. 2015). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
...................

7

Melendres v. Arpaio, 695 F.3d 990 (9th Cir. 2012). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

Miss. Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U.S. 718 (1982) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

Muir v. Applied Integrated Tech., Inc., 2013 WL 6200178 (D. Md. 2013). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
...................

7

Orr v. Orr, 440 U.S. 268 (1979). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228 (1989). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

Rumble v. Fairview Health Servs., No. 14-CV-2037 SRN/FLN, 2015 WL 1197415, at *2 (D. Minn. Mar. 16,
2015). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7–8

Schroer v. Billington, 577 F. Supp. 2d 293 (D.D.C. 2008). . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

Smith v. City of Salem, 378 F.3d 566 (6th Cir. 2004). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

Snyder ex rel. R.P. v. Frankfort-Elberta Area Sch. Dist., 2006 WL 3613673 (W.D. Mich. 2006). . . . . . . . . . . .
......................

9

Tuan Anh Nguyen v. INS, 533 U.S. 53 (2001). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

-ii-

397
United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515 (1996). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

Wengler v. Druggists Mut. Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142 (1980). . . . . . . . . . . .

10

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

299

Constitutional Provisions
U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6,
10–11

Statutes
...
7–8
6–9
Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of 1972, 20 U.S.C. § 1681(a) (2012). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000e (2012)
............
Administrative Decisions and Guidance
Lusardi v. McHugh, EEOC DOC 0120133395, 2015 WL 1607756 (Apr. 1, 2015). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
..................

9

Mia Macy, EEOC DOC 0120120821, 2012 WL 1435995(Apr. 20, 2012). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
...............

8–9

Other Authorities
Am. Psychiatric Ass’n, Gender Dysphoria Fact Sheet (2013). . . . . . . . .

2

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V) (American Psychiatric Association 2013).
......................

1–2

International Classification of Diseases-10 (World Health Organization 2010). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
..................

1

World Professional Association for Transgender Health, Standards of Care for Treating People with Gender
Dysphoria (“WPATH Standards”) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

-iii-

398

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

300

INTRODUCTION
This is a preliminary
statement as described in
Ch. 29 (§29.1). Here it’s
called an Introduction. It

tells the court in a nutshell
what the appeal is all
about. While doing that,
lawyers also introduce the
court to their theory of
the appeal (Ch. 24).

See the exercise at the end
of Ch. 31 (Questions
Presented).

Plaintiff G.G. is a 16-year-old transgender boy who has just begun his junior year
at Gloucester High School. He is a boy and lives accordingly in all aspects of his life,
but the sex assigned to him at birth was female. In accordance with the standards of
care for treating Gender Dysphoria, he is undergoing hormone therapy; he has legally
changed his name; and his state identification card identifies him as male. In every
other context outside school, he uses the boys’ restrooms, just like any other boy
would.
During his sophomore year, with the permission of school administrators, G. used
the boys’ restrooms at school for seven weeks without incident. After some parents
complained, however, the Gloucester County School Board (the “Board”) passed a
new policy that singles out transgender students for different treatment than all other
students. The policy prohibits G. from using the same restrooms as other boys and
relegates him to single-stall, unisex restrooms that no other student is required to use.
G. alleges that the Board’s policy of excluding transgender students from the
restrooms used by all other students violates his rights under Title IX and the
Fourteenth Amendment by stigmatizing transgender students, depriving them of
physical access to school resources, jeopardizing their health, and impairing their
ability to participate equally in the educational benefits and opportunities of school.
G. seeks a preliminary injunction to stop the ongoing irreparable harm he
experiences each day he is subject to the Board’s policy.
STATEMENT OF ISSUES
1. Should G. be granted a preliminary injunction to allow him to resume using the
boys’ restrooms during the pendency of the case?
2. Should the court’s dismissal of the Title IX claim be reversed?
STATEMENT OF CASE

This brief explains the
story in much detail. Partly
that’s to help the court
grasp medical and other
facts that aren’t widely
understood. And partly it’s
to give the court a feeling
for how the plaintiff has
experienced
the situation. A judge’s work
isn’t limited to
logical reasoning.

Gender Dysphoria
“Gender identity” is a well-established medical concept, referring to one’s sense of oneself
as belonging to a particular gender. J.A. 36. All human beings have a gender identity. Id. It is
an innate and immutable aspect of personality that is firmly established by age four, although
individuals vary in the age at which they come to understand and express their gender identity.
Id. Typically, people who are designated female at birth based on their external anatomy
identify as girls or women, and people who are designated male at birth identify as boys or
men. Id. For transgender individuals, however, the sense of one’s self — one’s gender identity
— differs from the sex assigned to them at birth. Id.

The medical diagnosis for that feeling of incongruence is Gender Dysphoria, a
serious medical condition codified in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-V) (American Psychiatric
-1-

399

Association 2013) and International Classification of Diseases-10 (World Health
Organization 2010). The criteria for diagnosing Gender Dysphoria are set forth in the
DSM-V (302.85). J.A 37. Untreated Gender Dysphoria can result in significant
clinical distress, debilitating depression, and suicidal thoughts and acts. Id. The
World Professional Association for Transgender Health has established international
Standards of Care for treating people with Gender Dysphoria (the “WPATH
Standards”). J.A. 37. Leading medical and mental health organizations, including the

It includes empathy,
which is why motivating
arguments are essential.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

301

American Medical Association, the Endocrine Society, and the American
Psychological Association, have
endorsed the WPATH Standards as the authoritative standards of care. Id.
Under the WPATH Standards, treatment for Gender Dysphoria is designed to help
transgender individuals live congruently with their gender identity and eliminate
clinically significant distress. J.A. 38. Attempting to change a person’s gender
identity to match the person’s sex assigned at birth is ineffective and harmful to the
patient. Id. “It is important to note that gender nonconformity is not in itself a mental
disorder. The critical element of gender dysphoria is the presence of clinically
significant distress associated with the condition.” Am. Psychiatric Ass’n, Gender
Dysphoria Fact Sheet 1 (2013).
Under the WPATH Standards, social role transition — living one’s life fully in accordance
with one’s gender identity — is a critical component of treatment for Gender Dysphoria. J.A.
38. For a transgender male, that typically includes dressing and grooming as a male, adopting a
male name, and presenting oneself to the community as a boy or man. Id. The social transition
takes place at home, at work or school, and in the broader community. Id. If any aspect of
social role transition is impeded, it undermines a person’s entire transition. Id. Negating a
person’s gender identity poses serious health risks, including depression, post-traumatic stress
disorder, hypertension, and self-harm. J.A. 40.

Motivating
arguments are usually
introduced in a
Statement of the Case,
where they are implied
by the way the story is
told rather than
expressly stated. They
should be expressly
stated in the Argument.
In Ch. 26, see §§26.3.1
and 26.3.2.

G.’s Gender Dysphoria
At a very young age, G. was aware that he did not feel like a girl. J.A. 28. By
approximately age twelve, G. acknowledged his male gender identity to himself and
to close friends. J.A. 29. By ninth grade, most of G.’s friends knew his gender
identity, and they treated him as male when socializing away from home and school.
Id.
G.’s untreated Gender Dysphoria, and the stress of concealing his gender identity
from his family, caused him to experience severe depression and anxiety. Id. G.’s
mental distress was so severe that he could not attend school in 2014 during the
spring semester of his freshman year. Id. Instead, he took classes through a
home-bound program that follows the public high school curriculum. Id.
In April 2014, G. told his parents that he is transgender. Id. At his request, he
began seeing a psychologist with experience working with transgender youth. Id.
G.’s psychologist diagnosed G. with Gender Dysphoria and, consistent with the
WPATH Standards, recommended that he begin living in accordance with his male
gender identity in all aspects of his life. Id. G.’s psychologist also provided G. with a
“Treatment Documentation Letter” confirming he was receiving treatment for
Gender Dysphoria and, as part of that treatment, should be treated as a boy in all
respects, including with respect
-2-

400
to his use of the restroom. Id. G. uses the boys’ restrooms in public venues such as restaurants, libraries, and
shopping centers. J.A. 30.
In July 2014, G. successfully petitioned the Circuit Court of Gloucester County to change his legal name to G.
J.A. 29. G. now uses that name for all purposes, and his friends and family refer to him using male pronouns. Id.
Also consistent with the WPATH Standards, G.’s psychologist recommended that he see an endocrinologist to
begin hormone treatment. Id. G. has received hormone treatment since late December 2014. J.A. 30. Among other
therapeutic benefits, the hormone treatment has deepened G.’s voice, increased his growth of facial hair, and given
him a more masculine appearance. Id.
In June 2015, the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles approved G.’s request for the sex designation “M” for
male to appear on his driver’s license or identification card. J.A. 60.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

302

School Response

In August 2014, before beginning his sophomore year, G. and his mother informed officials at Gloucester High
School that G. is a transgender boy and that he had legally changed his name to G. J.A. 30. G. and his mother also
met with the school principal and guidance counselor to explain that G. is a transgender boy and that, consistent
with his medically supervised treatment, he would be attending school as a male student. Id.
G. initially agreed to use a separate restroom in the nurse’s office because he was unsure how other students
would react to his transition. Id. When the 2014–15 school year began, however, G. was pleased to discover that
his teachers and the vast majority of his peers respected the fact that he is a boy and treated him accordingly. J.A.
30–31. G. found the separate restroom stigmatizing and inconvenient, so he asked the principal permission to use
the boys’ restrooms. J.A. 31. On or about October 20, 2014, the principal agreed that G. could use the boys’
restrooms. Id. For approximately the next seven weeks, G. used the boys’ restrooms without incident. Id.
Nevertheless, some adults in the community were angered when they learned that a transgender boy was
attending the school and using the boys’ restroom. J.A. 57–58. Those adults contacted members of the Board to
demand that the transgender student be barred from using the boys’ restrooms. Id.
Shortly before the Board’s meeting on November 11, 2014, Board member Hooks added the following policy
for discussion on the agenda:
Whereas the GCPS recognizes that some students question their gender identities, and
Whereas the GCPS encourages such students to seek support, advice, and guidance from parents,
professionals and other trusted adults, and
Whereas the GCPS seeks to provide a safe learning environment for all students and to protect the privacy
of all students, therefore
It shall be the practice of the GCPS to provide male and female restroom and locker room facilities in its
schools, and the use of said facilities shall be limited to the corresponding biological genders, and
-3-

401
students with gender identity issues shall be provided an alternative appropriate private facility.
Gloucester County School Board Minutes, Nov. 11, 2014 (“Nov. 11 Minutes”) at 4.
G. and his parents attended the meeting to speak against the policy. J.A. 31. Doing so required G. to identify
himself to the entire community, including local press covering the meeting, as the student whose restroom use
was at issue. Id. “All I want to do is be a normal child and use the restroom in peace,” G. said. See Gloucester
County School Board Video Tr., Nov. 11, 2014 (“Nov. 11 Video Tr.”). “I did not ask to be this way, and it’s one of
the most difficult things anyone can face.” Id. 26:14. “This could be your child . . . . I’m just a human. I’m just a
boy.” Id. 27:02.
Most speakers at the meeting urged the Board to prohibit G. from using the restrooms that other boys use. See
Nov. 11 Minutes at 3. Speakers voiced many stereotypes and misperceptions about transgender people and
expressed fears that equal treatment for transgender students would lead to dire consequences. Some speakers
pointedly referred to G. as a “young lady” to negate his gender identity. Nov. 11 Video Tr. 14:55; 18:07; 20:36;
1:06:48. One speaker claimed that permitting transgender students to use the same restrooms as others would lead
to teenage pregnancies and sexually transmitted infections. Id. 34:40. Another cited the Bible and complained
about “morality creep.” Id. 53:35. And another said G.’s use of the boys’ restrooms would lead to boys wearing
dresses to school and demanding to use the girls’ restroom for improper purposes. Id. 20:55.
The Board deferred voting on the policy until its meeting on December 9, 2014. See Nov. 11 Minutes at 4.
At the Board’s December 9, 2014, meeting, most speakers again opposed permitting transgender students to use
the same restrooms as other students. See Gloucester County School Board Minutes, Dec. 9, 2014 (“Dec. 9
Minutes”) at 3. Several speakers threatened to vote Board members out of office if they did not require transgender
students to use separate restrooms. Gloucester County School Board Video Tr., Dec. 9, 2014, (“Dec. 9 Video Tr.”)
42:34; 50:53; 59:34; 1:17:56. Some speakers said allowing transgender boys to use the boys’ restroom would make
the restrooms “coed.” Id. 39:23; 41:11. Speakers again referred to G. as a “girl” or “young lady.” Id. 38:00;
1:17:40. One speaker who described herself as a “former lesbian” said “we have forgotten than God created a man
and a woman” and complained that prayers have been removed from schools. Id. 1:19:48. Another called G. a
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

303

“freak” and compared him to a person who thinks he is a dog and wants to urinate on fire hydrants. Id. 1:22:55;
1:23:19.
The Board voted 6–1 to pass the policy prohibiting transgender students from using the same restrooms as other
students. Dec. 9 Minutes at 4.
Aftermath
The public, community-wide debate about which restrooms he should use has been humiliating for G., who feels
that he has been turned into “a public
-4-

402

By this
point, are
you able to
see things
through
G.G.’s eyes
— how he
has
experienced

spectacle” in front of the entire community “like a walking freak show.” J.A. 31.
The day after the Board adopted the new policy, the principal told G. he could no longer use the
same restrooms as other boys. J.A. 32. G. must now use separate, private facilities instead of using
the same restrooms as other students. The Board has asserted that G. may use the girls’ restroom, but
that is not a realistic possibility for G. or other boys who are transgender. Even before G.
transitioned, other students objected to his presence in the girls’ restroom because they perceived
him to be a boy. Id.
G. refuses to use the separate, single-stall restrooms because they are even more stigmatizing and
isolating than the restroom in the nurse’s office. Id. No other students actually use these restrooms,
and only one of the restrooms is located anywhere near the restrooms used by everybody else. Id.
Adding to the stigma, everyone knows the restrooms were installed specifically for G. so that other
boys would not have to share the same restroom with him. Id. The separate restrooms physically and
symbolically mark G. as “other,” isolate G. from the rest of his peers, and brand him as unfit to share
the same restrooms as other students. Id. Every time G. has to use the restrooms at school, other
students are visibly reminded that the school considers him to be different than other students,
making him feel alienated and humiliated. J.A. 32–33.
To escape such stigma and humiliation, G. tries to avoid using the restroom entirely while at
school, and, if that is not possible, he uses the nurse’s restroom. J.A. 32. Using the nurse’s restroom
still makes him feel embarrassed and humiliated, which increases his dysphoria, anxiety, and
distress. J.A. 32–33. G. feels embarrassed that everyone who sees him enter the nurse’s office knows
he is there because he has been prohibited from using the same boys’ restrooms that the other boys
use. J.A. 33. To avoid using the restroom, G. limits the amount of liquids he drinks and tries to “hold
it” when he needs to urinate during the school day. J.A. 32–33. As a result, G. has repeatedly
developed painful urinary tract infections and has felt distracted and uncomfortable in class. Id.
Dr. Randi Ettner — a psychologist and nationally recognized expert in the treatment of Gender
Dysphoria in children and adolescents — recently conducted an independent clinical assessment of
G. and concluded that “excluding G.G. from the communal restroom used by other boys and
effectively banishing him to separate single-stall restroom facilities is currently causing emotional
distress to an extremely vulnerable youth and placing G. at risk for accruing lifelong psychological
harm.” J.A. 41. Dr. Ettner determined that G. has Gender Dysphoria and that medically necessary
treatment for G. includes testosterone therapy and social transition in all aspects of his life —
including the use of the boys’ restrooms. J.A. 42.
Dr. Ettner explained that ages 15–16 are particularly vulnerable years for teenagers, when nothing
is more important than fitting in with one’s peers. J.A. 39–40. That vulnerability is even greater for
transgender teenagers who, because of Gender Dysphoria, already feel different and must take
additional steps to fit in with their peers. J.A. 40. As a result of those challenges, transgender
students are at far greater risk for severe health consequences — including suicide — than other
students, and more than 50 percent of transgender youth will have attempted suicide at least once by
age

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

304

all these
events?
-5-

403

20. Id. Stigma also causes many transgender youth to experience academic difficulties and to drop
out of school. J.A. 41. Transgender students’ stress and victimization at school are associated with a
greater risk for post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, life dissatisfaction, anxiety, and
suicidality in adulthood. Id.
Dr. Ettner concluded that the stigma G. experiences every time he needs to use the restroom “is a
devastating blow to G. and places him at extreme risk for immediate and long-term psychological
harm.” J.A. 42.
Procedural History

G. originally filed the Complaint and Motion for Preliminary Injunction on June 11, 2015, the
day after the end of the 2014–15 school year, with the goal of obtaining a preliminary injunction
before September 10, 2015, the first day of the 2015–16 school year. J.A. 25.

On September 4, 2015 — a few days before school began — the court denied G.’s Motion for
Preliminary Injunction. J.A. 137.

The
wrap-up
in a
Statement
of
the Case
takes the
reader to
the
procedural
event —
the
lower
court’s
ruling —
that has
been
appealed.

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT
This case is not about whether schools may provide separate restrooms for male and female
students. It is about how to provide transgender students with equal, non-discriminatory access to
those existing restrooms, as Title IX and
the Fourteenth Amendment require. A preliminary injunction is necessary to stop the ongoing
irreparable harm the Board has inflicted on G. by preventing him from using the same restrooms as
other students and relegating him to separate, single-stall facilities.

G. has established a likelihood of success on his Title IX claim. Title IX’s prohibition on
discrimination “on the basis of sex” protects transgender students from discrimination based on
their transgender status or gender nonconformity. Discrimination against transgender people is
necessarily discrimination based on sex because it is impossible to treat people differently based on
their transgender status without taking their sex into account. Requiring transgender students to use
separate restrooms from other students violates Title IX by stigmatizing transgender students,
depriving them of physical access to school resources, jeopardizing their health, and impairing their
ability to participate equally in the educational benefits and opportunities of school.

As you
read the
Summary
of
Argument
and the
Argument
itself
below,
identify
every
place
where the
brief
makes a
policy
argument.

G. has also established a likelihood of success on his Equal Protection claim. For the same
reasons that excluding G. from using the same restrooms as other students violates Title IX, it also
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

305

discriminates based on gender and requires heightened scrutiny under the Fourteenth Amendment.
The Board has not carried its burden under heightened scrutiny to show that forcing G. to use
separate restrooms substantially advances an interest in privacy or any other important
governmental interest.
Because G. is likely to prevail on the merits, the remaining preliminary injunction factors
necessarily weigh in his favor.
-6-

404

ARGUMENT
See Ch. 29, §29.3
(standards of review).

This is the
four-element test G.G.
must satisfy. See
Ch. 27 (procedural
postures). The brief is
organized around
these elements.
Because G.G. must
satisfy all of them, the
Argument includes
several
paradigmed proofs.
For how to organize
in this situation, see
Ch. 13 (combining
separate paradigm
proofs).
In persuasive writing,
the paradigm is
modified to emphasize
motivating

arguments. See §§26.3
.1 and 26.3.2 in Ch.
26.
This paragraph
identifies a gap in the
law and lays a
foundation for filling
the gap in later
paragraphs. In Ch. 7,
see §7.5 on
gap-filling.

I. Preliminary Injunction Standard.
This Court “evaluate[s] the court’s decision to deny a preliminary injunction for an
abuse of discretion, reviewing the court’s factual findings for clear error and its legal
conclusions de novo. A court abuses its discretion when
it misapprehends or misapplies the applicable law.” League of Women Voters v. North
Carolina, 769 F.3d 224, 235 (4th Cir. 2014) (internal quotation marks omitted; alterations
incorporated).
To obtain a preliminary injunction, “[p]laintiffs must demonstrate that (1) they are
likely to succeed on the merits; (2) they will likely suffer irreparable harm absent an
injunction; (3) the balance of hardships weighs in their favor; and (4) the injunction is in
the public interest.” Id. at 236. “While plaintiffs seeking preliminary injunctions must
demonstrate that they are likely to succeed on the merits, they need not show a certainty of
success.” Id. at 247 (internal quotation marks omitted).

II. G. Has Established a Likelihood of Success on His Title IX Claim.

A. Excluding Transgender Students from Using the Same Restrooms as Other
Students Discriminates Against G. on the Basis of Sex.
G. is a boy and lives accordingly in all aspects of his life. He is undergoing hormone
therapy; he has legally changed his name; and his state identification card identifies him
as male. In every other context outside school, he uses the boys’ restrooms, just like any
other boy would. At school, however, the Board has singled him out for different
treatment than everyone else. Most non-transgender boys would feel humiliated if they
were publicly labeled as different and forced to use a separate restroom from all the other
boys. G. feels that way too.
By singling out G. for different and unequal treatment because he is transgender, the
Board has discriminated against him based on sex, in violation of Title IX. This Court has
not addressed whether discrimination against transgender individuals constitutes
discrimination based on sex. See Lewis v.
High Point Reg’l Health Sys., 79 F. Supp. 3d 588, 589 (E.D.N.C. 2015). Within this
Circuit, however, two district courts have already held that discrimination against
transgender people is sex discrimination, see id. at 589–90; Finkle v. Howard Cty., 12 F.
Supp. 3d 780, 788 (D. Md. 2014), and another two have issued rulings where the
defendant conceded that Title VII applied, see Muir v. Applied Integrated Tech., Inc., No.
13-0808, 2013 WL 6200178, at *10 (D. Md. Nov. 26, 2013); Hart v. Lew, 973 F. Supp. 2d
561, 581 (D. Md. 2013).
Discrimination based on transgender status is discrimination based on sex under Title
IX and other federal civil rights statutes because an individual’s “transgender status is

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

306

necessarily part of his ‘sex’ or ‘gender’ identity.” Rumble v. Fairview Health Servs., No.
14-CV-2037 SRN/FLN, 2015 WL 1197415,
-7-

405

at *2 (D. Minn. Mar. 16, 2015). By definition, transgender individuals are people whose
gender identity is not congruent with the sex assigned to them at birth. Accordingly, when
an official “discriminates against someone because the person is transgender,” the official
necessarily “has engaged in disparate treatment related to the sex of the victim.” Mia Macy,
EEOC DOC 0120120821, 2012 WL 1435995, at *7 (Apr. 20, 2012) (internal quotation
marks omitted). Just as it is impossible to discriminate against a person for being a
religious convert without discriminating based on religion, it is impossible to treat people
differently based on their transgender status without treating them differently based on sex.

In addition, discrimination based on a person’s transgender status also inherently
involves impermissible discrimination based on a person’s gender nonconformity. Under
Title IX and other federal civil rights statutes, discrimination “on the basis of sex” includes
discrimination for “failing to act and appear according to expectations defined by gender.”
Glenn v. Brumby, 663 F.3d 1312, 1316 (11th Cir. 2011). For example, in Price Waterhouse
v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228 (1989), the Supreme Court ruled that an employer
discriminated on the basis of “sex” when it denied promotion to an employee based, in
part, on her failure to conform to stereotypes about how women
should behave. The employee was advised that if she wanted to advance in her career she
should be less “macho” and learn to “walk more femininely, talk more femininely, dress
more femininely, wear make-up, have her hair styled, and wear jewelry.” Id. at 235. Price
Waterhouse thus “eviscerated” the reasoning of some lower court decisions that attempted
to narrow Title VII by drawing a distinction between discrimination based on sex and
discrimination based on gendered behavior. Smith, 378 F.3d at 573.

Under Price Waterhouse, it does not matter whether a plaintiff is perceived “to be an
insufficiently masculine man, an insufficiently feminine woman, or an inherently
gender-nonconforming transsexual.” Schroer v. Billington, 577 F. Supp. 2d 293, 305
(D.D.C. 2008). Transgender individuals are people who not conform to the general
assumption that a person’s gender identity will correspond to the sex assigned to that
person at birth. Thus, “it would seem that
any discrimination against transsexuals (as transsexuals) — individuals who, by definition,
do not conform to gender stereotypes — is . . . discrimination on the basis of sex as
interpreted by Price Waterhouse.” Finkle, 12 F. Supp. 3d at 788; see Rumble, 2015 WL
1197415, at *2 (“Because the term ‘transgender’ describes people whose gender expression
differs from their assigned sex at birth, discrimination based on an individual’s transgender
status constitutes discrimination based on gender stereotyping.”). There is inherently “a
congruence between discriminating against transgender and transsexual individuals and
discrimination on the basis of gender-based behavioral norms.” Glenn, 663 F.3d at 1316.
The Price Waterhouse line of cases confirms what is already evident from the text of
Title IX. “[I]ntentional discrimination against a transgender individual because that person
is transgender is, by definition, discrimination based on sex.” Macy, 2012 WL 1435995, at
*11 (internal quotation marks omitted; alterations incorporated). By treating G. differently
than every other boy because of the sex assigned to him at birth, the Board is treating him
differently based on “sex” under Title IX.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

In statutes
prohibiting sex
discrimination,
what did Congress
mean by the word
“sex”? This is a
classic statutory
interpretation
problem, like the
McBoyle case in
Ch. 8 (working
with statutes).
Both this brief and
the one in App. H
use some of the
statutory
interpretation tools
explained in Ch. 8.

Both briefs discuss
Glenn v. Brumby
and Price
Waterhouse v.
Hopkins. Use the
App. H brief’s
Table of
Authorities
to find that brief’s
discussion of these
two cases. How do
the two briefs
differ in the way
they handle them?

307

-8-

406

B. Excluding G. from Using the Same Restrooms as Other Students Deprives Him of Equal
Access to Educational Opportunity.
On the
Title IX
issue, the
rule proof
part of the
paradigm
(Ch. 11)
was
mostly in
subpoint A
above.
Rule
application
starts here
in
subpoint
B.

At the most basic level, Title IX protects students from “physical deprivation of access to school
resources” based on gender. Davis ex rel. LaShonda D. v. Monroe Cnty. Bd. of Educ., 526 U.S. 629,
650 (1999). The Board has physically deprived G. and other transgender students of equal access to
school resources by excluding them from the same restrooms used by everyone else. See Lusardi v.
McHugh, EEOC DOC 0120133395, 2015 WL 1607756, at *8 (Apr. 1, 2015) (excluding transgender
woman from restrooms used by other women deprived her of a basic term and condition of
employment); Kastl v. Maricopa Cty. Cmty. Coll. Dist., No. CIV.02-1531PHX-SRB, 2004 WL
2008954, at *2 (D. Ariz. June 3, 2004) (“[N]either a woman with male genitalia nor a man with
stereotypically female anatomy, such as breasts, may be deprived of a benefit or privilege of
employment by reason of that nonconforming trait. Application of this rule may not be avoided
merely because restroom availability is the benefit at issue.”); cf. Snyder ex rel. R.P. v.
Frankfort-Elberta Area Sch. Dist., No. 1:05-CV-824, 2006 WL 3613673, at *1 (W.D. Mich. Dec. 11,
2006) (requiring black elementary school student to use separate restroom in response to harassment
from other students deprived her of “equal access to restroom facilities” in violation of the Equal
Education Opportunity Act).

Singling out G. for different treatment than all the other boys also interferes with his medically
necessary treatment for Gender Dysphoria. As Dr. Ettner explained, when authority figures deny
transgender students access to the restroom consistent with their gender identity, they shame those
students — negating the legitimacy of their identity and posing health risks, including depression,
post-traumatic stress disorder, and self-harm. J.A. 41. The harm caused to transgender students’
physical and psychological wellbeing necessarily interferes with their ability to thrive at school. For
example, the depression and anxiety G. previously experienced as a result of concealing his gender
identity at school and from his parents was so great that G. could not attend school during the spring
of his freshman year. J.A. 29.
Excluding G. from the same restrooms used by all other students further denies G. equal
educational opportunity by publicly shaming him and physically isolating him from the rest of his
peers. The policy is an official school decree marking G. and other transgender students as unequal
based on other students’ supposed disapproval or discomfort with them. It sends a message to G. and
the entire school community that G. is not a “real” boy and should not be treated as such. The
intention and effect of the transgender policy were crystallized in the words of one of its supporters:
“[W]e have a thousand students versus one freak.” Dec. 9 Video Tr. 1:22:53.
This stigma has real consequences for G. and other transgender students. Transgender students are
at far greater risk for severe health consequences — including suicide — than the rest of the student
population, and more than 50 percent of transgender youth will have had at least one suicide attempt
by age 20. J.A. 40. The stress and victimization transgender students experience at school is
associated with a greater risk for post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, anxiety, and suicidality in
adulthood. J.A. 41.
-9-

407

III. G. Has Established a Likelihood of Success on His Equal Protection Claim.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

308

For the same reasons that excluding G. from using the same restrooms as other students
discriminates based on sex under Title IX, it also triggers heightened scrutiny under the
Equal Protection Clause. Glenn, 663 F.3d at 1318–19. “[A]ll gender-based classifications
today warrant heightened scrutiny.” United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 555 (1996)
(internal quotation marks omitted). Heightened scrutiny applies even when discrimination
is based on physical or anatomical differences. Tuan Anh Nguyen v. INS, 533 U.S. 53, 60
(2001). And it applies whether the asserted
justification for discrimination is benign or invidious. Miss. Univ. for Women v. Hogan,
458 U.S. 718, 724 (1982). The “analysis and level of scrutiny applied to determine the
validity of the classification do not vary simply because the objective appears acceptable.”
Id. at 724 n.9.
The Board cannot carry its burden of proof under this heightened-scrutiny standard. Just six days
before adopting the new policy excluding transgender students from the same restrooms as their
peers, the Board identified alternatives to protect the privacy of all students, such as “adding or
expanding partitions between urinals in male restrooms,” “adding privacy strips to the doors of stalls
in all restrooms,” and “[d]esignat[ing] single-stall, unisex restrooms.” Dec. 3 Press Release 2. Such
gender-neutral alternatives demonstrate that excluding transgender students from the same restrooms
used by everyone else is not substantially related to the asserted interest in privacy. See Wengler v.
Druggists Mut. Ins. Co., 446 U.S. 142, 151 (1980) (invalidating sex-based classification where
sex-neutral approach would serve the needs of both classes); Orr v. Orr, 440 U.S. 268, 281 (1979)
(same).

Likelihood of
success on the
merits is the first
element of the
preliminary
injunction test.
G.G. pleaded two
claims. Point II
addressed his Title
IX claim. Here
Point III addresses
his Equal
Protection claim. If
the court believes
that he is likely to
succeed in proving
either claim in the
trial court, he has
satisfied the first
element.

Despite these additional privacy measures, the district court stated that excluding
transgender students from the same restrooms as other students would vindicate
non-transgender students’ constitutional right to bodily privacy. J.A. 160–62. In support,
the court cited precedent regarding prisoner’s privacy rights related to the involuntary
exposure of genitals to members of the opposite sex. Id. Excluding G. from the boys’
restroom, however, has no relationship to preventing exposure to nudity — especially in
light of the additional privacy measures the Board has already implemented. According to
the court, even with no exposure to nudity, the Board’s privacy concerns also encompass
students’ purported objections to “[t]he mere presence” of a transgender person “in the
restroom.” J.A. 162. But such concerns, even if sincerely held, have nothing to do with the
constitutional right to bodily privacy invoked by the court.
While privacy interests may justify separate but truly equal and non-stigmatizing
restroom facilities for boys and girls, they cannot justify policies that stigmatize one group
of students as inherently unfit to use the same restrooms as everyone else. Some students
may (or may not) be uncomfortable with “[t]he mere presence” of a transgender person “in
the restroom.” J.A. 162. But discomfort with transgender people is not a legitimate basis
for imposing unequal or stigmatizing treatment.
Ultimately, if other students are not comfortable using a restroom with a transgender
person present, they have the option — like any other student — to
-10-

408

use one of the new single-stall unisex facilities the Board has installed. But the Board cannot place
the burden on transgender students to use separate restroom facilities to address other students’
discomfort with their “mere presence.”
Point IV
addresses
the other
elements of
the
preliminary
injunction

IV. G. Has Satisfied the Remaining Preliminary Injunction Factors.

A. An Injunction Is Necessary to Prevent Irreparable Harm to G.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

309

test.
Subpoint A
argues that
G.G. has
satisfied
the second
element
(threatened
with
irreparable
harm).

Because G. is likely to succeed on the merits, he has also established irreparable harm. “[T]he
deprivation of constitutional rights unquestionably constitutes irreparable injury.” Melendres v.
Arpaio, 695 F.3d 990, 1002 (9th Cir. 2012) (internal quotation marks omitted). The violation of G.’s
rights under Title IX also constitutes irreparable harm that cannot be compensated by monetary
damages.

In this case, moreover, G. faces irreparable harm with serious medical consequences. The expert
declaration by Dr. Ettner was more than sufficient to corroborate G.’s testimony about the
psychological distress he experiences as a result of being singled out for different treatment than
every other boy at Gloucester High School and forced to use separate single-stall restroom facilities.
Excluding G. from the same restrooms as other students increases G.’s risk of depression, anxiety,
and self-harm. J.A. 33, 40. It impairs his ability to perform well academically. J.A. 33, 41. It subjects
him to physical pain associated with avoiding the restroom. J.A. 32–33. And, at a time of life when
fitting in with peers is all-important, it publicly labels him as different from every other student in his
school. J.A. 39–40. These harms are irreparable.
B. The Balance of Hardships Weighs in Favor of an Injunction.
Subpoint B
argues that
G.G. has
satisfied
the third
element
(balance of
hardships
favors an
injunction).

The balance of hardships weighs strongly in favor of a preliminary injunction. As explained
earlier, allowing G. to resume using the boys’ restrooms will not affect privacy interests related to
nudity. Any student with privacy concerns based on G.’s “mere presence” in the restroom has the
option of using the new single-stall restrooms instead. J.A. 162. The Board cannot credibly argue that
using separate single-stall restrooms would be too burdensome for other students but is not a
hardship for G.

The court distorted its analysis of the balance of harms by drawing a false equivalence between the
burden imposed on G. from being relegated to using a separate restroom and the burden that would
be imposed on students who choose to use a separate restroom in order to avoid the “mere presence”
of G. The court stated, “It does not occur to G. that other students may experience feelings of
exclusion when they can no longer use the restrooms they were accustomed to using because they
feel that G.’s presence in the male restroom violates their privacy.” J.A. 162. There is simply no
equivalence on this record between the burden placed on a student who chooses to use a separate
restroom
-11-

409

in order to avoid G. and the stigma and isolation caused by singling out G. and forcing him to use
separate restrooms that no other student is required to use.
C. An Injunction Is in the Public Interest.
An injunction in favor of G. is in the public interest. It is always in the public interest to
“uphold[] constitutional rights.” Centro Tepeyac v. Montgomery Cty., 722 F.3d 184, 191 (4th Cir.
2013) (en banc) (internal quotation marks omitted). Similarly, the “public interest is certainly

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Subpoint C
argues that
G.G. has
satisfied
the last

310

served by promoting compliance with Title IX.” Doe, 888 F. Supp. 2d at 778; accord Cohen v.
Brown Univ., 991 F.2d 888, 906 (1st Cir. 1993) (“[T]he overriding public interest l[ies] in the firm
enforcement of Title IX.”).

element
(public
interest).

CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the denial of Plaintiff’s motion for preliminary injunction should be
reversed, and the dismissal of the Title IX claim should be reversed.
Respectfully submitted,
American Civil Liberties Union
of Virginia Foundation, Inc.
___________/s/______________
Rebecca K. Glenberg
Gail Deady
Richmond, Virginia

American Civil Liberties Union
Foundation
Joshua A. Block
Leslie Cooper
New York, New York

Counsel for Plaintiff-Appellant
Dated: October 21, 2015
-12-

1. G.G. ex rel. Grimm v. Gloucester County School Bd., 132 F. Supp. 3d 736 (E.D. Va. 2015).
2. G.G. ex rel. Grimm v. Gloucester County School Bd., 822 F.3d 709 (4th Cir. 2016).
3. Gloucester County Sch. Bd. v. G.G. ex rel. Grimm, 137 S. Ct. 1239 (2017).
4. 140 S. Ct. 1731, 1754 (2020).
5. Grimm v. Gloucester Cty. Sch. Bd., 2020 WL 5034430, 2020 U.S. App. LEXIS 27234 (4th Cir. 2020).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

311

411

Appendix

H

Excerpts from Appellee’s Fourth Circuit Brief in
G.G. v. Gloucester County School Bd. (2016)
This appendix includes excerpts from the appellee’s brief. Excerpts from the appellant’s brief are in
Appendix G.
The introductory note at the beginning of Appendix G explains the lawsuit, the appeal, Rule 28 of the
Federal Rules of Appellate Procedure, and the material that is omitted or edited in these Appendices.
On this book’s website are the complete, unedited briefs, which are about twice the size of the ones in
Appendices G and H.

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

312

412
No. 15-2056
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FOURTH CIRCUIT
__________________________________________________________
G.G., by his next friend and mother, DEIRDRE GRIMM
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
GLOUCESTER COUNTY SCHOOL BOARD
Defendant-Appellee.
__________________________________________________________
On Appeal from the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia Newport News Division
__________________________________________________________

BRIEF OF DEFENDANT-APPELLEE
David P. Corrigan
Jeremy D. Capps
M. Scott Fisher, Jr.
Harman, Claytor, Corrigan & Wellman
Richmond, Virginia
Counsel for Appellee

413

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

313

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Authorities. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ii

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement of Issues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement of The Case . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Summary of Argument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

Argument . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3
3

Notice that the

G.G. is not likely to succeed on the merits, because the School Board has not
violated the Equal Protection Clause. . . . . . .

4

two briefs don’t
tackle the Equal
Protection and Title

A.

All students are treated the same. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

IX the arguments
same sequence. in

B.

There is no evidence of intentional discrimination. . . . . . . . . .

5

G.G G.’addressess
brief in Title App.

C.

G.G.’s transgender status does not create a suspect class or evidence of
discrimination under the Equal Protection Clause. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
............................

5

IX Equal first
Protection.and then

I.

Standard of Review on Appeal. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

II.

D.

There is a substantial interest for the restroom policy. . . . . . . .

7

III. G.G. is not likely to succeed on the merits, because the School Board’s
policy does not violate Title IX. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

IV. G.G. cannot satisfy the remaining factors justifying the imposition of a
preliminary injunction.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
A. The balance of hardships does not tip in G.G.’s favor, and G.G. is not
likely to suffer irreparable harm. . . . . . . . . . .
B. An injunction is not in the public interest. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

10
11

-i-

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

314

414
TABLE OF AUTHORITIES
Cases
Aggarao v. MOL Ship Mgmt. Co., 675 F.3d 355 (4th Cir. 2012) . . . . . . .

3

American Civil Liberties Union of Florida, Inc. v. Miami-Dade County School Bd., 557 F.3d 1177 (11th Cir.
2009). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

Barnes v. City of Cincinnati, 401 F.3d 729 (6th Cir. 2005) . . . . . . . . . . .

7

Beard v. Whitmore Lake Sch. Dist., 402 F.3d 598 (6th Cir. 2005) . . . . . .

9

Burns v. Gagnon, 727 S.E.2d 634 (Va. 2012). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Direx Israel, Ltd. v. Breakthrough Med. Corp., 952 F.2d 802 (4th Cir. 1992). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
....................

3

Doe v. Luzerne Cty., 660 F.3d 169 (3d Cir. 2011). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Etsitty v. Utah Transit Auth., 502 F.3d 1215 (10th Cir. 2007). . . . . . . .

5, 8

Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

Giarratano v. Johnson, 521 F.3d 298 (4th Cir. 2008). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

Glenn v. Brumby, 663 F.3d 1312 (11th Cir. 2011) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

Instant Air Freight Co. v. C.F. Air Freight, Inc., 882 F.2d 797 (3d Cir. 1989). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
..................

3–4

Johnston v. Univ. of Pittsburgh, 97 F. Supp. 3d 657 (W.D. Pa. 2015). . .

8, 10

Lee v. Downs, 641 F.2d 1117, 1119 (4th Cir. 1981). . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9–10

Linnon v. Commonwealth, 752 S.E.2d 822 (Va. 2014). . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

Morrison v. Garraghty, 239 F.3d 648 (4th Cir. 2001). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

Nofsinger v. Virginia Commonwealth Univ., 523 F. App’x 204 (4th Cir. 2013). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.....................

5

Nordlinger v. Hahn, 505 U.S. 1 (1992). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4

Pashby v. Delia, 709 F.3d 307 (4th Cir. 2013) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3–4

Personnel Adm’r of Massachusetts v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256 (1979). . . . .

4

-ii-

415
6

Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228 (1989). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Rosa v. Park West Bank & Trust Co., 214 F.3d 213 (1st Cir. 2000)
Smith v. City of Salem, 378 F.3d 566 (6th Cir. 2004). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.....
7
7
8

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

315

Sommers v. Budget Mktg., Inc., 667 F.2d 748 (8th Cir. 1982) . . . . . . . . .
Ulane v. Eastern Airlines, Inc., 742 F.2d 1081 (7th Cir. 1984). . . . . . . . .

8

United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515 (1996). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Williamson v. A.G. Edwards & Sons, Inc., 876 F.2d 69 (8th Cir. 1989).

..5

Winter v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7 (2008).

..4

Wrightson v. Pizza Hut of Am., Inc., 99 F.3d 138 (4th Cir. 1996). . . . . . .

5

Constitutional Provisions
U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4-9

Statutes
28 U.S.C. § 92(a)(1). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

.....
5
Title IX of the Education Amendments Act of 1972, 20 U.S.C. § 1681(a) (2012). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1, 3,
10
.........
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. 2000e (2012)

Other Authorities
117 Cong. Rec. 30,155–30,158 (Aug. 5, 1971) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

117 Cong. Rec. 39,248–39,261 (Nov. 4, 1971) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

-iii-

416

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

316

INTRODUCTION
This is a
preliminary
statement as
described in Ch. 29
(§29.1). In this
court, it’s called an
Introduction. It tells
the court in a
nutshell what the
appeal is all
about. While doing
that, lawyers also
introduce the court
to their theory of the
appeal (Ch. 24).

The fundamental issue in this appeal is whether the Fourteenth Amendment or Title IX
require the Gloucester County School Board to permit a student, who was born and remains
anatomically a female, to use the boys’ restroom, because the student now identifies as a
boy. Appellant (“G.G.”) was born a girl and is biologically a female. G.G. has female
anatomy. G.G. enrolled in Gloucester High School as a girl and started ninth grade as a girl.
At the beginning of G.G.’s sophomore year, school officials were informed that G.G. was
transgender and now identified as a boy. G.G., however, is still biologically and
anatomically a female. There is no allegation, medical evidence, or medical testimony that
G.G. is a boy or has male chromosomes.
The restrooms and locker rooms in Gloucester County schools are separated based on the
students’ biological sex. The school has boys’ restroom and locker room facilities and girls’
restroom and locker room facilities. After informing the school that G.G. identified as a boy,
G.G. voluntarily chose not to use the boys’ restroom. G.G. instead used a separate restroom
in the nurse’s office. In late October of 2014, G.G. asked to use the boys’ restroom. On
October 20, 2014, school personnel at the high school allowed G.G. to use the boys’
restroom.
Taking the safety and privacy of all students into consideration, the School Board on
December 9, 2014, adopted a restroom and locker room resolution. In implementing this
resolution (“policy”), the School Board maintained the practice of providing separate
restrooms and locker rooms based on students’ biological and anatomical sex. The School
Board also provided three unisex, single-stall restrooms for any student, including G.G., to
use for greater privacy. G.G., however, refuses to use either the girls’ restrooms or the
single-stall restrooms.
STATEMENT OF ISSUES

See the exercise at
the end of Ch. 31
(Questions
Presented).

The the Case
Statement is shorter
of
in this brief than in
the appellant’s brief
in App. G. That’s
because the School
Board’s story is less
complex than
G.G.’s story. As you
read this Statement
of the Case, list the
most
important facts

1.

Whether the Fourteenth Amendment or Title IX requires the School Board to permit
G.G., who was born and remains anatomically a female, to use the boys’ restroom
because G.G. identifies as a boy.

2.

Should this Court affirm the District Court’s denial of G.G.’s Motion for Preliminary
Injunction?
STATEMENT OF THE CASE

G.G. is a 16 year old high school student in Gloucester County, Virginia. J.A, 9, ¶1, J.A,
11, ¶9. G.G. is biologically a female. G.G. was born a girl and has female genitalia. J.A, 28,
J.A, 33, ¶31. G.G. enrolled in high school as a girl. J.A, 29; J.A, 12, ¶20; J.A, 57. At the
beginning of G.G.’s sophomore year, school officials were informed that G.G. was
transgender and identified as a boy. G.G., however, is still biologically and anatomically a
female. J.A, 33; J.A, 38–39.
When school officials were informed that G.G. was transgender, school officials immediately
expressed support. J.A, 9, ¶2; J.A, 14, ¶28. School officials agreed to refer to G.G. using his new name
and by using

-1-

417
from the
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

317

male pronouns. J.A, 14, ¶28. School officials changed G.G.’s name in the school records. At
G.G.’s request, school officials have permitted G.G. to continue with the home-bound program for
the school’s physical education requirements. J.A, 14, ¶29.

After informing the school that G.G. identified as a boy, G.G. voluntarily chose not to use the
boys’ restroom and instead used a separate restroom in the nurse’s office. J.A, 9–10, ¶3; J.A, 15,
¶30. In October of 2014, G.G. asked to use the boys’ restroom. School personnel at the high
school complied with that request on October 20, 2014.

School
Board’s
point of
view. As
you read
the rest of
the brief,
look for
places
where those
facts are
woven into
legal
arguments.

After receiving numerous complaints from parents and students, the School Board on November
11, 2014, considered the difficult issues associated with a transgender student seeking to use the
restroom that does not correspond with the student’s anatomical sex. J.A, 57–58. During the
discussion, several citizens expressed concerns to the School Board. J.A, 15-17, ¶¶34–38. The
School Board also considered G.G.’s concerns. J.A, 16–17, ¶38; J.A, 31, ¶21.
Taking the safety and privacy of all students into consideration, on December 9, 2014, the
School Board adopted a restroom and locker room resolution that provided:
Whereas the GCPS recognizes that some students question their gender identities, and
Whereas the GCPS encourages such students to seek support, advice, and guidance from
parents, professionals and other trusted adults, and
Whereas the GCPS seeks to provide a safe learning environment for all students and to
protect the privacy of all students, therefore
It shall be the practice of the GCPS to provide male and female restroom and locker room
facilities in its schools, and the use of said facilities shall be limited to the corresponding
biological genders, and students with gender identity issues shall be provided an alternative
appropriate private facility.
J.A, 18, ¶43.
In implementing the resolution, the School Board maintained its existing practice of providing
separate restrooms and locker rooms based on a student’s biological sex. The School Board also
provided three unisex, single-stall restrooms for any student to use. J.A, 17, ¶41; J.A, 19, ¶47; J.A,
57–58. Under the policy, G.G. is not permitted to use the boys’ restrooms. J.A, 18, ¶45. Based on
G.G.’s biological sex, G.G. is permitted to use the girls’ restroom. G.G.
chooses not to do so. J.A, 18–19, ¶46; J.A, 57–58. G.G. is permitted to use the unisex, single-stall
restrooms, but also refuses to use those restrooms. J.A, 19, ¶48; J.A, 58.

G.G. filed a Complaint and Motion for Preliminary Injunction against the School Board on June
11, 2015, alleging that the School Board’s policy violates the Equal Protection Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment and Title IX.

From the bench, the Court granted the School Board’s Motion to Dismiss G.G.’s Title IX claim
in Count II of the Complaint. J.A, 116.

The
wrap-up in
a Statement
of the Case
takes
the reader
to the
procedural
event —
the lower
court’s
ruling —
that has
been
appealed.

-2-

418
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

318

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

As you read the
Summary of
Argument and
the Argument
itself below,
identify every
place where the
brief makes a
policy
argument.

The School Board’s policy of separating students in restroom and locker room use based on
the students’ biological and anatomical sex does not violate the Equal Protection Clause or Title
IX. Moreover, by providing three single-stall restrooms for any student to use, G.G. is being
treated the same as all students at Gloucester High School. Transgender status is not a suspect
classification under the Equal Protection Clause, and G.G. does not ask this Court to recognize it
as a suspect classification. In fact, G.G. is not asking that transgender status alone be treated as a
separate classification. Transgender status is also not a class protected by Title IX.
G.G.’s attempt to state a cause of action under the Equal Protection Clause and Title IX by
construing the phrase “based on sex” to include gender identity is not persuasive. Price
Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228 (1989) does not support G.G.’s assertion that by virtue of
transgender status alone, the School Board’s policy violates the Equal Protection Clause and
Title IX. The School Board’s policy is not grounded in the false assertion that G.G. does not
conform to the stereotypes, behaviors or mannerisms expected of G.G.’s biological sex or gender
identity. Instead, it is grounded in the biological and anatomical differences between boys and
girls.
No court has held that a transgender student has the constitutional right, or the right under
Title IX, to use a restroom that is inconsistent with that student’s biological sex in a school
setting. In fact, the only United States District Court to have considered the issue held that a
University did not violate the Equal Protection Clause or Title IX by maintaining a policy of sex
segregated bathrooms and locker rooms or by requiring the transgender plaintiff to use the
bathroom and locker room that correlated with his biological sex. Johnston v. Univ. of Pittsburgh
, 97 F. Supp. 3d 657 (W.D. Pa. 2015). The same result is dictated here.
ARGUMENT
I. Standard of Review on Appeal.

See Ch. 29, §29
.3 (standards of
review).
Compare this
with the
standard of
review
discussion in
G.G.’s brief in
App. G. As the
plaintiff below
and the
appellant
on appeal, G.G.
must satisfy
these
procedural
tests. The
School Board’s
brief stresses
the

The denial of a preliminary injunction is an immediately appealable interlocutory order. 28
U.S.C. § 92(a)(1). This Court evaluates a district court’s decision to deny a preliminary
injunction under an abuse of discretion standard. Aggarao v. MOL Ship Mgmt. Co., 675 F.3d
355, 366 (4th Cir.
2012). Pursuant to this standard, the Court reviews the District Court’s factual findings for clear
error and reviews its legal conclusions de novo. Pashby v. Delia, 709 F.3d 307, 319 (4th Cir.
2013). Because preliminary injunctions are “extraordinary remed[ies] involving the exercise of
very far-reaching power,” this Court should be particularly “exacting” in its use of the abuse of
discretion standard when it reviews an order granting or denying a preliminary injunction.
Pashby, 709 F.3d at 319.

A preliminary injunction is “an extraordinary remedy involving the exercise of a very
far-reaching power, which is to be applied ‘only in [the] limited circumstances’ which clearly
demand it.” Direx Israel, Ltd. v. Breakthrough

-3-

419

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

319

Med. Corp., 952 F.2d 802, 811 (4th Cir. 1992) (quoting Instant Air Freight Co. v. C.F. Air
Freight, Inc., 882 F.2d 797, 800 (3d Cir. 1989)). It is “never awarded as of right.” Winter v.
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 24 (2008). Instead, a preliminary
injunction is a “drastic remedy not to be granted unless the movant clearly establishes the
burden of persuasion as to the four
requisites.” American Civil Liberties Union of Florida, Inc. v. Miami-Dade County School
Bd., 557 F.3d 1177, 1198 (11th Cir. 2009) (citations omitted).
In deciding whether to grant a preliminary injunction, G.G. must demonstrate that (1)
G.G. is likely to succeed on the merits, (2) G.G. is likely to suffer irreparable harm, (3) the
balance of hardships tips in G.G.’s favor, and (4) the injunction is in the public interest.
Winter, 555 U.S. at 20. A preliminary injunction must be denied if G.G. does not satisfy
every factor of this test. Pashby, 709 F.3d at 320–21.

barriers G.G.
must overcome.

The brief is
organized around
the four-element
preliminary
injunction test.
See Ch. 27
(procedural
postures). The
School Board
argues that G.G.
can’t satisfy
these
elements.

II. G.G. is not likely to succeed on the merits, because the School Board has not violated
the Equal Protection Clause.
The District Court did not abuse its discretion in denying G.G. a preliminary injunction,
because G.G. is not likely to succeed on the merits of the Complaint. The Equal Protection
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment provides that “[n]o State shall . . . deny to any person
within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.” U.S. Const. Amend. XIV, § 1. The
equal protection requirement “does not take from the States all power of classification,”
Personnel Adm’r of Massachusetts v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 271 (1979), but “keeps
governmental decision makers from treating differently persons who are in all relevant
respects alike.” Nordlinger v. Hahn, 505 U.S. 1, 10 (1992).
Thus, “[t]he [Equal Protection] Clause requires that similarly-situated individuals be
treated alike.” Giarratano v. Johnson, 521 F.3d 298, 302 (4th Cir. 2008). In order to make
out a claim under the Equal Protection Clause, a plaintiff must demonstrate (1) that he has
been treated differently from others similarly situated and (2) that the unequal treatment was
the result of intentional discrimination. Morrison v. Garraghty, 239 F.3d 648, 652 (4th Cir.
2001). G.G. was not denied equal protection of the law on the basis of sex.

Because more
than one element
is involved, this
brief’s Argument
includes several
paradigmed
proofs. For how
to organize in
this situation, see
Ch. 13
(combining
separate
paradigm
proofs).

A. All students are treated the same.
The School Board’s policy does not discriminate against any class of students. Instead, the
policy was developed to treat all students and situations the same. To respect the safety and
privacy of all students, the School Board has had a long-standing practice of limiting the use
of restroom and locker room facilities to the corresponding biological sex of the students.
The School Board also provides three single-stall bathrooms for any student to use regardless
of his or her biological sex. Under the School Board’s restroom policy, G.G. is being treated
like every other student in the Gloucester Schools. All students have two choices. Every
student can use a restroom associated with their anatomical sex, whether they are boys or
girls. If students choose not to use the restroom associated with their anatomical sex, the
students can use a

Notice how this
brief and G.G.’s
brief, in App. G,
interpret the
same facts very
differently.

-4-

420
private, single-stall restroom. No student is permitted to use the restroom of the opposite sex. As a result, all
students, including female to male transgender and male to female transgender students, are treated the same.
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

320

B. There is no evidence of intentional discrimination.
G.G. cannot demonstrate, under the allegations in the Complaint or in the evidence presented on the Motion for
Preliminary Injunction, that there was intentional discrimination. The School Board did not develop the restroom
and locker room policy in an attempt to stigmatize, embarrass or otherwise reject G.G. Indeed, when school
officials were informed that G.G. was transgender, school officials immediately expressed support. J.A, 9, ¶2, J.A,
14, ¶28. School officials changed G.G.’s name in the official school records, refer to G.G. using his new name, and
refer to G.G. using male pronouns. J.A, 14, ¶27. G.G. has not alleged that school officials have in any way
harassed or discriminated against G.G. in his educational opportunities or engaged in any form of discriminatory
treatment with respect to G.G.’s transgender identification. Nofsinger v. Virginia Commonwealth Univ., 523 F.
App’x 204, 206 (4th Cir. 2013) (failed to establish that any differential treatment was the result of discrimination.)
C. G.G.’s transgender status does not create a suspect class or evidence of discrimination under the
Equal Protection Clause.
The United States Supreme Court and this Court have not recognized transgender status as a suspect
classification under the Equal Protection Clause. In fact, no Circuit Court has recognized transgender status, alone,
as a suspect classification under the Equal Protection Clause. To the contrary, Courts have rejected the notion that
transgender status, or other classifications of sex, is a suspect classification. See, e.g., Etsitty v. Utah Transit
Authority, 502 F.3d 1215, 1222 (10th Cir. 2007) (holding that transsexuals are not a protected class under Title
VII); Wrightson v. Pizza Hut of Am., Inc., 99 F.3d 138, 143 (4th Cir. 1996) (Title VII does not afford a cause of
action for discrimination based upon sexual orientation); Williamson v. A.G. Edwards & Sons, Inc., 876 F.2d 69,
70 (8th Cir. 1989) (“Title VII does not prohibit discrimination against homosexuals”).
G.G. asserts on brief that G.G. is a boy. (Appellant Br., p. 20). The Complaint and evidence on the preliminary
injunction, however, establish that G.G. was born a girl and remains anatomically and biologically a girl. G.G. has
female genitalia. G.G. enrolled in high school as a girl. G.G. has been diagnosed with Gender Dysphoria by a
psychologist, and now identifies as a boy. The Complaint does not allege, however, that G.G. is a boy
anatomically. Medical evidence was not introduced at the preliminary injunction hearing to establish that G.G. is a
boy. Accordingly, the Complaint and evidence show that G.G. is biologically and anatomically a girl.
This point is not made to be insensitive to G.G.’s diagnosis of Gender Dysphoria. Instead, it is made to show
that G.G. is not being treated differently from any other similarly situated students. The School Board’s policy
provides
-5-

421

at its most basic level that if a student is anatomically a female, the student can use the girls’
restrooms or a single-stall restroom, but the student cannot use a restroom designated for
anatomical males. The reverse is true with anatomical males. Accordingly, because G.G.
does not seek to create a new classification for transgender status, the Equal Protection
claim cannot survive under the facts of this Complaint.
Ignoring this underlying flaw in the case, G.G. attempts to redefine the meaning of sex.
G.G. contends that “sex” does not mean biologically male or female. Instead, G.G. tries to
obtain protected status under the Equal Protection Clause by arguing that sex encompasses
gender “nonconformity.” Appellant Br., p. 38. This argument implicitly attempts to create a
classification based on transgender status, despite G.G.’s steadfast refusal to assert this very
claim. This position is evident in G.G.’s assertion that “discrimination based on a person’s
transgender status also inherently involves impermissible discrimination based on the
person’s gender nonconformity.” (Appellant Br., pp. 22–23). That assertion misinterprets
Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228 (1989), is not supported by the cases cited by
G.G., and would create a new sex classification not currently protected under the
Constitution.
Price Waterhouse holds that discrimination based on behavior that is inconsistent with a
sex stereotype is prohibited. A policy based on anatomy, however, is not “sex stereotyping”

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Both briefs
discuss Price

321

under Price Waterhouse. In Price Waterhouse, the Supreme Court considered a Title VII
claim based on allegations that a female employee at Price Waterhouse was denied
partnership, because she was considered “macho” and “overcompensated for being a
woman.” 490 U.S. at 235. The female employee had been advised to “walk more
femininely, talk more femininely, dress more femininely, wear make-up, have her hair
styled, and wear jewelry.” Id. The Court found that such comments were indicative of
gender stereotyping, which Title VII prohibited as sex discrimination. Accordingly, the
Court found that “an employer who acts on the basis of a belief that a woman cannot be
aggressive or that she must not be” has acted on the basis of sex. Id. at 251.

Waterhouse v.
Hopkins and
Glenn v. Brumby.
Use the App. G
brief’s Table of
Authorities to
find that brief’s
discussion of
these two cases.
How do the two
briefs differ in the
way they handle
them?

The use of Price Waterhouse and subsequent employment cases to support a transgender
stereotype theory in the school restroom context is not analogous. In the employment
context, as in Price Waterhouse, employees allege that they are discriminated against
because the employer believes the employee is not behaving in accordance with the
employee’s biological sex. Nevertheless, G.G. suggests that the federal cases he cites stand
for the proposition that transgender status alone can support a discrimination claim based on
gender non-conformity. See, e.g., Appellant Br., pp. 22–23. Contrary to that suggestion,
those cases do not stand for the proposition that transgender status supports an Equal
Protection Claim.
For example, in Glenn v. Brumby, 663 F.3d 1312 (11th Cir. 2011), the plaintiff was a
male and intended to take steps to transition to a female, including wearing women’s
clothing to work. The plaintiff’s supervisor told the plaintiff that his appearance was not
“appropriate.” The supervisor found the plaintiff’s appearance “unnatural” and “unsettling.”
Id. The court in Glenn concluded that the transgender plaintiff’s discrimination claim arose
from the failure to act according to socially prescribed gender roles. That is, the plaintiff’s
claim could proceed because of evidence of sex stereotyping — acts
-6-

422
“which presume that men and women’s appearance and behavior will be determined by their sex . . .” Id. at 1317,
1320 (emphasis added) (“All persons, whether transgender or not, are protected from discrimination on the basis of
gender stereotype.”). Thus, the plaintiff was seeking protection on the basis of his biological sex — male.
Similarly, Smith v. City of Salem, 378 F.3d 566 (6th Cir. 2004), is a classic sex stereotyping case where the Sixth
Circuit concluded that the plaintiff had stated a cause of action by alleging that the defendant’s discrimination was
motivated by his appearance and mannerisms, and the defendant’s belief that this behavior was “inappropriate for
his perceived sex.” The same is true with Barnes v. City of Cincinnati, 401 F.3d 729, 738 (6th Cir. 2005), where
the plaintiff was a male to female transsexual. The plaintiff alleged discrimination based upon his mannerisms and
the way he behaved. There, supervisors told the plaintiff he was not sufficiently masculine, and numerous
supervisors and peers criticized him for lacking a quality known as command presence.” Thus, the sexual
stereotyping claim was again grounded in plaintiff’s biological sex. Id. See also Rosa v. Park West Bank & Trust
Co., 214 F.3d 213, 215 (1st Cir. 2000) (reasonable to infer from the Complaint that the plaintiff was told to go
home and change because the supervisor thought that the plaintiff’s attire did not accord with his male gender.) In
sum, sex stereotyping cases are all grounded in allegations that the transgender plaintiffs were discriminated
against because their behaviors, mannerisms or appearance did not correspond to notions attributable to their
biological sex.
Here, G.G.’s behavior, mannerisms and appearance are not at issue. In fact, G.G. does not seek constitutional
protection based on biological and anatomical sex. Instead, G.G. asks the Court to provide protection based on
gender identity. Yet the Complaint and evidence show that while G.G. now identifies as a boy, G.G. was born
biologically and anatomically female, enrolled in school as a female, and remains biologically and anatomically

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

322

female. The Complaint and evidence submitted during the hearing on the motion for a preliminary injunction do
not show that the School Board acted on an impermissible stereotype associated with G.G. being a girl or, for that
matter, a boy.
The School Board acted based on the admitted and legitimate biological and anatomical differences between
boys and girls. Accordingly, it is apparent that G.G. is seeking protection based on transgender status alone, not
stereotypes about biological sex, and there has been no unlawful discrimination under the Equal Protection Clause
based on G.G.’s sex. The District Court’s Order denying the Motion for Preliminary Injunction should be affirmed.
D. There is a substantial interest for the restroom policy.
Even if G.G. could assert an Equal Protection claim, the School Board’s policy does not violate the Equal
Protection Clause. Only one United States District Court has considered whether a public school can prohibit a
transgender student from using a bathroom or locker room that is not associated with that student’s biological sex.
-7-

423
In Johnston v. Univ. of Pittsburgh, 97 F. Supp. 3d 657 (W.D. Pa. 2015), the plaintiff was born a biological
female. The plaintiff entered college as a female, but later identified as a male. The plaintiff was diagnosed with
Gender Identity Disorder, legally changed his name, and began living as a male. The plaintiff used the men’s
restrooms and locker rooms on campus. The plaintiff, however, remained anatomically a female.
Thereafter, the plaintiff was told that he could not use the men’s restrooms or locker rooms. When the plaintiff
refused to comply with this policy, he was expelled from the University. The plaintiff filed suit against the
University alleging that the school’s policy violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and
Title IX. In short, Johnston is nearly “on all fours” with this case, except that it arose in a university instead of a
high school setting, and the plaintiff in Johnston was expelled whereas G.G. is simply offered an alternative
restroom. The District Court, in a detailed analysis and opinion, rejected these claims.
Johnston held that transgender status is not a suspect classification, and that providing separate restroom and
locker room facilities for college students based on their biological sex did not violate the Equal Protection Clause.
As the Court noted, this holding is consistent with the holdings of numerous other courts that have considered
allegations of discrimination by transgender individuals, whether under the Fourteenth Amendment or Title VII.
See Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677 (1973); Etsitty v. Utah Transit Auth., 502 F.3d at 1221–22; Ulane v.
Eastern Airlines, Inc., 742 F.2d 1081, 1084 (7th Cir. 1984); Sommers v. Budget Mktg., Inc., 667 F.2d 748, 750 (8th
Cir. 1982).
The same result should be reached here. Not only is the School Board’s policy rationally related to protecting
students’ safety and privacy rights, but it is substantially related to this important governmental interest. G.G.
frames the question as “whether an important interest in privacy is substantially furthered by the new policy
regulating the restroom use of transgender students.” (Appellant Br., p. 39). That ignores, however, the underlying
basis for the policy’s existence.
The policy was implemented to ensure that the safety and privacy rights of all students, both boys and girls, are
respected and protected. In doing so, the School Board focused on those privacy rights by providing three
single-stall restrooms that any student can use for increased privacy. Thus, contrary to G.G.’s suggestion, the
question is whether the School Board’s policy of providing separate bathrooms based on anatomical sex, along
with providing single-stall restrooms for all students, serves the governmental interest in protecting all students’
safety and privacy.
The answer is yes. This case is not an employment case involving adults. It is a case that involves the public
education of children, kindergarten through twelfth grade. In fact, the School Board’s interests here are much more
compelling than in Johnston, because the School Board is responsible for the care and education of minor children,
from kindergarten through twelfth grade, not adults in college as in Johnston. There is no question that the School
Board has a substantial interest in protecting the safety and privacy of minor children while they are in school.
As Johnston noted, the issue presents “two important but competing interests.” G.G.’s interest is performing
“life’s most basic and routine
-8-

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

323

424
functions” in the school restroom in an environment consistent with G.G.’s gender identity. On the other hand, the
School Board has an interest in “providing its students with a safe and comfortable environment for performing
these same life functions consistent with society’s long-held tradition of performing such functions in
sex-segregated spaces based on biological or birth sex.” Johnston, 97 F. Supp. 3d at 668. In analyzing these issues,
Johnston held that segregating “bathroom and locker room facilities on the basis of birth sex is substantially related
to a sufficiently important governmental interest.” Id. at 669. That conclusion is a correct statement of the law and
should be followed in this case.
This Circuit has recognized a right to bodily privacy. Lee v. Downs, 641 F.2d 1117, 1119 (4th Cir. 1981) (“Most
people, however, have a special sense of privacy in their genitals, and involuntary exposure of them in the presence
of people of the other sex may be especially demeaning and humiliating.”) Parents have an interest in the safety of
their children, and children have a strong privacy interest of their own. United States v. Virginia, 518 U.S. 515, 551
(1996) (recognizing that admitting women to VMI would undoubtedly require alterations necessary to afford
members of each sex privacy from the other sex); Doe v. Luzerne Cty., 660 F.3d 169, 177 (3d Cir. 2011)
(recognizing right of privacy from involuntary exposure of body particularly while in the presence of members of
the opposite sex); Beard v. Whitmore Lake Sch. Dist., 402 F.3d 598, 604 (6th Cir. 2005) (“Students of course have
a significant privacy interest in their unclothed bodies.”).
The School Board has a responsibility to its students to ensure their privacy while engaging in personal
bathroom functions, disrobing, dressing, and showering outside of the presence of members of the opposite sex.
This is particularly true in an environment where children are still developing, both emotionally and physically.
See, e.g., Burns v. Gagnon, 727 S.E.2d 634, 643 (Va. 2012) (school administrators have a responsibility “to
supervise and ensure that students could have an education in an atmosphere conducive to learning, free of
disruption, and threat to person.”).
As Johnston recognized, the context of this dispute is important. Here, the School Board is balancing the needs,
interests and rights of children in kindergarten through twelfth grade. The right to privacy for students strongly
supports maintaining sex-segregated bathrooms and locker rooms.
The School Board is not unsympathetic to G.G.’s recent identification as a boy, but G.G.’s identification does
not alter the biological and anatomical differences between G.G. and other male students, nor does it erase the
biological and anatomical differences between a male student who identifies as a female and other female students.
G.G. cannot reconcile these facts with the position that the School Board does not have a legitimate interest in
protecting other students’ privacy.
The School Board has taken both G.G.’s interests and the interests of its other students into consideration and
developed a policy that attempts to accommodate the best interests of all of its students. In doing so, the School
Board bolstered these privacy rights by providing single-stall restrooms for any student to use. Accordingly, there
is not only a rational basis, but a substantially related basis for the School Board’s policy requiring students to
-9-

425

use the restroom and locker room associated with their biological sex, or to use a single-stall
restroom of their choice.
III. G.G. is not likely to succeed on the merits because the School Board’s policy does
not violate Title IX.

The School Board’s policy does not violate Title IX. Title IX prohibits discrimination “on
the basis of sex” in educational programs. 20 U.S.C. § 1681(a).

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

Likelihood of
success on the
merits is the
first element of
the preliminary
injunction test.
G.G. pleaded
two
claims. Point II
addressed his
Equal Protection

324

As discussed in detail under the Equal Protection argument, courts have not permitted
discrimination claims to proceed based upon transgender status alone. Instead, all of the
cases have been premised on some form of discrimination based on the plaintiff’s behaviors,
mannerisms or appearance, and those plaintiffs have sought protection on the basis of their
biological sex. Johnston addressed this precise issue as well, and held that being transgender
itself is not a protected characteristic under Title IX. As the Court noted, the exclusion of
gender identity from the language of Title IX is not an issue for the court to remedy, but one
within the province of Congress to identify the classifications which are statutorily
prohibited. Id. at 75–77.

This is consistent with the plain language of the statute and the legislative history of Title
IX. Title IX was enacted in order to open up educational opportunities for girls and women in
education and to address discrimination toward women. See, e.g., 117 Cong. Rec.
30,155–30,158 (August 5, 1971); 117 Cong. Rec. 39,248–39,261 (November 4, 1971);
Johnston, 97 F. Supp. 3d at 677. The legislative history, statutory language and implementing
regulations do not refer to gender identity or transgender individuals in the enforcement
scheme.
IV. G.G. cannot satisfy the remaining factors justifying the imposition of a preliminary
injunction.

claim. Here
Point
III addresses his
Title IX claim.
The School
Board is arguing
that in the trial
court G.G. will
probably lose on
both claims and
therefore has no
likelihood of
success on the
merits.

Point IV
addresses the
other elements of
the preliminary
injunction test.

A. The balance of hardships does not tip in G.G.’s favor, and G.G. is not likely to
suffer irreparable harm.
The District Court did not abuse its discretion in finding that G.G. did not submit sufficient
evidence to establish that the balance of hardships weigh in his favor. J.A, 154. As discussed
under the Equal Protection claim, the School Board is charged with the responsibility to care
and protect minor children while they are in school. Linnon v. Commonwealth, 752 S.E.2d
822, 826 (Va. 2014). Those children have a right to privacy protected by the Constitution.
Lee, 641 F.2d at 1119. That right, as explained above, is of paramount concern for the School
Board, and outweighs the interests of G.G. This is particularly true where G.G. seeks to
impose an injunction on the School Board before the difficult issues associated with G.G.’s
claims are litigated, before the

Subpoint A
argues that G.G.
hasn’t satisfied
the second
element
(threatened with
irreparable harm)
and the third
element (balance
of hardships).

-10-

426

Court has considered whether G.G. even has a viable legal claim, and in direct contradiction to the
holding of the only Federal Court to have actually considered the issues raised in G.G.’s Complaint.
As the District Court correctly recognized, the School Board’s strong interest in protecting student
privacy outweighs the claims of hardship by G.G. Moreover, the School Board, and school officials,
have recognized and accepted G.G. as a transgender individual. They are supporting G.G., have
changed his official school records, refer to G.G. with male pronouns, and are allowing him to
participate in his school educational opportunities as a transgender male. The School Board has also
provided three single-stall bathrooms for G.G. and any other student to use. G.G. can also use the
bathroom in the nurse’s office. G.G. has voluntarily chosen not to use the locker room at the high
school. This evidence discounts the notion that G.G. will suffer irreparable harm if a preliminary

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

325

injunction is not granted. The competing hardship is to the remaining students in the school system.
Their safety and privacy interests will go unprotected if an injunction is entered until the issue is
resolved on the merits.
G.G.’s assertions concerning the Court’s consideration of Dr. Ettner’s declaration and G.G.’s
declaration miss the point. Dr. Ettner saw G.G. on one occasion. In the declaration, Dr. Ettner devotes
only three paragraphs to G.G. specifically. J.A, 41–42. Those three paragraphs do not divulge any
particular facts related to G.G. While Dr. Ettner opines that G.G. is suffering emotional distress, Dr.
Ettner does not offer an opinion differentiating between the distress that G.G. may suffer by not using
the boy’s bathroom during the course of this ligation and the distress that he has apparently been living
with since age 12. J.A, 29. Similarly, while G.G. asserts that his feelings of dysphoria, anxiety and
distress increase when he uses the restroom at school, because he is reminded that everyone knows he is
transgender, G.G. did not present evidence that those feelings would be lessened by using the boy’s
restroom. As the District Court rightly pointed out, there was no evidence presented from G.G.’s
treating psychologist, nor was there any medical evidence presented in support of the preliminary
injunction.
While G.G. disagrees with aspects of the District Court’s opinion, a close review of that opinion
shows that the District Court did consider in detail the evidence presented on the motion for a
preliminary injunction. That opinion discredits the assertion that there was “clear error” in the Court’s
factual findings. In sum, G.G. did not present sufficient evidence to carry the burden required to impose
a preliminary injunction on the School Board under the circumstances of this case.
B. An injunction is not in the public interest.
Subpoint
B argues
that
G.G.
hasn’t
satisfied
the last
element
(public
interest).

An injunction is not in the public interest, because the School Board’s policy does not violate the
Equal Protection Clause or Title IX, and the School Board is not discriminating against G.G. by
maintaining separate sex-segregated bathrooms. As the District Court candidly pointed out, there are
significant concerns with the precedent that would be set if the Court granted the Motion for
Preliminary Injunction without full consideration of the case on the merits.

-11-

427
CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated above, this Court should affirm the District Court’s Order denying G.G.’s Motion for
Preliminary Injunction. This Court should further affirm the District Court’s Order granting the School Board’s
Motion to Dismiss the Title IX claim. Finally, this Court should direct the District Court to enter an Order granting
the School Board’s Motion to Dismiss the Equal Protection claim on remand.

Gloucester County School Board

By Counsel
/s/ David P. Corrigan
David P. Corrigan
Jeremy D. Capps

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

326

M. Scott Fisher, Jr
Attorney for Gloucester County
School Board
Harman, Claytor, Corrigan & Wellman
Richmond, Virginia
Dated: November 23, 2015

-12-

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

327

429

Index
Abbreviations, where inappropriate, § 21.5 (question 21-Q)
Active voice, § 21.5 (question 21-J)
Affirmative defenses, § 2.4
Airplanes and interplanetary rockets, National Motor Vehicle Theft Act, § 8.7
Analogizing (precedent), § 9.4
Apartment rental (example of interdependence of facts, issues, and rules), § 3.2
Appeals, Ch. 23, Ch. 29. See also Appellate briefs
Appellate briefs, Ch. 23, Ch. 29
appellant’s, Ch. 29, App. G
appellee’s, Ch. 29, App. H
developing a theory of the appeal, § 29.2.1
how judges read, § 23.3
role of, § 23.2
Apply as an imprecise verb, § 21.5 (question 21-B)
Argument (part of a memorandum or brief). See also Arguments
in an appellate brief, Ch. 28
in a motion memorandum, Ch. 29
Arguments, Ch. 24
argumentation as a concept, § 26.1
ethics of, § 26.5
how to handle adverse authority and arguments, § 26.4
what judges expect in argumentation, § 26.2
Authority and sources, Ch. 7
adverse, § 24.5
dicta, § 7.6
gap-filling, § 7.5
hierarchy of, § 7.4
Bots, paradigm example, § 11.1, Ch. 12
Canons of statutory construction, § 8.1
Cases. See Precedent
Causes of action, § 2.4
Clarity, § 21.1, § 21.5
Clickwrap contracts, paradigm example, § 11.1, Ch. 12
Client advice letters, Ch. 19, App. E.
Coca-Cola, caffeine added to, in U. S. v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca Cola, § 22.1
Comprehensive explanation (variation of paradigm for structuring proof), § 12.4
Conciseness, § 21.2, § 21.5
Conclusory explanation (variation of paradigm for structuring proof), § 12.2
Constructive trust, Emil Risberg’s Diary (precedent exercise), App. B
EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

328

Contractions, § 21.5 (question 21-P)
Conversational language, § 21.5 (question 21-P)
Costanza v. Seinfeld, § 3.4
Counter-analysis, § 11.2
Counter-argument, § 26.4
Courts, organization of, § 7.2
CRAC, CREAC, and CruPAC, § 11.2
Cryptic explanation (variation of paradigm for structuring proof), § 12.5
Deal with as an imprecise verb, § 21.5 (question 21-B)
Death Valley
fact statements, Ch. 25, Exc. 1
paragraphs, § 20.2

430
Descriptive writing (compared to probative writing), § 20.2
Dicta and dictum, § 7.6
Directed verdicts, § 29.3
Distinguishing precedent, § 9.4, § 9.6
Elvis and legalese, § 21.5 (question 21-O)
Email, Ch. 17, App. D
Emil Risberg’s Diary, constructive trust (precedent exercise), App. B
Fact statements, persuasive. See Statement of the Case
Facts, Ch. 10, Ch. 24, Ch. 25
allegations and facts, § 10.1
characterizations, distinguished from, § 10.1
determinative, § 3.1, § 3.2,§ 10.2
evidence and facts, § 10.1
inferences from, § 10.3
interdependence with issues and rules, § 3.2
nonexistence of allegation or evidence as a fact, § 10.1
statement of the case in motion memos and briefs, Ch. 24, Ch. 25
telling the client’s story persuasively, Ch. 24, Ch. 25
First draft, § 5.2, § 5.6
Fluid outlining, § 5.5, § 14.1
Forcefulness, § 21.3, § 21.5
Front-loaded sentences, § 21.5 (question 21-C)
Gaps
in facts, § 16.3 (question 16-C)
in law, § 7.5
filling a gap in the law with nonmandatory authority, § 7.5
Gendered wording, § 21.5 (question 21-S)
Grateful Dead, § 21.5 (question 21-D)
Harry Potter (Nimbus 2000), § 21.3
Hierarchy of authority and sources, § 7.4
Imagery and story-telling, Ch. 24, Ch. 25
Indicate as an imprecise verb, § 21.5 (question 21-B)
Interplanetary rockets and airplanes, National Motor Vehicle Theft Act, § 8.7
Involve as an imprecise verb, § 21.5 (question 21-B)
Ironwood Tract (statutory interpretation exercise), App. A, Exc. B
Issues, interdependence with facts and rules, § 3.2
IRAC, law school examinations, § 11.2
Judgment, defined, § 23.1.2

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

329

Justifying arguments, distinguished from motivating arguments, § 26.3
Lawyer noises, imitation of, legalese, § 21.5 (question 21-O)
Legalese, § 6.8, § 21.1, § 21.5 (questions 21-M, 21-N, 21-O)
Legislative history, use of in statutory interpretation, Ch. 8
Letters, client advice, Ch. 19, App. E.
Lutz and Welty, § 2.2, § 4.3, § 10.3
Medwick’s bot, paradigm example, § 11.1, Ch. 12
Memoranda,
motion, Ch. 28, App. F
office, Ch. 16, App. C
Modifiers, confusing placement of, § 21.5 (question 21–K)
Motion memos, Ch. 28, App. F
Motions, types of, and procedural postures, Ch. 23
Motivating arguments, distinguished from justifying arguments, § 26.3
Nominalizations, § 21.5 (question 21-A)
Nouns, building sentences around concrete, § 21.5 (question 21-A)
Objective writing. See Predictive writing
Only, confusing placement of, § 21.5 (question 21-K)
Opinions (judicial). See also Precedent
anatomy of, § 3.1
interdependence of facts, issues, and rules, § 3.2
Oral argument, Ch. 32
role of, § 23.2, § 32.1
Oral presentations to supervising lawyers, Ch. 18
Order, defined, § 23.1.1
Organization. See also Paradigm for structuring proof
argumentation, organization in, § 26.3.4
paragraphing and organization, Ch. 20
statement of the case, § 25.3, § 25.4
testing organization while rewriting, § 14.2
Outlining, fluid, § 5.5, § 14.1
Paradigm for structuring proof, Chs. 11–14
arguments, in, § 26.3.1, § 26.3.4, § 26.3.5, § 27.4
combinations of separately structured explanations, § 11.4.3, Ch. 13
comprehensive explanations, § 12.4
conclusory explanations, § 12.2
cryptic explanations, § 12.5
examinations, law school, use IRAC instead, § 11.2

431
procedural posture, and, § 27.3
reader’s need for, § 11.3
substantiating explanations, § 12.3
testing writing for effective organization, § 14.2
variations in depth, § 11.4.2, Ch. 12
variations in sequence, § 11.4.1
website contract example, § 11.1, Ch. 12
Paragraphs, Ch. §20
descriptive writing, § 20.2
organization, and, § 20.1
probative writing, § 20.2
thesis sentences, §§ 20.3–20.4, § 20.5 (question 20-A)
topic sentences, §§ 20.3–20.4, § 20.5 (question 20-A)

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

330

transition sentences, §§ 20.3–20.4, § 20.5 (question 20-G)
Parallel construction, § 21.5 (question 21-L)
Passive voice, § 21.5 (question 21-J)
Persuasive writing, distinguished from predictive writing, § 4.1
Plagiarism, § 6.5
Plagiarism and the Bar Examiners (statutory interpretation exercise), App. A, Exc. A
Points and point headings, § 23.3, § 26.3.4, Ch. 30
in an appellate brief, Ch. 29
in a motion memorandum, Ch. 28
Policy
appellate briefs, policy arguments in, § 31.4
gaps in the law, use of when filling, § 7.5
in persuasion and argumentation, § 23.1, § 24.2, § 26.3, § 26.4, § 29.2
in paradigm for structuring proof, §§ 11.2–11.3
precedent, and, § 9.3
statutory interpretation, use of policy in, Ch. 8
Precedent. See also Opinions
analogizing, § 9.4, § 9.6
dicta, how courts use, § 7.6
distinguishing, § 9.4, § 9.6
policy, § 9.3
realism and marketability, testing analysis of precedent for, §§ 9.5–9.6
synthesis, § 9.2, § 9.6
working with, Ch. 9
Predictive writing, Chs. 4, Ch. 16
how to predict, § 4.3
persuasive writing, distinguished from, § 4.1
testing writing for predictiveness, § 16.3
Preliminary Statement
in an appellate brief, Ch. 29
in a motion memorandum, Ch. 28
Prince (also known as the Artist Formerly Known as Prince), § 20.5 (question 20-B)
Probative writing (compared to descriptive writing), § 20.2
Process of writing. See Writing, process of
Pronouns, gendered, § 21.5 (question 21-S)
Public policy. See Policy
Punctuation, § 21.4
Questions Presented, Ch. 31
Quoting, Ch. 22
Realism, in interpreting precedent, §§ 9.5–9.6
Record, on appeal. See also Facts
ethics and the record, § 25.8
how to cite to, § 27.4
procedural posture, and, § 27.3, § 27.4, § 29.3
role in appeals, Ch. 23
theory, developing a persuasive, § 25.1
Rewriting, § 5.7
Rhetorical questions, § 21.5 (question 21-R)
Right of Privacy, Ch. 3
Roberson v. Rochester Folding Box Co., Ch. 3
Rule application (component of paradigm for structuring proof), Chs. 11–14
Rule proof and and explanation (component of paradigm for structuring proof), Chs. 11–14
Rule, statement of (component of paradigm for structuring proof), Chs. 11–14
Rules of law, Ch. 2
affirmative defenses, § 2.4
broad and narrow rule formulations, § 3.2
causes of action, § 2.4

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

331

declaratory rules, § 2.1
discretionary rules, § 2.1
elements, § 2.1
factors, § 2.1
interdependence with issues and facts, § 3.2
mandatory rules, § 2.1
organizing the application of, § 2.2
prohibitory rules, § 2.1
structure of rules, § 2.1
Seinfeld, Costanza v., § 3.4
Sentences
concrete nouns and verbs, built around, § 21.5 (question 21-A)
front-loaded, § 21.5 (question 21-C)
sing-song, § 21.5 (question 21-I)
thesis, §§ 20.3–20.4, § 20.5 (question 20-A)
topic, §§ 20.3–20.4, § 20.5 (question 20-A)
transition, §§ 20.3–20.4, § 20.5 (question 20-G)
unnecessarily long, § 21.5 (question 21-H)

432
Standards of review on appeal, § 29.3
Statement of facts, persuasive. See Statement of the Case.
Statement of the Case, Ch. 25
ethics, § 25.8
how to evaluate, § 25.7
Statement of Facts vs. Statement of the Case (name), § 25.1
Statutes, Ch. 8
and common law, § 3.4
Storytelling, Ch. 24, Ch. 25
Style, Ch. 21
clarity, § 21.1, § 21.5
conciseness, § 21.2, § 21.5
forcefulness, § 21.3, § 21.5
older judicial opinions and bad writing style, § 5.7
testing writing for effective style, § 21.5
vividness, § 21.1, § 21.5
Substantiating explanation (variation of paradigm for structuring proof), § 12.3
Synthesis (of precedent), § 9.2, § 9.6
Terms of art, § 21.5 (questions 21-M, 21-N)
Theory of the case, motion, or appeal, Ch. 24 how to evaluate, § 24.5 theory of the appeal, § 29.2
Thesis sentences, §§ 20.3–20.4, § 20.5 (question 20-A)
Throat-clearing introductory sentences, § 20.5 (question 20-B)
Topic sentences, §§ 20.3–20.4, § 20.5 (question 20-A)
Transition sentences, §§ 20.3–20.4, § 20.5 (question 20-G)
Transitional words and phrases, §§ 21.3, § 21.5 (question 21-E)
Verbs
bringing the reader to the verb quickly, § 21.5 (question 21-C)
building sentences around verbs that show the action, § 21.5 (question 21-A)
placement in relation to subject and object, § 21.5 (question 21-D)
relationships, verbs that communicate precise, § 21.5 (question 21-B)
to be, avoid, § 21.5 (question 21-A)
Vividness, § 21.1
Voice, writer’s, § 6.3
Welty and Lutz, § 2.2, § 4.3, § 10.3

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

332

Writer’s block, overcoming, § 6.4
Writing, process of, Ch. 5, Ch. 6
appellate briefs, § 29.2
first draft, § 5.6
motion memoranda, § 28.2
office memoranda, § 16.2
outlining, fluid, § 5.5, § 14.1
plagiarism, § 6.5
paradigm, working with, Ch. 14
question presented, § 31.3
rewriting, § 5.7
testing for effective organization, § 14.2
writer’s block, overcoming, § 6.4
writing and thinking are a single process, § 6.1

EBSCOhost - printed on 8/22/2022 8:25 PM via COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY - MAIN. All use subject to https://www.ebsco.com/terms-of-use

333

