IN THE UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE SECOND CIRCUIT

PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff-Appellant
Civil Action No.
1:23-cv-45678-CBA
v.
ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant- Appellee

ON APPEAL FROM THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR THE SOUTHERN
DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

RECORD ON APPEAL

Revised from a problem originally written by Andrew Lent, Stuart Levitin, Benjamin Apfel, and Joshua Schilowitz

1

QUESTIONS PRESENTED
1.​ Did the district court err in granting summary judgment for EchoCraft and finding that
Mr. Riven had not established a prima facie claim of retaliation?
2.​ Did the district court err in granting summary judgment for EchoCraft and
determining that EchoCraft’s use of portions of Mr. Riven’s song, “Revere Paul
Revere,” constituted fair use?

1

STIPULATIONS
1.​ Parties may not cite cases, statutes, law review articles, treatises, or other
materials, written, decided, enacted, or promulgated after December 31, 2025.
2.​ Plaintiff has satisfied all issues regarding standing and jurisdiction for all claims brought
forth in this appeal.
3.​ There are no statute of limitations issues. Both parties have met all filing deadlines.
4.​ The only issues to be decided on appeal are stated above in the Questions Presented.
5.​ Parties waive all challenges based on procedural issues, including jurisdiction and venue.
6.​ The parties agree that for purposes of establishing a prima facie case of retaliation,
Riven has demonstrated that EchoCraft took an adverse action against Riven by firing
him.
7.​ Issues of contract law related to Riven’s emails with Toobin are not at issue.
8.​ The parties agree that “Revere Paul Revere” does not constitute a work for hire.
9.​ The parties agree that Riven’s copyright of “Revere Paul Revere” is valid.
10.​Students should limit their copyright analysis to the four-factor test fair use test.
11.​Students should limit their retaliation analysis to the plaintiff’s initial burden of
establishing a prima facie case.

2

STATEMENTS OF JURISDICTION AND VENUE
1.​ The United States District Court for the Southern District of New York had original
jurisdiction over the subject matter of this claim pursuant to 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331 and
1338.
2.​ Venue is appropriate because EchoCraft Productions’s main office is located in New
York, and this is where the events giving rise to these claims took place.
3.​ The United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit has jurisdiction of appeal from
the final decision of the Southern District of New York under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.

3

KEY STATUTORY PROVISIONS
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3
(a) Discrimination for making charges, testifying, assisting, or participating in enforcement
proceedings.
It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer to discriminate against any of his
employees or applicants for employment, for an employment agency, or joint
labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship or other training or retraining,
including on-the-job training programs, to discriminate against any individual, or for a labor
organization to discriminate against any member thereof or applicant for membership, because
he has opposed any practice made an unlawful employment practice by this title [42 USCS §§
2000e–2000e-17], or because he has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any
manner in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under this title [42 USCS §§
2000e–2000e-17].

17 U.S.C. § 107. Limitations on exclusive rights: Fair use
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair use of a copyrighted work,
including such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified
by that section, for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including
multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research, is not an infringement of copyright.
In determining whether the use made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors to
be considered shall include—
(1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is of a commercial
nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes;
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work;
(3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to the copyrighted work
as a whole; and
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the copyrighted work.

4

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR
THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

v. ​ ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS, ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

COMPLAINT

Defendant
---------------------------------------------------------------------X

Plaintiff Philip Riven (“Riven”) files this Complaint against Defendant EchoCraft Productions
(“EchoCraft”) and in support thereof alleges the following:
NATURE OF THE PROCEEDINGS
1.​ This is a civil action seeking damages against EchoCraft Productions for retaliation
in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a), contained in Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq., as amended by the Civil Rights Act of 1991.
2.​ This is a civil action seeking damages and injunctive relief against EchoCraft
Productions for copyright infringement under the Copyright Act of the United States,
17 U.S.C. § 101.
JURISDICTION AND VENUE
3.​ This Court has original jurisdiction over the subject matter of this claim pursuant to 28
U.S.C. § 1331 and 28 U.S.C. § 1338.
4.​ Plaintiff Philip Riven is a citizen of New York and is domiciled in New York, NY.

5

5.​ At all material times, Defendant EchoCraft Productions was a corporation formed and
operated in New York. EchoCraft Productions is headquartered at 215 Mercer Street,
New York, NY 10012.
6.​ Venue is proper in this Court pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2) because a substantial
part of the events and injury giving rise to Plaintiff’s claims has occurred and continues
to occur in the Southern District of New York.
PARTIES
7.​ Plaintiff is Philip Riven (“Riven”), a former employee at EchoCraft Productions.
8.​ Defendant is EchoCraft Productions (“EchoCraft”) a New York City-based
entertainment conglomerate with satellite offices nationwide.
BACKGROUND
9.​ On or about September 4, 2018, Riven joined EchoCraft as a member of the
country song-writing team.
10.​In or around February 2020, after a string of positive performance reviews,
Riven was promoted to Manager of the country song-writing department.
11.​On or about December 21, 2022, at a holiday party for EchoCraft employees, Riven,
Jackie Moses (manager of the education songwriting department), and several of their
employees engaged in a conversation in which Moses’ employees expressed concerns
that employees in her department were receiving lower bonuses than Riven’s
employees who had received comparable performance reviews. The vast majority of the
employees in Moses’ division were women.
12.​On or about January 10, 2023, Riven and Moses approached Daphne Sniff, head of the
songwriting division of EchoCraft, to express their concerns about discrepancies in
bonuses awarded between their departments.
13.​At the meeting, Sniff told Riven that while she did not believe EchoCraft discriminated
in assignment of bonuses, Riven was welcome to look into the matter.

6

14.​Between January and in or about May 2023, Riven interviewed approximately 81
EchoCraft employees across approximately 12 departments, asking them about their
performance reviews, bonuses, and base salaries.
15.​On or about July 5, 2023, Sniff informed Riven that he had failed to meet his
department’s songwriting quotas for the previous six consecutive months. Riven was
issued a formal warning.
16.​Upon information and belief, on July 5, 2023, Sniff informed Moses that she had failed
to meet her department’s songwriting quotas for the previous six consecutive months.
Moses did not receive a formal warning.
17.​On or about August 18, 2023, Riven e-mailed a summary of his findings on EchoCraft’s
assignment of bonus awards to Sniff. In an email dated on or about August 19, Sniff
replied, “I take these concerns very seriously. However, are you sure this is the best use
of your time right now?”
18.​On or about December 1, 2023, Riven composed an educational song about Paul Revere
(“Revere Paul Revere”) for his daughter in order to help her study for her Advanced
Placement United States History class.
19.​On or about December 21, 2023, EchoCraft fired Riven, citing Riven’s failure to meet
song-writing quotas as a contributing factor in his termination.
20.​As a consequence of the popularity of “Revere Paul Revere” at both his daughter’s
school and several others, between in or about January and February 2024, Riven
engaged in negotiations with the principal of Columbia Grammar School, Elle Toobin,
for use of Riven’s Paul Revere composition and future educational songs. Toobin paid
Riven an advance of $500.
21.​On or about January 2, 2024, Riven registered a copyright with the U.S. Copyright
Office for his song “Revere Paul Revere.”
22.​Based on information and belief, on or about January 3, 2024, Ryan Raine, EchoCraft’s
CEO, discovered the original copy of “Revere Paul Revere.”

7

23.​On or about January 15, 2024, EchoCraft released a near-duplicated version of Revere
Paul Revere, titled “Revere Paul Revere?”, through EchoCraft’s not-for-profit
education division (“EchoCraft Ed”), which produces educational American History
songs targeted to a high school audience.
24.​After dissemination at Columbia Grammar high school in January 2024, “Revere Paul
Revere?” became known among teenagers and educators.
25.​On or about February 12, 2024, Toobin terminated Columbia Grammar’s ongoing
negotiations with Riven.
26.​Upon information and belief, as of September 2024, commercial interest in Riven’s
original composition has effectively vanished.

FIRST CAUSE OF ACTION: RETALIATION
27.​Plaintiff Riven repeats and alleges the averments contained paragraphs 1 through 19
as if fully set forth herein.
28.​Defendant EchoCraft was aware of Riven’s investigations into bonus award practices
at the company.
29.​Defendant EchoCraft cited Riven’s failure to meet songwriting quotas as a contributing
factor in his termination. However, Jackie Moses held an equivalent position in
another department and similarly failed to meet her quotas without receiving a warning
or termination.
30.​Pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 2000e–3(a), Defendant EchoCraft retaliated against Plaintiff
Riven, who lost income and career opportunities as a result of EchoCraft’s adverse
action of terminating him.
SECOND CAUSE OF ACTION: COPYRIGHT INFRINGEMENT
31.​Riven repeats and realleges the averments contained in paragraphs 1 through 26 as if
fully set forth herein.
8

32.​Riven registered and maintains a copyright for “Revere Paul Revere.”
33.​Through its conduct, EchoCraft Ed has violated Riven’s exclusive rights in his
copyrighted work, “Revere Paul Revere” and the lyrics contained therein, under 17
U.S.C. § 106.
34.​EchoCraft Ed created “Revere Paul Revere?” for a commercial purpose.
35.​EchoCraft Ed, by producing the song, negatively affected the market for “Revere Paul
Revere” and derivative works.

PRAYER FOR RELIEF
Wherefore, Plaintiff demands judgment on his Complaint and requests that this Court grant an
order:
For monetary damages including statutory damages, emotional distress, lost income,
and lost career opportunities in excess of the jurisdictional minimum of this
court;
For injunctive relief;
For post-judgment interest, at legal rate;
For attorney’s fees and cost of suit;
For such other and further relief as the Court deems just and proper.

/s/ John Locke
John Locke, Attorney for Plaintiff
Locke and Associates, LLP
82 W. 57th St., New York, NY 10027
Date: September 5, 2024
9

FOR THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
IN THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
PHILIP RIVEN,

laintiff
Civil
Action No.
1:23-cv-45678
-CBA

v.
ECHOCRAFT
PRODUCTIONS,

ANSWER TO
COMPLAINT
Defendant

ADMISSIONS AND DENIALS
Defendant by and through counsel, answers the Complaint as follows:
1.​ Defendant admits to the allegations set forth in paragraphs 1-10, 16-17, 19, 22, 24, and
32.
2.​ Defendant has insufficient knowledge or information to form a belief as to the truth of the
allegations put forth in paragraphs 11-15, 18, 20-21, and 25-26.
3.​ Defendant denies the allegations put forth in paragraphs 23, 28-30, and 33-35.

AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES
FIRST AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE
1. Defendant asserts that they have a reasonable belief that their use of “Revere Paul Revere”
is protected by fair use under U.S.C § 107.

10

/s/ Alexandra Rousseau
Alexandra Rousseau, Attorney for Defendant
Rousseau, Graham, & Kilmer LLP
395 W. 55th St.
New York, NY 10027

Date: September 19, 2024

11

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff
v.
No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA
Deposition of Philip Riven
ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant
---------------------------------------------------------------------X
APPEARANCES:
On behalf of the Plaintiff:
John Locke
Locke and Associates, LLP
On behalf of the Defendant:
Alexandra Rousseau
Rousseau, Graham, & Kilmer LLP
Pursuant to notice, the deposition of Philip Riven was taken on
February 17, commencing at 9:00 am at the offices

of Rousseau,

Graham, & Kilmer LLP, 395 W. 55th St., New York, NY

10027.

It is hereby stipulated and agreed that the reading and signing
of this deposition are not waived. Philip Riven, duly been sworn
to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
testifies as follows:

12

Questioning by Alexandra Rousseau, Esq., Attorney for Defendant:
Q: Good morning, Mr. Riven. My name is Alexandra Rousseau, and I
represent EchoCraft Productions in this matter. Please state
your full name for the record.
A: Philip Riven.
Q: Please state your full address for the record.
A: 300 West End Avenue, New York, New York, 10023.
Q: Are you currently employed?
A: No.
Q: Where was your last place of employment?
A: EchoCraft Productions.
Q: How long did you work at EchoCraft?
A: About five years, from September 2018 until I was fired in
December 2023.
Q: And in what capacity were you hired?
A: I was hired as a songwriter in the country music department.
Q: What responsibilities did that role involve?
A: Well, it was what it sounds like. I wrote country songs and
pitched them to artists.
Q: To whom did you report in that role?
A: I reported to Daphne Sniff, head of the songwriting
division. Q:​And did you get along with your superiors?

13

A: Yes. They liked me a lot. We got along well. I was promoted
after two years to manage the department.
Q: The country songwriting department?
A: Yes.
Q: What were your duties as manager?
A: I oversaw a team of songwriters – between 12 and 15 over my
time there. I managed their songwriting and helped them work
with our clients to make sure the department was producing
songs that would find commercial and critical success.
Q: What sort of feedback did you get from your superiors while
you served as manager?
A: I did a good job. I got really positive reviews during my
first two years as manager.
Q: I’d like to show you a document I’ve marked as Exhibit A. Do
you recognize this document?
A: Yes, those are my performance reviews from 2021 through 2023.
Q: I’d like to submit this document as Exhibit A to the record.
[Exhibit A was marked for the record]
Q: Let’s start with the reviews from 2021 and 2022. How would
you characterize these reviews?
A: They are very positive. I did a good job.
Q: The reviews seem to focus on your department’s songwriting
credits. Could you explain what those are?
A: Essentially, any time one of our songs get produced, we get a
credit. EchoCraft keeps track of how many credits each
department receives.
14

Q: Would you say the number of credits your department receives
is a significant metric for evaluating your performance?
A: Credits definitely matter, but you can see the reviews also
emphasize my leadership abilities and the work environment I
created.
Q: But there are expectations for credits each year, are there
not?
A: Yes, there’s an expected quota of about 25 songs per quarter.
Q: And the reports indicate you exceeded these numbers in 2021
and 2022. Is that correct?
A: Yes.
Q: Let’s turn now to your performance review from 2023.
A: That’s fine with me.
Q: The review rates your performance as “failing to meet
expectations.” What happened?
A: What happened was that they weren’t okay with the research I
was doing into the bonuses.

15

Q: We’ll get to the bonuses in a minute if that’s okay. For
now, I’d like to talk about the review. It says your department
failed to meet songwriting credit expectations for six
consecutive months. Is that accurate?
A: Yes, it’s accurate. It was a slow time for country music.
Our clients just weren’t interested.
Q: In 2024, did you ever speak with your team of songwriters
about their decline in credits?
A: I had a few individual conversations with writers about how
things were going, but nothing formal. We all seemed to agree it
was just a dip in the market. Could have been related to
generative AI.
Q: The report also mentions that you displayed a lack of
interest in your work. Is that true?
A: I don’t think so.
Q:​ It says here that you decided to skip the Annual Conference
for Country Songwriters in 2023.​ What is that conference?
A: It’s a convention for country songwriters. Lots of artists
show up, and it’s generally a good opportunity to network.
Q: Did you attend that conference in 2021?
A: Yes.
Q: Did you attend that conference in 2022?
A: I did.
Q: Why did you decide not to attend that conference in 2023?

16

A: My daughter had a piano recital that weekend that I didn’t
want to miss. I made sure to catch up on what I missed at the
conference by talking to a few friends of mine at other
companies who attended.
Q: And were you told that your department was not meeting its
quotas at any point in 2023?
A: Yeah, from Daphne. She issued me a formal warning that I was
on probation for my department’s failure to meet songwriting
quotas for six consecutive months. I got that in July 2023.
Q: Do you recognize this document?
A: That’s a letter recording my formal warning.
Q: I’d like to introduce Exhibit B to the
record. [Exhibit B was marked for the record]
Q: When did you receive this warning?
A: On July 7th, 2023.
Q: Based on this warning, you had notice that your department
was underperforming, correct?
A: Yes, but there was little I could do to control the lack of
interest from our clients.
Q: Can we talk a bit more about the songwriting credits? I’d
like to show you a document I’ve marked as Exhibit C. Do you
recognize this document?
A: Yes. That’s a report of my department’s songwriting credits
between 2021 and 2023.

17

Q: I’d like to introduce Exhibit C to the record.
[Exhibit C was marked for the record]
A: Does this look accurate to you?
Q: Yes. I think that’s accurate. This is a common report that we
run internally.
Q: What does the report show?
A: It shows my department was putting out more than 25 songs per
quarter through 2022.
Q: And what is the number of songs per quarter in 2023?
A: Under 20 for each quarter.
Q: So, what happened in 2023?
A: Well, there was a decrease.
Q: What caused the decrease in 2023?
A: Well, that’s a complicated question. It was a bunch of
factors. One, generative AI became a thing that songwriters
started to use. Second, EchoCraft transferred three of my
best songwriters in June of that year, so we had less
manpower for half the year.
Q: How many songwriters were in your department until June?
A: Fifteen.
Q: So, starting in June, you had twelve?
A:​ Yes.

18

Q: Why did EchoCraft transfer the writers?
A: Well, they said it was necessary for staffing reasons. But I
think it was to begin the process of pushing me out.
Q: Who told you it was for staffing reasons?
A: Daphne.
Q:​ And were those three employees transferred to other
departments within the company?
A: Yes.
Q:​ To your knowledge, were those other departments busier than
the country department?
A: I think they were having a good year. But like I said, these
things come and go.
Q: Are employee transfers like that typical at EchoCraft?
A: They happen every now and then, but never with such short
notice – they transferred my writers within a week - at least
that I am aware of. Also, the timing seems to indicate they
had other motives.
Q: Can you explain what you mean by that – the timing?
A:​ Yes.​ EchoCraft transferred three of my songwriters on short
notice a few months after I started researching the bonus
structure at the company.
Q: Let’s talk about that research into bonuses. How did you
decide to begin that project?
A: Well, I’d say the whole thing began at the holiday party
in 2022.

19

Q: What happened at the holiday party?
A: Well, we have this holiday party every year. AndQ: Sorry to interrupt. I just want to confirm the date of the
event.
A: It was December 21, 2022. I remember because it was the day
before my daughter’s birthday.
Q: Ok. Please continue.
A: Well, that year, the holiday party happened to be on the
same day as people got their bonuses for the year. And a bunch
of my employees were talking with a bunch of Jackie’s employees
about their bonuses.​ Eventually, they sort of figured out that
it seemed like Jackie’s folks were getting lower bonuses that
mine.
Q: Who is Jackie?
A: Jackie Moses, she has the same job as me but in the
educational music department.
Q: And those employees brought their concerns about bonuses to
your attention?
A: Yeah. The group of them came over to me and Jackie to talk
about it at the party.
Q: How many employees spoke with you?
A: It was three male employees from my department and four women
from Jackie’s. All songwriters, all great employees.
Q: They all held positions at the same level?
A: Yes.

20

Q: And what did they tell you?
A:​ They told us that they had been talking, and it sounded like
my writers were getting higher bonuses than Jackie’s writers.
Q: Did their concerns surprise you?
A: A little. I mean, I run my department really well, so at
first, I just assumed that my employees outperformed Jackie’s I was glad they were getting good bonuses, you know?
Q: During that conversation, did you ask the employees about the
basis for their belief?
A:​ I mean, they said they had been talking to each other.
Q:​ Did you ask them for details about their productivity over
the past year?
A:​ Well, no, we were in the middle of a holiday party.
Q: Taking a step back here for a second, what’s the process for
bonus assignments?
A: Well, the managers like me and Jackie submit our performance
reviews to an inter-division board that assigns bonuses.
Q: Who sits on this board?
A: The heads of the divisions. So Daphne Sniff, my boss, she’s
on it. Along with the heads of marketing, legal, talent
acquisition, etc.
Q: In calculating bonuses, what does the board consider other
than the performance reviews?

21

A: For songwriters, they look to how the department is doing in
terms of credits. But I have no clue what they consider outside
that.
Q: So after the group raised its concern with you and Jackie,
how did the conversation continue?
A: Well, you know, Jackie was there, and she said she had given
her employees glowing reviews, too. And then one of the
employees, I don’t remember which one specifically, but one of
them said maybe their department was getting lower bonuses
because the department was made up of mostly women.
Q: Did that employee provide a reason for that theory?
A: I think it was just numbers. Jackie’s group had like 12
women and 3 or 4 men compared to my department, which had 10
men and 5 women at the time.
Q: What did you say when the employee suggested that gender
might have something to do with bonus assignments?
A: I told them all I would look into it.
Q: Anything else?
A: No, that was the end of the conversation.
Q: What were your thoughts on this theory at the time?
A: I was skeptical, but I thought it was worth looking into.
Q: What did you do next?
A: Well, a few weeks later, so at some point in January of
2023, I went to Daphne Sniff, who runs the songwriting
division. I had been thinking about the conversation at the
holiday party, and I couldn’t really come up with a good
explanation for the

22

different bonuses the songwriters had received. So I expressed
my concern to her that my employees were getting higher bonuses
than Jackie’s.
Q: Did you mention anything regarding women at that time?
A: I wasn’t certain it was gender based, but I did mention
something to Daphne about Jackie’s department having a solid
number of women. I certainly felt that might be the cause.
Q: And what did Ms. Sniff say?
A: She told me she wasn’t sure why the bonuses would differ.
She’s on the committee, and she said she didn’t think the
committee discriminated in any way in assigning bonuses.
Q: What did you say in response?
A: I said I wanted to check out if this was a real issue. And
Daphne said she doubted I’d find anything, but that I was free
to poke around.
Q: What did you do after you met with Ms. Sniff?
A: Well, I asked Jackie if she wanted to look into this with
me. She said she was a little worried about how it would look
for her to be investigating bonus assignments, so I just
started going around on my own to different departments and
sort of asking around about what sort of bonuses people were
getting.
Q: How long did your research last?
A: I started pretty slowly, but it was about four months – from
January until like mid-May of 2023.
Q: How many employees did you interview?

23

A: Around 80 in all, in 12 different departments in the
songwriting, marketing, and talent acquisition divisions.
Q: How did you pick the people you interviewed?
A: I pretty much just knocked on the doors of any
non-management-level employees and interviewed to whoever was
willing to speak with me.
Q: What sort of questions were you asking employees during your
research?
A: Well, the interviews were pretty brief. I asked about their
general feelings about how EchoCraft treats its employees, and
I asked them about their bonuses.
Q: Did you ask the employees about the factors that go into
their bonus assignments?
A: No. Like I said, I’m not sure how bonus assignments work
outside songwriting departments. I know for us, they consider
how departments are doing quota-wise, but I don’t know how that
works for the Marketing department, for example. And frankly it
didn’t seem like it mattered, if within departments men were
receiving higher bonuses than women. How a department is doing
overall shouldn’t have an effect on that, so I wasn’t really
interested in asking about it.
Q: And what did you discover during these interviews?
A: I asked about people’s bonuses from the previous year and
discovered that in almost all departments, the men were getting
higher bonuses on average than the women. Eventually, I sent
that information in a report to Daphne.
Q: Can you describe this report?

24

A: It’s the email exchange containing the report I sent to
Daphne in August about my investigation.
Q: I’d like to show you a document I’ve marked as Exhibit D. Do
you recognize this?
A:​ Yes, this is the email I sent to Daphne. It contains the
report I just mentioned.
[Exhibit D was marked for the record]
Q: What does this exchange say?
A: Well, here, the email dated August 18th, 2023 it summarizes
my findings and states my opinion that EchoCraft was giving its
female employees lower bonuses than male employees.
Q: Did your email contain any positive findings?
A: Yes, I said that overall employees were happy with the
sexual harassment policies at EchoCraft, and the parental leave
and time off policies as well.
Q: One last thing: I’d like to show you a document I’ve marked
as Exhibit E.
[Exhibit E was marked for the record]
Q: Do you recognize this document?
A: Yes, I do.
Q: What is
it?
A: That’s my termination letter.
Q: When did you receive it?
A: On December 20, 2023.
25

Q: What was the context of the letter? Had you been informed of
the termination beforehand?
A: Well, the day before, I was called in to meet with Blaire
Sinenski in HR, and she told me they’d have to let me go.
Q: What were the reasons provided for your termination during
that meeting?
A: Their reason was that my department had been underperforming.
Q: And what did you say in response?
A: I said what I’ve told you, which is that it was just a rough
year for country music, and that they should give me more time. As
I’m sure you’re aware, there are computer programs now, AI, that
generate lyrics in mere minutes. We’re adjusting as an industry.
Q: Were the reasons in the letter here in Exhibit E consistent
with that meeting?
A: I guess. EchoCraft said they terminated me because of my
“unsatisfactory work performance,” but the real reason is because
I was looking into their discriminatory bonus award practices.
They didn’t want to deal with the bad PR or any sort
of suit, so
they figured they’d just get rid of me.
Q:​ Did you raise this concern – this theory of yours – with Ms.
Sniff when she informed you of the company’s decision to terminate
your employment?
A: No. I was too busy trying to keep my job.
Q: Okay, shifting gears a little bit, I’d like to discuss your
song about Paul Revere. I’d like to show you a document I’ve
marked as Exhibit G.
[Exhibit G was marked for the record]

26

Q: Do you recognize this document?
A: Yes. This document contains the lyrics to my song, “Revere
Paul Revere.”
Q: Is this your original work?
A: Yes. Thank you for asking that. The lyrics and accompanying
music were all products of my brain.
Q: When did you write the song?
A: December 2023, mostly.
Q: While you were still working for EchoCraft?
A: Yes, but on my own time. I wrote it over a few weeks at night
while home.
Q: Why did you write the song?
A: I wrote the song to help my daughter study for a U.S. History
test. She’s in high school. She doesn’t like books and hates
reading, but she loves music. I want her to do well in school and
to get into a good college. I figured writing her a song about
Paul Revere would help her do well on her test about Lexington and
Concord.
Q: Are you a history buff?
A: Sort of. I mean I don’t spend all my free time reading
biographies. But my family went to Boston this summer and

27

happened to visit Paul Revere’s grave. So I knew a bit about him
already. I read his Wikipedia page after visiting his grave.
Q: What was your process for writing the song?
A: I took facts that my daughter needed to know for her test and
arranged them in a creative way. I can’t really explain my
process. I am a songwriter, so I know how to do this kind of
thing.
Q: Indeed, Mr. Riven. Would you describe yourself as a fan
of Paul Revere?
A: A fan? Yeah, why not? He was a Patriot - an important figure
in the Revolution. Who’s not a fan?
Q: Just asking. So your song also puts Revere in a positive
light?
A: Yeah I’d say so. I called him a “great man.”
Q: Did your daughter like the song you wrote for her?
A: I think so. I mean, she shared it with her friends at school.
She seemed to be listening to it leading up to her test.
Q: Did the school principal reach out to you about the song?
A: Yes. She emailed me about the song.
Q: Were you surprised by that?
A:​ Yes. I mean, I’d never even met her before.

28

Q: I’d like to show you a document I’ve marked as Exhibit I.​ Do
you recognize this?
A: Yes, it’s my email chain with Elle Toobin, the principal of
my daughter’s high school, Columbia Grammar.
[Exhibit I was marked for the record]
Q: What did you discuss with Ms. Toobin in this email exchange?
A: Well, as you can see, Ms. Toobin liked my song a lot and
thought the kids in my daughter’s class had performed well
because of it. She offered me a $500 advance to negotiate a deal
for future

educational songwriting exclusively with her school

and for use of “Revere,” in whatever capacity the school desired.
Q: Did she offer you anything else?
A: I mean, she wrote, as you can see, that the school would
want 5-10 songs during the next school year and that I would
receive a set amount for each song. She also mentioned the
possibility of a bonus structure if more than 75% of students
received a 4 or above on the AP exam.
Q: I’d like to show you a document I’ve marked as Exhibit H. Are
you familiar with this document?
[Exhibit H was marked for the record]
A: Yes. It’s EchoCraft’s version of my song.
Q: At what point did you first learn of EchoCraft’s song?

29

A: My daughter brought it to me. The school told them to use
“Revere Paul Revere?” and not my song.
Q: How did the school “tell her to use” this song?
A: Her teacher told the class to study with the new version from
now on. Apparently, the teacher said it was a “better” version
and “updated” to help the students.
Q: And did the school expressly forbid students from using your
Paul Revere song?
A: I don’t think so.
Q: Looking at Exhibit H, do you think EchoCraft’s song puts
Revere in a positive light?
A: Yeah, overall. Obviously, it adds a few lines. But I think
it’s clear to everyone that they copied my song almost word for
word. They stole it.
Q: Would you please refer to line 5 of EchoCraft’s song, Exhibit
H. Isn’t that an entirely new line?
A: Yes, but seven of the lines are identical.
Q: Looking at your song, Exhibit G, the last line. Why did you
write that Revere revealed no secrets while captured?

30

A: Our tour guide at his grave site mentioned something like
that. If I recall correctly, she said Revere was brave even
while held by British soldiers.
Q: Are you sure that’s accurate?
A: I mean, in all honesty, I wouldn’t swear that that’s
accurate. It’s what our guide said. But I also don’t see how
that’s relevant or important.
Q: Well, would you please look at line 11 of EchoCraft’s song,
Exhibit H. Do you see that EchoCraft’s song says Revere did
reveal secrets?
A: Yes, I can see that. Maybe they just needed a way to pretend
that their song is different. I’m sure they didn’t make the
change because they were so concerned about accuracy. Can’t you
see that their song is a rip off of mine?
Q: Stepping back a bit, did you go on to write any more songs
for Ms. Toobin?
A:​ I did not.
Q: Did you try to talk to the school about EchoCraft’s song?
A: I did, but they didn’t believe me. I went into the school’s
office after Ms. Toobin’s final email and spoke to her a bit.
She reiterated that they chose to work with EchoCraft. So I no
longer have a deal with the school.
Q: That’s just one school. What about other schools in New York?
A: I tried reaching out, I sent a copy of my song, but no school
was receptive.

31

Q: When did you first find out that Ms. Toobin would not be hiring
you to write songs?
A: In February of 2023.​ If you look at that chain of emails
you just showed me, you can see that eventually, Ms. Toobin
wrote that the school went with EchoCraft.
Q: Ms. Toobins’ email refers to an advance. Why did you only
receive a “preliminary negotiation advance”?
A: My understanding was that they paid me to make sure I would
negotiate with them first. I did that. We worked out a rough
deal.
Q: I have no further questions. Thank you, Mr. Riven.
Questioning by John Locke, Esq., Attorney for Plaintiff:
Q: Good afternoon, Mr. Riven. I’d like to follow up a bit
about your investigation at EchoCraft and the report that you
ultimately submitted to Ms. Sniff.
A: OK.
Q: Did you present your project as focused on gender disparities
from its inception?
A: Yes, gender was certainly on my mind given the makeup of our
departments.
Q: Did you present your concerns to Ms. Sniff as such when you
first reached out to her?
A: I’m not sure what phraseology I used, but I think Daphne
definitely understood that those were my concerns.
Q: And in general terms, what were the results of your
investigation?
32

A: I found that in nine out of twelve departments, men were
awarded higher bonuses in 2022 than women.
Q: And what did Ms. Sniff reply when you sent her your findings?
A: She replied that she wasn’t sure my investigation was the
best use of my time.
Q: What do you think Ms. Sniff meant by that?
A: Well, it was clear to me she was either unhappy with the
investigation, or that she was warning me that other people at
EchoCraft were unhappy with it. Either way, somebody was
trying to get me to stop pursuing the bonus award
investigation.
Q:​ Did you ever get the sense that your coworkers or
supervisors disapproved of your research?
A: Yes. There was a lot of talk around the office about what I
was doing. I passed Ryan Raine, the CEO, in the hall a few weeks
before I was terminated, and he completely ignored me. And the
email from Daphne telling me the investigation wasn’t the best
use of my time.
Q: Did you ever prioritize your research over managing your
songwriters?
A: Absolutely not. I was pretty dedicated to my investigation
though, because I think companies like EchoCraft really need to
be accountable for their practices. That being said, I always
tried to maximize the output of my department. Whenever
employees had items for me to review or ideas to run by me, I
got it done. But that transfer of three of my best songwriters
definitely spread me a little thin.
Q: Why do you think the employees were transferred?
A: To make it harder for me to meet quotas so I’d be easier to
fire.
33

Q: When were the employees transferred?
A: In June of 2023.
Q: At that point how well-known was your investigation?
A: I hadn’t yet sent my report to Daphne, but she knew what I
was doing, and there was lots of talk around the office about
it.
Q: Was investigating discriminatory practices part of your
job description?
A.​ No. Of course, as a manager, I’m supposed to look out
for my subordinates, and if someone reports something like
sexual harassment to me, I have to move that report up the
chain, but this investigation was not something I had to do
as part of my job.
Q: Let’s talk a bit about your performance review from 2023.
A: It was a pretty negative review. They talked about my
department’s performance. But, like I said, Jackie’s department
was doing just as poorly, and I had also lost those songwriters.
Q: Thank you. Do you mind if we talk a little bit about
“Revere Paul Revere”?
A: Of course not.
Q: You said your daughter shared your song with her friends at
school?
A: Yes.
Q: How many people at school did she share it with?

34

A: I’m not sure. A few of her friends came over one night and
told me that my daughter had shared it with her class.
Q: Did your daughter’s friends like the song?
A: I think they did. They did seem to say it helped them study
for their test.
Q: Is it possible that the song was shared beyond your
daughter’s class?
A: I think that’s very likely. It’s a big school with a lot of
U.S. History classes, and they were all being tested on
Lexington and Concord.
Q: Is it possible the song was shared beyond your daughter’s
school?
A: It’s possible. I think it was shared with a few other
schools. My daughter mentioned that some of her friends at
other schools were listening to it.
Q: You mentioned earlier that you learned about EchoCraft’s
song – “ Revere Paul Revere?” – from your daughter. Did she
mention any similarities between the songs to you?
A: Any similarities? Of course! She came home at some point in
January and said, “Dad, EchoCraft stole your song!” And she’s
right.

Any person with half a brain can see they stole my

song. They added two lines to my song. That’s it.
Q: With reference to the songs, Exhibits G and H, what do you
see as the main similarities?

35

A: Where do I start? My song has eight lines. They added lines,
but seven of the fourteen lines in their song are exactly the
same as my song.
Q: Why do you think they added more lines?
A: Well, they knew they couldn’t just sell my song, so they had
to do something different, but I guess they weren’t creative
enough to start from scratch and write their own song.
Q: Shifting gears to your emails with Ms. Toobin, why do you
think the school never signed a contract with you?
A: I spoke to Ms. Toobin. No lawyers were involved. It was just
two people talking about a deal. Also, like I said earlier,
EchoCraft is a powerful company. Even though their song is
basically the same as mine, they might have just felt it’s less
risky to go with EchoCraft.
Q: Did you understand the email exchange to be a final deal?
A: Yes. She responded, “Sounds good.” I figured that meant we’re
good - it’s done.
Q: Why do you think Toobin offered you an advance?
A: I’m a professional songwriter - I’m skilled. I’m not an
amateur. She probably saw how much my daughter’s class was
helped by my song.
Q: What classrooms did you envision your song for?
A: I was targeting AP classes in high schools. Like

my

daughter’s class.

36

Q: At any point did you worry that the school would go with
someone else?
A: No.
Q: Why do you think they went with someone else?
A: Well, when Toobin told me, I had a lot of ideas. Maybe
EchoCraft said bad things about me. Maybe Toobin was worried
that I had been fired. Maybe Toobin thought I stole
EchoCraft’s song. Maybe they just thought it’s safer to go
with the big company. Probably a combination of those factors.
Q: You said before that other schools were not receptive. Why do
you think that is?
A: No school gave me any detail really, but I heard from my
daughter that other schools were using EchoCraft’s song. It
could be that they preempted me and monopolized the local
market.
Q: That’s it for me. Thanks, Mr. Riven.

37

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN
Plaintiff,
v.
No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA
Deposition of Daphne Sniff
ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------X
APPEARANCES:
On behalf of the Plaintiff:
John Locke
Locke and Associates, LLP
On behalf of the Defendant:
Alexandra Rousseau
Rousseau, Graham, & Kilmer LLP
Pursuant to notice, the deposition of Daphne Sniff was
taken on February 18, 2025, commencing at 9:00 am at the
offices of Locke & Associates, LLP, 82 W. 57th St., New York,
NY 10027.
It is hereby stipulated and agreed that the reading and signing
of this deposition are not waived. Daphne Sniff, duly been sworn
to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
testifies as follows:

38

Questioning by John Locke, Esq., Attorney for Plaintiff:
Q: Good morning, Ms. Sniff. My name is John Locke, and I
represent the plaintiff, Philip Riven, in this matter. Please
state your full name for the record.
A: Daphne Sniff.
Q: Please state your full address for the record.
A: 495 West 185th Street, New York, NY 10033.
Q: Where are you employed, Ms. Sniff?
A:​ At EchoCraft Productions.
Q: How long have you worked at EchoCraft?
A: About 25 years. I was hired in March of 2000.
Q: In what capacities have you served during your time at
EchoCraft?
A: Well, I started as a songwriter and became in charge of the
Hip Hop department 6 years in. I ran that department until
2017. About 8 years ago, I was promoted to supervisor of the
songwriting division, the position I hold today.
Q: What does it mean to be the supervisor of the songwriting
division?
A: As the division head, it is my responsibility to make sure
that all the different songwriting departments are hitting their
quotas for the year and creating music that is up to a certain
standard. EchoCraft is one of the top record labels in the world
and it is my job to make sure it stays that way.
Q: What do you mean when you say “hit their quotas”?
A: Each songwriting department is expected to produce a certain
amount of songs in a given quarter. The expectations differ
39

between departments depending on numerous factors, the most
relevant being how popular their particular genre is.
Q: How many songwriting departments are there?
A: Here at EchoCraft, we have eight different departments.
Q: And you personally oversee all of these departments?
A: Indirectly. But each department has its own head, who manages
the day to day; they deal directly with the songwriters. I
oversee the department heads and meet with them regularly to set
goals and review their performance.
Q: As supervisor, did you oversee Philip Riven?
A: Yes. For a couple of years.
Q: What was his position at the company?
A: When I supervised him, he was the head, or manager, of the
country song writers’ department.
Q: Did you like Mr. Riven?
A: What do you mean?
Q: Did you like him? Did you find him pleasant to be around?
Respectful?
A: Sure. Me and Philip got along pretty well.
Q: Was he a hard worker?
A: From what I could tell, he seemed to work pretty late hours.
Q: What was Mr. Riven’s position before he was manager of the
country division?
A: He was a songwriter.
40

Q: Was it your decision to promote him from songwriter to
manager?
A: I was partially responsible, sure. Myself and Mr. Raine made
the final decision.
Q: Is it correct to say that Mr. Riven was very good at his
job?
A: I am not sure I would say that…
Q: Well, when did he become manager of the country songwriters?
A: I believe it was February of 2020, right before the
pandemic.
Q: And are you aware as to when he started at EchoCraft?
A: I believe it was September 2018.
Q: Is it typical to become a manager after such a short time?
A: I wouldn’t say it’s common, but it might have happened
before. Anyways, this case is sort of different because we
needed to find someone pretty quick after the abrupt departure
of the country manager. The previous manager got a job at Pear
Inc. and left us hanging in the middle of the year.
Q: You say it might have happened before, do you know of it
happening before?
A: I don’t, no.
Q: And it took you six years to become manager of the Hip Hop
department, right?
A: Yes.
Q: Would you say that is around the average time it takes to
become a manager of a department?
41

A: I am not sure, probably around that.
Q: So it’s fair to say that Mr. Riven made an impression?
A: Sure. I mean listen, I am supervisor of the division, he
wouldn’t have become a manager without my approval. He was a
rock-solid songwriter. Just not sure I would say he was very
good at his job as a manager -- certainly not towards the end
of his time at EchoCraft.
Q: I would like to discuss a document that has been previously
introduced as Exhibit A. Do you recognize this document?
A: Yes, it is Riven’s performance reviews for the years 2021,
2022 and 2023.
Q: Who wrote these?
A: I did.
Q: Let's start with the 2021 and 2022 reviews. Do these reviews
indicate that Mr. Riven was performing his job as manager
satisfactorily?
A: Sure, at that time.
Q: They both indicate that he was “exceeding expectations,”
correct?
A: Yes.
Q: In fact, you wrote that he was a “powerhouse” in your 2022
report, did you not?
A: I did, but as you can see that changed in 2023, when Philip
began to fail to meet expectations.
Q: You mean the year he was investigating EchoCraft for sex
discrimination?

42

A: Listen he had a job to do, and he wasn’t doing it.
Q: Well, let's go to 2022. Did Mr. Riven come to meet with you
about an issue he had around January that year?
A: Yeah, I believe it was right after the holidays.
Q: And what was that meeting about?
A: Philip was concerned that the employees in Jackie Moses’s
department were receiving reduced bonuses even though they
received performance reviews comparable to those he gave his
employees in the country songwriting department.
Q: Which department did Ms. Moses oversee?
A: The education department.
Q: And why did Philip come to you with this?
A: I assume because I was his supervisor. But perhaps also
because I actually serve on the cross-division committee
responsible for assigning end-of-year bonuses.
Q: How does that committee assign bonuses?
A: Well, we primarily look at performance reviews. The managers
of each department are really in the best position to tell us how
employees are doing. Then we also consider things like how the
employee’s department is performing and how long the employee has
been around.
Q: What do you mean by how the department is performing? What
metrics do you take into account when assessing departmental
performance?
A: The most important factor is that the department hits its
quotas. If the department isn’t producing music, it isn’t doing
its job.

43

Q: Was it clear to you when Mr. Riven talked to you that he felt
EchoCraft might be discriminating against women?
A: It was not, no. As presented, his concern was a departmental
issue, not a gender one.
Q: So he didn’t mention women at all?
A: The way he framed it really seemed to be about the department
issue. I think he used the phrase “the women in Jackie’s
department” when he brought their concerns to me, but to me, it
just seemed like he was interested in seeing if some departments
were seeing higher bonuses than others.
Q: How many women were there in Mr. Riven’s department at the
time?
A: Hm, let me see... I think that at that time, 5 of the 15
songwriters in the country department were women.
Q: And how many women were in Jackie Moses’s department?
A: 12 women and 3 men.
Q: So, wouldn’t you say it's reasonable to assume that
under-compensation of a mostly female department might indicate
a gender discrimination issue?
A: No, honestly, I didn’t think too much about the whole thing.
Q: And why is that?
A: Because I found it hard to believe that there was any
discrepancy. I told Philip at the time that as a member of the
cross-divisional committee, I had not witnessed the committee use
any sort of criteria that would unilaterally favor one department
or one group over another.
Q: Did you tell Mr. Riven anything else?
A: Yeah, I think I said something along the lines that he could
poke around if he wanted to make sure.
44

Q: But you didn’t seek a formal investigation?
A: No, again, I really didn’t think there was anything to uncover.
Q: So why did you let him poke around?
A: I mean it is always possible, right? Also, as manager, he has
some amount of autonomy, and I didn’t want to micro-manage.
Q: Do you know if Mr. Riven ultimately conducted an investigation
of his own?
A: He did. Ultimately, he sent me a report about it in August
2023.
Q: But did you know that Mr. Riven was conducting an investigation
before receiving the report?
A: I did.
Q: How did you become aware of that investigation?
A: I first became aware of it when I received an email from our
CEO, Ryan Raine in May of 2023.
Q: I would like to show you a document I’ve marked as Exhibit F.
[Exhibit F was marked for the record]
Q: Do you recognize this document?
A:​ Yes, this is the email Raine sent me about Philip’s
investigation?
Q: How would you describe Mr. Raine’s tone in the email?
A: I am not sure you can tell tones from emails.
Q: Okay, I’ll rephrase. Did you understand from the email that
Mr. Raine was unhappy with Mr. Riven’s investigation?
45

A: I suppose so. Certainly, he appeared to be blindsided and
confused about what was going on.
Q:​ What makes you say that?
A: Well, he said in the email that he recently learned that Mr.
Riven had a “vendetta” against the company. It's understandable
that he wanted to make sure that the company wasn’t being
sidetracked by that.
Q: Did you think Mr. Riven had some sort of vendetta?
A: No, but based on his email, it was clear that Ryan thought
that might be the case.
Q: Did you understand the email to be instructing you to take any
action against Mr. Riven?
A: No, I did not.
Q: He did say, though, to keep Mr. Riven “in line,” didn’t he?

46

A: Yes.
Q: How did you interpret that?
A: I understood that to mean to just to my general job as his
supervisor, but not an order to do anything in specific. He
wanted me to make sure everything ran smoothly in all of the
departments I supervise, which is my job.
Q: Did you respond to Mr. Raine’s email?
A: I did not. As you can see from the email, he told me not to,
just to handle it. That is his thing, he doesn’t want to deal
with things hands on – get into the details – he just wants any
issues resolved.
Q: And have you spoken with Mr. Raine about the investigation
since that email?
A: Only in June 2023 to inform him that I received a formal
report from Philip outlining his findings and that I would be
doing by own evaluation of the report.
Q: What was his response to that?
A: He just told me to keep him updated.
Q: Okay, we will return to your evaluation later, but for now what actions did you take after receiving Mr. Raine’s initial
email, did you communicate with Mr. Riven regarding the
investigation?
A: Not until receiving the report, no. I figured at that point it
was best to let it play out. I figured the investigation was
probably nearing its conclusion anyway and that I would deal with
it then.

47

Q: But you did reprimand Mr. Riven shortly after May 2023, didn’t
you?
A: That was in a totally unrelated matter. Philip’s department
had failed to meet their quotas six months consecutively. We had
a meeting in July 2023 to discuss how we could improve his
department’s performance going forward.
Q: And what was Mr. Riven’s explanation for his department’s
declining performance?
A: He said it was just a bump in the road and that he hoped to
get back on track shortly.
Q: Did you two discuss ways the group could improve?
A: Yes. We spoke about keeping focus on the goals at hand and
about maintaining proper communication and guidance with the
songwriters.
Q: And what happened at the end of that meeting?
A: I issued Mr. Riven a formal warning. I was concerned about the
trend developing and wanted to nip it in the bud.
Q: And what does a formal warning entail?
A: It is an oral warning that serves to alert a manger - in this
case Philip - that they are underperforming and that there could
be negative consequences, such as termination, if they fail to
improve.
Q: Did you put this formal warning in writing?
A:​ Yes, just so that we have a record that the warning was
given.

48

Q: Did you meet with the managers of any other departments around
that time – July of 2023?
A: Yes, Jackie Moses, manager of the educational songwriting
department, was also underperforming her quotas at that time.
So, I met with her too.
Q: And did Jackie receive a formal warning?
A: No, she did not.
Q: Why is that?
A: Jackie had been at the company 20 years longer than Philip and
had served as a manager for 12 years longer. She had a proven
track record, including points where her department’s performance
had declined and then rebounded. I had many fewer concerns with
her than I did with Philip. And evidently, I was right, as she
ultimately turned it around, while Philip unfortunately did not.
Which is why Philip was let go.
Q: Well, let's talk about this termination. Who decided to
terminate Mr. Riven’s employment?
A: It was my decision, though it was approved by Mr. Raine.
Q: Was his investigation one of the causes of his termination?
A: Of course not. I, along with Ryan, decided to terminate Philip
solely because he had not hit his quotas for the last year, and I
had seen little improvement since I issued a formal warning.
Q: So, it’s your position that Mr. Riven was terminated for poor
performance?
A: Yes.

49

Q: When exactly did you decide he should be let go?
A: I issued the formal warning in July hoping for improvement,
and it didn’t come. At some point in November I was pretty sure
Philip was no longer in our future plans and finally in December
I made the final determination with Mr. Raine.
Q: Did you ever meet with Riven regarding his impending
termination?
A: No, but I did have Ms. Sinenski meet with him.
Q: Isn’t that unusual? For a supervisor not to meet with a
manager of a department when they are to be terminated?
A: Listen, it isn’t what I usually do, but Riven was getting on
my nerves. I promoted him early, expected big things - but
instead he failed to meet quotas and cause issues with Mr.
Raine. It was time for him to go.
Q: So instead you had the head of HR meet with him? What did
they discuss?
A: I told her to inform Mr. Riven that he had been terminated
because he had continuously underperformed his quotas for the
last year and had not shown signs of improvement. To my
understanding, she conveyed this information to Riven and he went
on his way.
Q: Do you recognize this document I’ve marked as Exhibit E?
[Exhibit E was shown to Ms. Sniff]
A: Yes, this is Philip’s termination letter. This was sent to
Mr. Riven by email and regular mail the day of his meeting with
Ms. Sinesnki.
Q: Did you write this letter?

50

A: No, it was written by our head of HR, Blaire Sinenski.
Q: Did you consult with Ms. Sinenski about the content of this
letter?
A: Just with regards to the reason for his termination - his
failure to meet his quotas, otherwise it was all HR.
Q: About those quotas, isn’t it true that three songwriters were
transferred from Philip’s team around the time of your warning in
July?
A: Yes. It was in late July, after our meeting regarding his
performance.
Q: Is it possible that that is what contributed to Mr. Riven’s
inability to hit his quotas after the meeting?
A: Philip’s job is to get the job done with whatever we give him.
Twelve songwriters were more than enough to get the job done. We
don’t make excuses at EchoCraft.
Q: Why were these songwriters transferred in the first place?
A: We needed them for another department that recently began
growing at a much faster pace than we anticipated.
Q: Which department was that?
A: The Pop department.
Q: Are decisions like this generally made on such short notice?
A: Generally not. We try to make all employment and personnel
decisions at the start of every year. But as I said, the Pop
department grew faster than we anticipated.

51

Q: Did any other departments have songwriters transferred out to
help the Pop department?
A: No, it was just from the country department.
Q: And why was that? Couldn’t the burden have been spread amongst
the departments?
A: These three songwriters had all started at the company
recently and were being underutilized in Philip’s department. It
just made sense to transfer them at that time.
Q: What do you mean underutilized?
A: They were the lead songwriter of record for very few songs
that the country department produced.
Q: Before we finish, let us backtrack for a second. The report
from Mr. Riven’s investigation--you mentioned he ultimately sent
it to you?
A: Yes, he emailed me his findings in August 2023.
Q: Well, let me find that quickly. Here, Exhibit D. This is what
you are referring to? Do you recognize this?
A: Yes, this is the report that he emailed me.
Q: Did you read the Mr. Riven’s entire report, including the
section including the “bottom line?”
A: Yes, I did.
Q: So, is it fair to say that by the time you fired Mr. Riven you
were aware that his investigation focused on discrimination
against women with regards to EchoCraft’s bonus allotment system?

52

A: No, I wouldn’t say it like that. I was aware that Philip was
looking into his department as a whole being undercompensated
through lower bonuses. This is the context in which I read the
report. Yeah, I saw that line about women, but there was also
another line in the report how women are treated very nicely by
EchoCraft as well.
Q: And how did you respond?
A: As you see in the email I sent in response to his report, I
told him that I took any allegations regarding our bonus system
very seriously, but that perhaps he could be doing better things
with his time. Philip’s department was slacking and I imagine
part of that was due to his everlasting investigation. He was
wasting time.
Q: Isn’t an investigation into possible discriminatory practices
at EchoCraft a good use of one’s time?
A: Again, I did not think much of the line regarding women.
Honestly, before Riven was fired, I only gave it a quick glance,
so I am not even sure I saw the line about women until later when
I did my actual evaluation.
Q: And when did you actually conduct an evaluation of the report?
A: Sometime in early 2024, after Riven had already been
terminated.
Q: Did anyone else at EchoCraft help you with it?
A: No.
Q: Did you inform Human Resources that you were conducting this
evaluation?
A:​ No, I did not.

53

Q: Did you ever reach a conclusion about Mr. Riven’s report?
A: Yes, while I saw departmental discrepancies in bonuses,
ultimately, I concluded that many of those could be explained by
numerous other factors and therefore no further action was
needed.
Q: What other factors were those?
A: I don’t feel comfortable revealing how we make those
decisions, so if it's not really necessary…
Q: Okay. You said that you took these allegations seriously, yet
only months later took a close look at the report?
A: Yes, I had other things going on at the time I received
Riven’s report -- like his underperformance. Contrary to what you
might think, I have other responsibilities outside of catering to
your client’s needs.
Q: Okay, thank you for your time, Ms. Sniff.
Questioning by Alexandra Rousseau, Esq., Attorney for Defendant:
Q: Returning to Riven’s promotion to manager in 2020--is there a
reason he was promoted in February of that year?
A: Yes. As I mentioned before, the manager of the country
songwriters at the time abruptly left the company, so we needed
to find someone in the middle of the business year to take his
place. That’s always a challenge in our industry where a cohesive
unit amongst coworkers is key and might be disrupted by bringing
in outside talent.
Q: So is it fair to say that had you had more notice it is
possible Riven might not have been given the position?

54

A: It is possible, sure. We were scrambling and needed to find
someone quickly to fill the vacated role. While Mr. Riven had
only been at the company for a short time, he seemed like he
could do that job, and we couldn’t really afford to second guess
ourselves at that time.
Q: Thank you. And now transitioning to when Mr. Riven first came
to you regarding his concerns about the bonus discrepancies - did
he once mention the words gender discrimination or anything like
that?
A: No, he did not.
Q: Did he mention there was a possible Title VII violation?
A: No, he did not.
Q: So you had no reason to know Mr. Riven was investigating
possible discrimination against women?
A: No. Philip was going on and on about how Moses’s department
was being underpaid. He did say something about women, but it
didn’t sound to me that he thought the basis of the problem was
gender. Trust me, I am a woman that wants other women to succeed
at EchoCraft. If I thought he was bringing a gender
discrimination issue to me, I would have spoken to someone in HR
and asked for a formal investigation.
Q: And then it still wasn’t clear to you when you received the
final report, correct?
A: Yeah, pretty much. There was stuff here and there that
suggested that the bonus assignment system might have been
affected by gender differences, but that didn’t appear to be the
main purpose of the report, nor was there clear evidence that
alerted me to this fact. This appeared to me to be a departmental
issue, not much more.

55

Q: Okay, moving on. You said Mr. Riven performed poorly in 2023?
A: That's correct.
Q: Do you recognize this exhibit? [Exhibit C was shown to Ms.
Sniff]
A: Yes, this chart shows the country department’s songwriting
credits by quarter, as compared to our company quotas. What
you’ll see here is that while Riven was making his quotas in 2021
and 2022, he began to fail to hit them in 2023.
Q: When did you notice that he wasn’t hitting his quotas?
A: We update this log after every quarter, so it first came to my
attention at the end of March 2023.
Q: And when did the trend begin to concern you?
A: After the second quarter of 2023. Philip did well his first
year and a half or so, but after he underperformed for two
straight quarters, I was very concerned, especially for someone
without a long track record of strong performance, as he was new
to the job.
Q: What did you do at that point?
A: A met with him and issued a formal warning.
Q: What did you hope to accomplish with a formal warning?
A: Philip was fairly new, and I wanted to give him a wakeup call,
which would hopefully refocus him. I really did it for his
benefit, I didn’t want to have to let him go, nobody wanted that.
Q: And did his performance ultimately improve?

56

A: No, he didn’t improve, so we had to make the tough decision to
let him go in December of 2023.
Q: And regarding the transferring of the three songwriters. Mr.
Riven still had 12 under his leadership, correct?
A: Yes.
Q: And is 12 more or less average for a department of similar
amount of work to the country songwriting department?
A: I am not sure what is average, but 12 is certainly enough to
get the job done. The Rap department has to hit similar quotas to
the country department and also just has 12.
Q: And as for Ms. Moses, you thought she would be able to turn it
around even without a formal warning?
A: Yeah, Jackie had been there a long time, I didn’t have much
concern about her. She has always done good work over the years
and my meeting with her was just to give her a heads up to get
back on track, but I’m sure she was already aware she needed to
do better.
Q: So, Ms. Moses wasn’t warned because of her strong track record
that Mr. Riven didn’t have?
A: Yes. She earned that through her hard work over the years and
her awesome contacts throughout the music industry. She’s been at
EchoCraft longer than I have. She isn’t someone we would let go
of easily.
Q: Understood. So, in short, what you’re saying is that Mr. Riven
was fired solely because of his underperformance?
A: Correct.

57

Q: Mr. Raine never told you or implied indirectly that you should
fire Mr. Riven?
A: Well ultimately, of course, he signed off on Philip’s
termination, but he never indicated I should fire Philip before I
approached him regarding Philip’s underperformance.
Q: Mr. Raine did not tell you to take any formal action against
Mr. Riven or with regards to the investigation?
A: No, he did not. He was concerned about some rumors he heard,
but that's about it. It is my job to manage the songwriter
managers, nobody else's, even Ryan’s.
Q: I have no further questions. Thank you, Ms. Sniff.

58

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff
v.
No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA
Deposition of Jacqueline Moses
ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant
---------------------------------------------------------------------X
APPEARANCES:
On behalf of the Plaintiff:
John Locke
Locke and Associates, LLP
On behalf of the Defendant:
Alexandra Rousseau
Rousseau, Graham, & Kilmer LLP
Pursuant to notice, the deposition of Jacqueline Moses was
taken on February 18, 2025, commencing at 1:00 pm at the offices
of Locke & Associates, LLP, 82 W. 57th St., New York, NY 10027.
It is hereby stipulated and agreed that the reading and signing
of this deposition are not waived. Jacqueline Moses, duly been
sworn to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, testifies as follows:
Questioning by John Locke, Esq., Attorney for Plaintiff:
59

Q: Good afternoon, Ms. Moses. My name is John Locke, and I
represent the plaintiff, Philip Riven, in this matter. Please
state your full name for the record
A: Jacqueline Moses. I go by Jackie.
Q: Please state your full address for the record.
A: 734 W. 57th St., New York, NY 10019.
Q: Are you employed at the moment?
A: Yes, I work at EchoCraft as head of the Educational
Songwriting department. I actually formed the department after
spending ten
years at EchoCraft in various different roles,
and I’ve held my current position for 15 years.
Q: Do you know Philip Riven?
A: Yes, I’ve known him since he joined EchoCraft in September
2018.
Q: Did you work closely with him at EchoCraft?
A: Not really. We managed different departments. So I’d see him
at inter-departmental meetings and at corporate functions, but
no, we didn’t work together closely on a regular basis.
Q: Are you subject to the same sort of management and oversight
as Mr. Riven?
A: Well, we both report to Daphne Sniff, and our jobs are pretty
much identical on paper.
Q: I’d like to talk about your department’s work output in 2022.
How did it compare to previous years?
A: We didn’t put out as many songs as we had in previous years.

60

Q: Why was that?
A: I’m not sure. I think it just wasn’t a good time for
educational music. It could be that schools were experimenting
with AI too.
Q: Did anyone at EchoCraft speak to you about this dip in
performance?
A: Yeah, in July of 2023, Daphne called me in and mentioned
that we should do our best to pick things up in the second half
of the year. But it was nothing serious.
Q: Did you have this conversation in person?
A: Yes.
Q: Had this sort of thing happened before?
A: Yeah, every few years there tends to be a dip. On the other
hand, of course, sometimes you have a great year, like 2014,
when my department outperformed every other one. It’s a
cyclical business.
Q: On these other occasions, were you ever concerned about
repercussions from your supervisor?
A: No, we always bounce back.
Q: Were you issued a formal warning in 2023?
A: What? No, of course not. There was no need, it was just a
fluke of a year.
Q: And did your department’s performance pick up in the second
half of the year?
A: Yes, it did as a matter of fact. We met our quota for the
last quarter of 2023. I was never really concerned.

61

Q: And with regards to my client’s investigation, did you ever
hear anything about it?
A: Yes, I was at the holiday party when my employees and
Philip’s were discussing their bonuses. I honestly didn’t think
much of it at the time. A few weeks later he asked me if I
wanted to help him look into what was going on. I chose not to,
but I did hear rumors from a few different employees that a
pretty large-scale investigation into gender disparity in bonus
awards was going on.
Q: Why did you decide not to help him with the investigation?
A: Oh, please. You don’t last this long as a woman in the music
business by getting involved in stuff like this.
Q: What do you mean?
A: I just mean that I didn’t want to go poking around.
Q: I had one last question for you regarding the “Revere?”
song. As department head of the songwriting division, I assume
you had what to do with the writing of “Revere?”
A: Funny you mention that, I actually had very little to do
with that song. Ryan is a very enthusiastic Revere buff, and he
decided that he wanted to oversee the writing of that song all
on his own.
Q: Thank you for your time. No further questions.
Questioning by David Gordon, Esq., Attorney for Defendant:
Q: Hi, Ms. Moses. I think I really just have one or two
questions for you. During 2023 when your department was
struggling, were you ever concerned for your job?

62

A: Not really. I started this department. I’m an institution.
Other record labels have tried and failed to replicate what I’ve
created here. I’ve got all the business ties, and the resources,
and all the talent. These things ebb and flow, and EchoCraft
knows that. So no, I was never really concerned about losing my
job.
Q:​ Thank you. That is all.

63

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff
v.
No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA
Deposition of Ryan Raine
ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant
---------------------------------------------------------------------X
APPEARANCES:
On behalf of the Plaintiff:
John Locke
Locke and Associates, LLP
On behalf of the Defendant:
Alexandra Rousseau
Rousseau, Graham, & Kilmer LLP
Pursuant to notice, the deposition of Ryan Raine was taken
on February 18, 2025, commencing at 3:00 pm at the offices of
Locke & Associates, LLP, 82 W. 57th St., New York, NY 10027.
It is hereby stipulated and agreed that the reading and signing
of this deposition are not waived. Ryan Raine, duly been sworn
to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
testifies as follows:
Questioning by John Locke, Esq., Attorney for Plaintiff:
Q: Please state your full name for the record.
64

A: Ryan Raine.
Q: Please state your full address for the record
.A: 360 Maitland Avenue, Teaneck, NJ 07666.
Q: How long have you worked at EchoCraft Productions?
A: For my entire adult life. I started here as just a mailroom
worker 45 years ago. Worked hard every day until I made it to
the top.
Q: And what exactly is “the top” Mr. Raine? A: Well, it means I am
CEO, is what it means.
Q: What positions did you hold between mailroom worker and CEO?
A: I served in the marketing department for some time, before
eventually becoming Vice President of operations, and from there
I became CEO.
Q: Can you please describe your responsibilities as CEO of
EchoCraft?
A: I supervise everything at the company and I take that role
seriously--I try to be as hands-on as I can.
Q: And as CEO do you oversee the songwriting divisions?
A: I oversee everything in the company in one way or another,
but not directly of course. Our very capable Daphne Sniff is in
charge of our songwriting divisions. As far as I am concerned,
it
is her baby. I’m just there to check in now and then and
to assist in any way I can.
Q: So, you don’t deal directly with any songwriter managers?

65

A: No, not really. I review their performance reviews and work
with Ms. Sniff in making personnel decisions, but otherwise my
direct involvement is minimal.
Q: But you do directly interview all candidates for manager
positions, correct?
A: Correct. Nobody is hired as a manager without getting an
interview with me first. Any hiring or firing decision Ms. Sniff
wants to make has to be approved by me.
Q: Did you interview Mr. Riven before he became manager?
A: Yes, I did.
Q: And what was your impression of him?
A: That he was an upstanding young man who had a bright future
ahead of him. He had been doing a great job as a songwriter
within the country group.​ Everyone seemed to like him there,
and I thought he would make a fine addition to the leadership
team.
Q:​ Was it typical to promote someone to manager after only
being at the company for such a short time?
A: It was out of the ordinary, but the country manager had left
on short notice, so we needed to find someone quickly. Riven
had strong performance reviews and seemed eager to get the job,
so we gave him a shot.
Q: So would you say Riven was headed for “the top”?
A: [laughter] I’m not sure that I would say that. But he had a
chance to be a part of this company's higher leadership one day.
I wouldn’t have okayed his hire for the manager’s position
otherwise. It’s a shame he never got to realize his potential at
EchoCraft. He had a real chance to blossom at the company.

66

Q: Why was Mr. Riven fired from the company?
A: He was fired for underperformance. It is my understanding that
he failed to meet his quotas each and every
month last year,
and that cannot go on at EchoCraft.
Q: And you made the decision to fire Mr. Riven?
A: I signed off on it, like all other personnel decisions. But
it was Daphne who brought the issue to my attention in
December of 2023.
Q: What issues about Mr. Riven’s performance did Ms. Sniff
bring
to your attention in December?
A: She alerted me to the fact that Riven’s department had failed
to meet their quotas the last 12 months consecutively.
Q: Had Ms. Sniff raised any concerns about Mr. Riven’s
performance with you before December 2023?
A: No, and I wouldn’t have expected her to. December is when we
have our year-end meeting regarding personnel and finalize who
will be hired and fired for the upcoming year. A lot of projects
begin to wrap up towards the end of the calendar year, so it
makes sense to make any needed changes come January.
Q: And from what Ms. Sniff conveyed to you, you thought Mr.
Riven deserved to be terminated?
A: Yes. I generally defer to Daphne when deciding whether to
terminate a manager, as she is the one that works with them on
the day-to-day. Here, she showed me the performance reviews and
recommended Riven be terminated. I had no information
suggesting a contrary course of action might be appropriate,
so I gave it my go-ahead.

67

Q: Mr. Raine, did you ever ask Ms. Sniff to fire Philip Riven?
A: What? No. I just told you, Ms. Sniff came to me with the
recommendation.
Q:​ I’d like to show you a document.
[Exhibit F was shown to Mr. Raine.]
Q: Do you recognize this document?
A: Yes, this is an email that I sent to Daphne in May 2023.
Q: And can you explain the context behind this email?
A: Sure, May 2023 I was making rounds through the office and I
overheard a conversation between two employees in our
advertising division. They said something about Riven being on
some sort of vendetta against the company through some massive
investigation. This surprised me, so I emailed Daphne to make
sure that everything was under control.
Q: Based on what you overheard, what was the investigation
about?
A: I wasn’t exactly sure. I heard them say something about
people getting paid less in bonus than they were due.
Apparently Riven felt some people were getting shorted in their
end of year bonuses.
Q: Did anything in the conversation make mention that it was an
investigation geared towards gender discrimination?
A: No, not that I can recall.
Q: So you’re saying women in particular were not mentioned at
all in the conversation you overheard?

68

A: No, I am not saying that. There was some mention of Riven
particularly focusing on departments with a lot of women, but
that didn’t mean much to me at the time.
Q: Why didn’t that mean anything to you at the time? Wouldn’t
that indicate to you there might be a gender issue at play?
A: No, not at all. I really had very few details, I didn’t
really know how to make sense of what I was hearing. That is
why I emailed Daphne to deal with the situation.
Q: What exactly did you write to her?
A: Oh, you know, not much. Just a quick email about making sure
everything was running smoothly.
Q: Well, take a second to read Exhibit F containing your email
so we can be on the same page.
A: Okay [reads over email].
Q: What did you mean when you told Ms. Sniff to keep “her
subordinates in line” and make sure nothing affects EchoCraft’s
“bottom line?”
A: I didn’t want any baseless investigations distracting our
employees. I intended for Daphne to speak with Mr. Riven about
what he was doing and hopefully resolve the matter so as not to
take away from the company’s productivity. You can’t have an
employee with a vendetta going around harassing people.
Q: So you were not concerned that Mr. Riven’s investigation
would uncover discriminatory bonus assignment practices by
EchoCraft?
A: We don’t do that, so there was nothing for him to find.
Q: You also referred to Riven as a “virus” in the email,
“infecting” the office culture.​ What did you mean by
that?

69

A: Listen, I was upset, okay? And rightfully so. Was my language
a little harsh? Maybe, but I take office culture very seriously
and the last thing an office needs is an intrusive investigation
by a disgruntled employee.
Q: What made you think Mr. Riven was a disgruntled employee?
A: As I see it, happy employees don’t run their own side-show
investigations.
Q: Okay, let’s switch gears for a second. I want to talk to you
about your Company’s song, “Revere Paul Revere?”. I’d like to
submit a document I’ve previously marked as Exhibit H for the
record. Do you recognize this document?
A: Yes, this is our song, “Revere Paul Revere?”. I’m very proud
of my composition.
Q: Oh, so you had something to do with writing this song?
A: Well, yeah. I’m kind of known around the office as a Paul
Revere fan, so I gave a lot of input for the song.
Q: Can you describe the song for me please?
A: Well, it’s really all there in its title “Revere Paul
Revere?” The song is a deep rumination on the problematic
character of one of our country's most celebrated figures.
Q: Deep rumination? We’ll get to that in a moment, but first
tell me more about the actual content of the song.
A: It’s a lyrical song with rhyming couplets. Each line
conveys information about Revere’s life.
Q: Where did you get the idea for the song?

70

A: As I said before, I am sort of a Revere buff. But to be
perfectly honest, I came across the idea completely by
chance. One of my employees found a copy of a song about
Revere while cleaning up the desk of Philip Riven.
Q: I assume you are referring to this document? I’d like
to submit Exhibit G for the record. Are you familiar with
this document?
A: Yes, that is the song we found.
Q: This document looks
song.

like it’s almost identical to your

A: Umm, I mean, I didn’t feel like I needed to make up my own
information about Revere. Facts are facts. You can’t own facts,
no?
Q: But you used many of the exact same lines?
A: Well, the rhymes are really catchy. I thought high schoolers
would like them. But it’s not like rhyming is so complicated, I
didn’t think it was a big deal to borrow the rhymes. Also, I
thought if my version was similar in style to Riven’s it would
help underscore the significant changes we made.
Q: So you admit that you copied much of his song?
A: No. I would never copy his song. It was completely
historically inaccurate. But in order to underscore the extent
of the inaccuracies, I only changed the parts that were
factually incorrect.
Q: What changes are those?

71

A: Well, Riven’s song portrays Revere much more positively than
EchoCraft’s. We made a concerted effort to tone down the
effusive nature of the original song and make it far more
historically accurate.
Q: Based on my review of Exhibits G and H, seven lines are
exactly the same in the two songs, is that correct?
A: Yeah, that sounds right, but it’s the changes that make all
the difference. I mean, the original song was all about
celebrating Paul Revere, but that’s just totally wrongheaded.
Revere shouldn’t just be celebrated. There were others who were
heroes in the same way. My song emphasizes that. And Revere was
complicated
Q: How does your song emphasize that?
A: We added lines to the song that mention the role of other
people. We made it more accurate by acknowledging that he did
reveal secrets. We also pointed out that the traditional story,
the one told in Riven’s version, is incomplete.
Q: Okay, changing topics just a bit, after you took the song and
made your changes, what did you do with it?
A: It was actually perfect timing. EchoCraft was getting some
bad
press at the time, and I thought we needed to generate
some good PR. I came across this song, and a light bulb went
off in my head--EchoCraft has a non-profit educational
division, which releases songs for educational enlightenment.
The division hadn’t released a big hit in some time. “Revere
Paul Revere?” was the perfect song to be the division’s big new
release.
Q: So EchoCraft was receiving bad press at the time, why was
that?
A: There were rumors among the city newspapers that the company
was engaging in wasteful recycling practices and hazing of our
support staff...totally fabricated obviously.
72

Q: And was this negative publicity affecting your bottom line?
A: I can’t say for sure, but sales of songs across all our
divisions were stagnating. People seemed to prefer using our
competitors, who didn’t have all this baggage.
Q: And you thought releasing “Revere Paul Revere?” could help
change that?
A: Yeah, I asked my PR consultants and the head of the
educational department, Jackie Moses, about it, and they
confirmed that giving a boost to our non-profit educational
division could bolster our image of being supportive of
education. You know, make us look like we were the good guys.
Q: Eventually, did your strategy with “Revere Paul Revere?” work?
A: 100%. Several newspapers wrote about our focus on non-profit
compositions and how EchoCraft’s corporate culture was turning
over a
new leaf.
Q: Which papers wrote reviews, and when were they written?
A: The NY Times, The New Yorker, The Wall Street Journal, and
The Village Voice. The reviews all came out within a couple of
weeks of each other, towards the end of January 2024. And one
preeminent Shakespeare scholar, Wilhelmina Lamborn Lee,
remarked to me at the annual dinner for the Englewood
Historical Society that the song made her entirely reevaluate
her perception of Revere. But more importantly, for EchoCraft’s
purposes, she talked about the power of well-crafted
educational compositions in imparting important historical
knowledge; and she applauded EchoCraft for being in the
vanguard of this movement
Q: And did all this good press help sales?

73

A: Again, I can’t say for certain, but after all those positive
op-eds, the press did stop printing the negative stories about
our company.
Q: But did the publication of “Revere Paul Revere?” coincide
with increased revenue?
A: Maybe not, but around the time after the
publication
of the song, our company did start to perform
better.
Q: Can you be a bit more specific?
A: I don’t have the facts and figures before me unfortunately,
but our annual revenue was down close to 5% before we released
“Revere Paul Revere?”, afterwards our R&B, Country, and Screamo
divisions all reported increased commercial interest, and
EchoCraft’s revenue went from a loss of 5% to a positive gain
of 2%.
Q: How exactly did EchoCraft release the song to the public?
A: Well, I cold emailed a bunch of high schools in Manhattan and
asked them if they were interested in licensing the song.
Q: You did this? Why didn't Jackie take care of this?
A: Revere means a lot to me. I made an executive decision to
handle this myself.
Q: And did any of the schools respond?
A: Yes, Columbia Grammar responded first. They told me they were
already working on incorporating songs as part of their history
curriculum. Elle Toobin, the principal, was eager to work out a
deal.
Q: What did you charge Columbia Grammar for use of the song?

74

A: $200.
Q: Is that a normal licensing fee for you?
A: Of course not. Our educational division’s goal isn’t to make
money. We usually license songs at or below cost. It generates
significant good will for us.
Q: What about the other schools you reached out to?
A: At first they didn't respond, but Toobin has connections to the
other area schools and helped me negotiate deals with those
schools as well.
Q: Thank you Mr. Raine, I have no further questions.
Questioning by Alexandra Rousseau, Esq., Attorney for Defendant:
Q: I just have a few quick questions for you Mr. Raine.
A: No problem.
Q: Is it typical to fire a manager for a year of
performance?

under

A: Yes. EchoCraft has a reputation to uphold, we won’t let it be
dragged down by one person. Let alone the profits that might be
lost.
Q: And this is true even for managers that otherwise performed
well in the past?
A: Sure. I mean as you progress through the company you build up
a reputation and you certainly get more leeway, but nobody is
immune from being terminated, even myself. And here, Mr. Riven
didn’t have much of a track record as a manager.
Q: Of course. And returning to your May 2023 email exchange with
Ms. Sniff--did you discuss Mr. Riven’s investigation with her or
anyone else at the company after that exchange?
75

A: No, I did not, not before this lawsuit anyways. Riven was
already wasting other people's time and energy; I wasn’t about
to let him do the same to me. I trusted Daphne to resolve the
issue promptly.
Q: So, you never received Riven’s official report, nor the
contents of it?
A: Not until this became a whole big lawsuit and we had
discovery.
Q: So, when you signed off on Riven’s termination, you still did
not know Riven engaged in an investigation against gender
discrimination.
A: No, I did not. And, honestly, I still know very little about
what went on.
Q: Changing topics, I’d like to ask you about your song, “Revere
Paul Revere?” Why exactly did you make the changes you made?
A: I had recently come back from this exhibit at the New York
Historical Society about Paul Revere that I had read about in
the NY Times, and the exhibit really impressed upon me how
complicated Revere was and how important other people were as
well.
Q: What do you mean by complicated?
A: Well, for one, do people know that he actually was captured
by the British and revealed crucial information about Patriot
military strategy?
Q: And you felt that the original song didn't accurately portray
Revere?

76

A: Not in the slightest. “He revealed no secrets, the man was
not skittish.” I mean that’s just propagating myth. Revere was
skittish! So, I changed that in the song.
Q: You added more lines to the song as well, tell me about
those.
A: A few other people rode that night, like William Dawes and
Samuel Prescott. Prescott actually made it to Concord. And then
there was Sybil Ludington, who was a sixteen-year-old girl! She
rode twice as far as Revere that night and gathered troops.
Q: Of course, your passion is inspiring. And did you in any way
profit off of this song?
A: No. We distributed it at below cost to schools who
wanted it. The amount we charged was below the cost to us
to produce and distribute it, so we did not make a profit.
Q: You mentioned before that the publication of the song
coincided with an increase in EchoCraft’s overall performance,
is it realistic to attribute the turnaround of your company to
a short historical song?
A: Certainly not! The music industry as a whole performed much
better this year than last. Also, I take pride in my work as a
CEO and would like to think that my leadership has helped steer
EchoCraft in the right direction.
Q: You mentioned that Toobin was eager to work out a deal with
you, why is that?
A: Well, we’re a big company, and the song is both catchy and
historically accurate, which I think is what Toobin was
looking for.
Q: Thank you, have a great day Mr. Raine.

77

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT
FOR THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff,
v.
No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA
Deposition of Elle Toobin
ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------X
APPEARANCES:
On behalf of the Plaintiff:
John Locke
Locke and Associates, LLP
On behalf of the Defendant:
Alexandra Rousseau
Rousseau, Graham, & Kilmer LLP
Pursuant to notice, the deposition of Elle Toobin was taken
on February 19, 2025, commencing at 10:00 am at the offices of
Locke & Associates, LLP, 82 W. 57th St., New York, NY 10027.
It is hereby stipulated and agreed that the reading and signing
of this deposition are not waived. Elle Toobin, duly been sworn
to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth,
testifies as follows:
Questioning by John Locke, Esq., Attorney for Plaintiff:
Q: Good morning, Ms. Toobin. How are you?
78

A: I’m well. Thanks for asking. I’m a bit nervous to be around
lawyers. But I’m good.
Q: No worries. I understand. Would you please state your name for
the record.
A: Elle Toobin.
Q: Please state your current address for the record. A: 450 West
185th Street, New York, New York.
Q: What is your current position?
A: I’m the school principal at Columbia Grammar.
Q: Have you heard Philip Riven’s song “Revere Paul Revere”?
A: Yes.
Q: When did you first hear about it?
A: An Advanced Placement U.S. History teacher Columbia Grammar
approached me in December 2023 and informed me that her students
were listening to a song about Paul Revere.
Q: Did she say anything else about the song?
A: She said her students had performed remarkably well on their
recent exam that included information about Paul Revere and
Lexington and Concord. She suspected the song may have played a
role in exemplary student performance.
Q: Interesting. How did you find out who wrote the song?
A: The teacher asked her students about the genesis of the song.
She reported to me that Mr. Riven, a parent of a student in the
class, had written it.
Q: When did you first see the lyrics of the song?

79

A: Also in December 2023. The teacher sent me the song and emailed
me a copy of the lyrics that she had typed up. I was impressed.
Q: Were you aware at that point about Mr. Riven’s occupation?
A: No.
Q: When did you find out about his occupation?
A: After seeing the lyrics, I was curious to see if he had
experience with this sort of writing. I googled him and found his
LinkedIn. I also saw that he had been credited on a number
of
seemingly well-known songs.
Q: If I could direct your attention to Exhibit I – do recognize
these documents?
A: Yes. These are emails between me and Mr. Riven.
Q: Why did you initiate an email exchange with Mr. Riven?
A: He’s a professional songwriter. His song was excellent. It
helped our students. So, I thought we could work together. It
seemed like an innovative idea that would benefit our students.
Q: What do you mean by “work together”?
A: He’s a school parent. I know his daughter is in my school, and
I knew he wrote the song. I wanted him to write songs for our
students. I thought he would be amenable to a good price as a
favor to the school.

80

Q:​ In your January 13th email to Mr. Riven, you mention an advance
as a “preliminary negotiation fee” – what did you mean by that?
A: I wanted to compensate him for use of his Revere song. And I
also wanted to incentivize him to negotiate a deal for future
songs.
Q: And why did you offer Mr. Riven this advance?
A: I was nervous he wouldn’t take our offer seriously. The $500
showed we were serious. He’s a professional songwriter and a
school parent. That’s a unique opportunity to capitalize on his
talent.
Q: Did you want to prevent him from negotiating with other
schools?
A: I guess that was part of my motivation. I wanted our school to
be the first to be credited with this idea. I wanted our students
to succeed relative to other schools’ students. Having Mr. Riven
take us seriously also motivated the advance.
Q: Your emails also reference Mr. Riven writing 5-10 songs “next
year.” Did that mean in 2024?
A: It meant the 2024-25 school year.
Q: How much money were you willing to offer Mr. Riven per song in
the 2024-25 school year?
A: I’m not sure, to be frank. We don’t work out our budget for
the school year until August before the school year is set to
begin. I can’t pinpoint any exact number.
Q: Can you give a ballpark estimate?
A: $200 per song? I don’t know. I really don’t. If our students
performed exceptionally well we could have offered more to

81

incentivize Mr. Riven further. But that’s just guessing. I
can’t say any number for certain, particularly because we never
moved forward.
Q: Looking again at Exhibit I, on January 13th, Mr. Riven told
you your deal “seemed great” to him, and you responded, “Sounds
good.” What did your response mean?
A: Well, it means our discussion sounded good up to that point.
It seemed we were heading in a good direction. We had worked out
a good arrangement so far.
Q: What do you mean by a “good arrangement”?
A: I think we were both happy with the give and take. Obviously
there were still gaps to be filled in, like the exact fee per
song, but overall it sounded good so far.
Q: What gaps?
A: I mean, like we just talked about, we hadn’t nailed down a
fee per song for 2024-25.
Q: So the only thing you still had to work out was the exact
amount you were to pay Mr. Riven per song?
A: I suppose. I guess I would have liked to meet with him in
person and to sign something. But yes.
Q: So you paid Mr. Riven the $500 advance?
A: Yes.
Q: How did you find out about EchoCraft’s song, “Revere
Paul Revere?”?
A: EchoCraft’s education division reached out to me in January
2024
and sent a copy of “Revere Paul Revere?”

82

Q: Did they send the song to any other schools?
A: At that point, I’m not sure. But I did later help them
negotiate licensing agreements with other schools.
Q: Why do you think they sent it to you?
A: Um, I can’t say for sure. Columbia Grammar is a prominent
school.
Q: What happened after EchoCraft reached out to you?
A: I worked out a deal with Mr. Raine for a similar price to
what I had been negotiating with Mr. Riven.
Q: Did Mr. Raine know that you had been working with Mr.
Riven?
A: We never spoke about Mr. Riven.
Q: Why did you help EchoCraft negotiate with other schools?
A: Well, I was working with EchoCraft and found them to be a
good partner. I did want to be at the forefront of
incorporating songs into our curriculum, but I also feel a
responsibility to help all area high schools and students. I
have some connections with other school administrators because
of my position as a principal.
Q: Why did you end up going with EchoCraft if you had worked
out a deal with Mr. Riven?
A:​ Well, I don’t think I necessarily had a deal with Mr. Riven.
We hadn’t signed anything if that’s the sort of thing you’re
referring to.
Q: But why did you go with EchoCraft?

83

A: EchoCraft is a huge company. They have lots of songwriters.
Mr. Riven is just one songwriter, and he seemed to be working
on his own. Having access to more talent seemed like a good
choice. Also, their education division donates profits to
charity, which is appealing to me. EchoCraft also charged us
$200, which I understood to be a good deal for us.
Q: Did you know at the time you were negotiating with EchoCraft
that
Mr. Riven had been fired from EchoCraft?
A: Yes, I found that out. I heard secondhand, but his daughter’s
teacher mentioned it to me in the hallway one day. I guess the
teacher felt I should know seeing as I was negotiating a deal
with him to write music.
Q: Did Mr. Riven’s dismissal have anything to do with you
forgoing your deal with Mr. Riven?
A: Again, I’m not sure I agree that I “had a deal with Mr.
Riven.” But I didn’t really consider his termination at all.
Q: What did EchoCraft tell you, if anything, about their Paul
Revere song?
A: EchoCraft told me they had a new song about Paul Revere. They
said
their version is historically accurate.
Q: Did you believe those claims?
A: I guess I did. I trust their songwriting competency and their
business acumen. They are a serious company. I’m sure they did
their research. I’m not a historian. In general, we want to use
material that is historically accurate.
Q: Do you know much about Paul Revere?

84

A: I can’t say that I do. I know the classic story of the
Midnight Ride. I know Longfellow wrote a poem about it. That’s
about it.
Q: Are you qualified to speak about specifics of Paul Revere’s
life?
A: I don’t think I am.
Q: To you, someone with limited knowledge of Paul Revere, was
EchoCraft’s song similar to Mr. Riven’s song?
A: Well, to me, they seem to be similar.
Q: What do you mean by “similar”?
A: Most of the words are common to both. EchoCraft’s version
has a few lines that I can see provoking discussion about Paul
Revere and the story about him. But the songs look similar to my
eyes, at least.
Q: I have no further questions. Thank you so much, Ms. Toobin.
Questioning by Alexandra Rousseau, Esq., Attorney for Defendant:
Q: Hi Ms. Toobin. Were you planning to meet with Mr. Riven to
sign a contract concerning Revere Paul Revere?
A: I would have liked to. Yes. Again, legalese is not my forte.
I’m a trained educator.
Q: Had anyone drafted that
contract? A:​No.
Q: Would the School Board have needed to approve that contract?
A: No.
Q: When are your budgets set?
85

A: Typically, early August before the relevant academic year.
Q: So it’s safe to say your budget for the 2024-2025 year had
not been set yet at the time of your email exchanges with Mr.
Riven in January and February of 2024?
A: That’s correct.
Q: Is it possible there would have been no room in the budget to
pay Mr. Riven?
A: It’s possible. Money is tight for all schools.
Q: If you would, please look at your emails, Exhibit I. Why did
you write “We’ll talk soon”?
A: I believe in that email I wrote “Sounds good. We’ll talk
soon.” We had a plan but that plan required more talking on both
sides to carry out.
Q: So you were, in fact, planning to talk again with Mr. Riven?
A: Yes, I think eventually that would have been inevitable. For
example, he would have to send a song to me.
Q: EchoCraft added six lines their Revere song. As an
educator, do you consider those lines to be significant
additions?
A: I’m not sure what you mean by “significant.” Asking the
audience if Paul Revere should be revered does, in my opinion,
solicit a critical discussion about Revere’s legacy.
Q: So would you characterize the additions as “significant” in
light of the fact that they solicit a critical discussion about
his legacy?
A: Riven’s song does not do that in the same way. But I’m not
naive. I can see that the songs use almost the same words. The
majority of the words are common to both, but the added lines
86

add a thoughtful gloss and more information. I can’t really say
if that’s significant or not.
Q: Do you think provoking critical discussion is an important
goal for an educator?
A: Certainly. And I noticed that when choosing the song. I’m
not a historian, but assuming EchoCraft’s song is accurate, I
think there
are educational benefits to asking questions
about Paul Revere’s legacy.
Q: So you don’t know whether Paul Revere actually revealed
secrets while in captivity?
A: I do not.
Q: Assuming, if you will, that EchoCraft’s song is historically
accurate and Mr. Riven’s song is not, would that be reason
enough
to select EchoCraft’s song over Mr. Riven’s?
A: Yes, I think so. To educate students, I think it’s best to
use historically accurate information.
Q: Would you use historically inaccurate material in a
classroom?
A: It depends how “inaccurate” the material is. Something that
is totally off base, likely not. Something that massages the
truth or contains minor mistakes, but is excellent work overall
- I could see a place for that.
Q: After listening to Mr. Riven’s song, would you have a
positive
impression of Paul Revere?
A: I think I would, yes.
Q: After listening to EchoCraft’s would you have a positive
impression of Paul Revere?
A: I think I would, yes, but I would also be asking
questions about whether I knew the whole story.
87

Q: That’s all I have. Thanks, Ms. Toobin.

88

Exhibit A
EchoCraft Productions Performance Review Notes, 2021
Employee Name: Philip Riven
Position: Department Manager, Country Songwriting Department
Performance Rating: Exceeding Expectations
Evaluations: Mr. Riven has really risen to the task of running the country songwriting department
this year. Under his leadership, the department has received over 30 songwriting credits per
quarter, exceeding last year’s performance, and clients report satisfaction across the board with
the product Mr. Riven’s department has been putting out. He is outperforming several of his peers
in other departments.
Strengths: Mr. Riven has a pleasant personality and manages to make the office environment
light-hearted yet productive. He is up-front with his employees about his expectations and
promotes collegiality and collaboration.
Weaknesses: None to report.
Future Potential: Because this was Mr. Riven’s first full year in this position, it is too soon to
evaluate his potential for further promotion. However, if his performance continues to impress,
there are no limits to how far he can go at this company.
EchoCraft Productions Performance Review Notes, 2022
Employee Name: Philip Riven
Position: Department Manager, Country Songwriting Department
Performance Rating: Exceeding Expectations
Evaluations: Mr. Riven continues to impress as manager of the country songwriters. His team
is responsible for over 100 credited songs released this year, and his department wrote 3 out of 5
songs nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Country Song in 2022. His employees seem to

89

enjoy coming to work every day, and Mr. Riven can frequently be seen conversing and
collaborating with them.
Strengths: Mr. Riven is a powerhouse, staying at the office late to complete projects, instituting
new ways for his employees to maximize productivity, and consistently reporting high numbers.
Weaknesses: Sometimes Mr. Riven works on his own projects during business hours. As long as
he continues to meet quotas, however, this should not be an issue.
Future Potential: Mr. Riven certainly has a bright future at EchoCraft if he keeps it up.

EchoCraft Productions Performance Review Notes, 2023
Employee Name: Philip Riven
Position: Department Manager, Country Songwriting Department
Performance Rating: Failing to meet expectations
Evaluations: Mr. Riven seems to have run out of steam. His department has failed to meet our
expectations for songwriting credits for six consecutive months, and Mr. Riven does not seem
optimistic about his ability to bring in more work in the short-term. He seems to be putting a lot
of time into a private project he is working on, which certainly is not helping his situation.
Strengths: Mr. Riven continues to be a pleasant presence around the office, and his
employees continue to respect him. He is a great conversationalist, which helps in meeting
with clients.
Weaknesses: Mr. Riven’s decreased productivity seems to stem from a decreased interest in his
work. This is the first year in which Mr. Riven skipped the Annual Conference of Country
Songwriters.
Future Potential: Mr. Riven’s drastic decline in performance is cause for concern. Mr. Riven was
warned of his failure to meet company quotas in July, and his continued failure to meet
expectations necessitates a formal evaluation of his position at the company.

90

Exhibit B

Formal warning issued:
On July 5, 2023, Daphne Sniff, supervisor of the songwriter managers, met with the
manager of the country songwriter department--Philip Riven--regarding his underperformance.
At this meeting, Mr. Riven was orally issued a formal warning stating that he was subject to
discipline, and possibly termination, if he did not improve his department's performance.
This document, a copy of which was given to Mr. Riven, serves as a record of this warning.

91

Exhibit C
EchoCraft Productions Country Songwriting Credits 2021-2023

92

Exhibit D
From: Sniff, Daphne
To: Riven, Philip
Date: Saturday, August 19, 2023 at 2:02 PM EST
Subject: RE: Bonus Awards
Thanks for sharing. I take these concerns very seriously. However, are you sure this side project is
the best use of your time right now?

From: Riven, Philip
To: Sniff, Daphne
Date: Friday, August 18, 2023 at 10:43 PM EST
Subject: Bonus Awards
Dear Daphne,
I have finally concluded my lengthy investigation into bonus compensation in 2022. I
interviewed 81 employees in 3 divisions and 12 departments. My findings are attached.
I’d first like to say that overall, I have found that EchoCraft’s policies and benefits really help our
employees manage their work and feel valued by the company. Employees were particularly
impressed with the efficacy of our Sexual Harassment Training, our parental and adoption leave
policies, and our flexible time off policy. Most employees I talked to said they were satisfied with
EchoCraft’s resources for reporting workplace harassment.
However, the bottom line is as follows: I found that in nine out of the twelve departments I
surveyed, the women I interviewed were, on average, awarded lower bonus compensation
than men.
This is not a good look for us, and I think we need to seriously think about how bonus
compensation is calculated here at EchoCraft. They deserve to receive the same appreciation as
everyone else.
Let me know if you want to discuss.
93

Attachment:
Bonus Compensation in the Songwriting Division:

Department Males

Females

Male
Female
Avg. Bonus Avg. Bonus
Employees Employees (Male)
(Female)
Interviewed Interviewed

Education

3

12

3

8

$2234

$2014

Rap

6

6

4

3

$2431

$2444

Country

10

5

7

3

$2623

$2198

Pop

12

14

2

2

$1989

$1234

Classical

7

4

3

4

$1458

$1202

Rock

9

5

6

5

$3202

$2874

Hip Hop

4

7

1

3

$2100

$2054

Jazz

4

3

2

2

$2568

$2206

Bonus Compensation in the Marketing Division

Departmen t

Males

Females

Male
Employees
Interviewe d

Female
Employees
Interviewe
d

Avg.
Bonus
(Male)

Avg.
Bonus
(Female)

Print

6

5

1

4

$3890

$3509

Digital

8

6

4

3

$3405

$3744

94

Bonus Compensation in the Talent Acquisition Division
Departmen
t

Males

Females

Male
Employees
Interviewe
d

Female
Employees
Interviewe
d

Avg.
Bonus
(Male)

Avg.
Bonus
(Female)

Vocals

8

4

4

2

$3890

$3509

Band

4

6

2

3

$3405

$3744

95

Exhibit E

December 21, 2023
Philip Riven
300 West End Avenue
New York, New York, 10023
Dear Mr. Riven,
This letter is to inform you that your employment with EchoCraft Productions is terminated
effective immediately. You have been terminated due to unsatisfactory performance and a
consistent failure to meet your department’s quotas for songwriting credits.
This decision is irreversible. You should expect to receive your final paycheck totaling $8,255 on
December 30, 2023. Your healthcare benefits will continue to remain in effect until February 1,
2024. Please return any company equipment and confidential materials before your departure.
Also, please keep in mind that you have signed a non-solicitation and confidentiality agreement.
If you have questions about the agreements you have signed, your compensation, benefits, or
returning company property, please contact me at 212-252-7000 or Bl.sinenski@EchoCraft.com.
Sincerely,
Blaire Sinenski
Director of Human Resources

96

Exhibit F
From: Raine, Ryan
To: Sniff, Daphne
Date: Wednesday, May 24, 2023 at 11:34 AM EST
Subject: URGENT- investigation
Daphne,
I recently became aware that one of your managers, Philip Riven, is on a vendetta against the
firm. I overheard two lower-level employees discussing the matter. We cannot have any
distractions affecting our bottom line. From what I can tell, Riven is a virus infecting the
company culture. Keep your subordinates in line.
No need to email me back, just get it done.
Ryan

97

Exhibit G

Revere Paul Revere
It was the night of April 18, 1775
A night made famous by Paul’s historic ride
One if by land Two if By Sea
Such was Revere’s Signal to Warn of The Enemy
Through Somerville, Arlington, and Medford he rode
The British are Coming, the great man bellowed
Captured at gunpoint by the soldiers of the British
He revealed no secrets, the man was not skittish.

98

Exhibit H

Revere Paul Revere?
It was the night of April 18, 1775,​
a night made famous by Paul’s historic ride.​
One if by land, two if by sea—​
such was Revere’s signal to warn of the enemy,​
though others helped raise that warning’s light.
Through Somerville, Arlington, and Medford he rode—​
yet he was not the only rider on that road.​
The British are coming, the great man bellowed—​
a line the storytellers favor, polished and mellowed.
Captured at gunpoint by the soldiers of the British,​
He revealed some secrets, the man was skittish—​
The tale often stops with him, though many stood ready.
So the ride we recall is brave, but incomplete:​
history’s chorus reduced to a single heartbeat.

99

Exhibit I
From: Toobin, Elle
To: Philip, Riven
Date: Wednesday, February 14, 2024 at 12:45 PM EST
Subject: Paul Revere
Hi Phil,
Unfortunately, our school will be unable to pursue the songwriting deal we spoke about last
month. We’ve decided to go in a different direction and have signed an alternative deal.
Regretfully, it included a provision that we could not distribute songs written by anyone else
to our students. I’m so sorry that it will not work out. I wish you continued success.
Elle Toobin

From: Toobin, Elle
To: Philip, Riven
Date: Sunday, January 14, 2024 at 9:05 AM EST
Subject: RE: RE: RE: RE: Your Song (Paul Revere)
Sounds good! We’ll talk more soon.
Elle Toobin

From: Philip, Riven
To: Toobin, Elle
Date: Saturday, January 13, 2024 at 10:20 AM EST
Subject: RE: RE: RE: Your Song (Paul Revere)
Elle,

100

Of course I’m interested. Your deal seems great to me. I am really passionate about
songwriting and helping my daughter succeed. I also only have positive things to say
about the school. Happy to give back in any way I can.
Phil

From: Toobin, Elle
To: Philip, Riven
Date: Saturday, January 13, 2024 at 9:05 AM EST
Subject: RE: RE: Your Song (Paul Revere)
Wow! EchoCraft? That must have been fun.
About those other songs you might write - I spoke to a few people around here and we’re
interested in potentially paying you for those songs. We believe the students scored
exceptionally well on their recent exam in large part due to your song. We feel strongly about
this. Would you be amenable to a $500 advance as a “preliminary negotiation fee”? Just to lay
it out for you, what we have in mind is a fee for each song you write next school year (we do
not have budget capacity this year). We would want 5-10 songs, which, I understand, may be
asking a lot. Additionally, we could work out a bonus if more than 75% of students receive a 4
or above on the AP exam. Let me know if this all works for you. We think it will benefit our
students immensely.
All the best,
Elle Toobin

From: Philip, Riven
To: Toobin, Elle
Date: Friday, January 12, 2024 at 12:02 PM EST
Subject: RE: Your Song (Paul Revere)

101

Yes! I did write the song. I was a songwriter at EchoCraft, so I figured why not take my talents
and help my daughter study? I’m thinking about writing a few more for her. Her classmates
seem to like the song a lot.
Phil

From: Toobin, Elle
To: Philip, Riven
Date: Friday, January 12, 2024 at 11:34 AM EST
Subject: Your Song (Paul Revere)
Hi Philip,
I’m the principal at your daughter’s school. Her U.S. History teacher emailed me a song her
students have been listening to. It’s about Paul Revere. Did you write the song? It’s really
excellent.
Best,
Elle Toobin

102

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR
THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff​ ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

v.​ ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​
No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA
​

Motion for Summary Judgment

ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant
---------------------------------------------------------------------X
DEFENDANT’S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Pursuant to rule 56(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, defendant requests that the court
grant Summary Judgement in favor of defendant, EchoCraft Productions (“EchoCraft”), on the
grounds that:
1.​ Even viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, the evidence raises no issue of
material fact and dictates that defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. No
reasonable factfinder could find that the plaintiff was (1) engaged in a protected activity,
(2) that defendant had knowledge of such an activity, or (3) that plaintiff’s ultimate
termination from the firm had anything to do with his involvement in such an activity.
Because plaintiff cannot demonstrate any of these claims, let alone all three,
defendant is entitled to judgement as a matter of law.
2.​ Even viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff, the evidence raises no issue of
material fact and dictates that defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. No
reasonable factfinder could find that EchoCraft’s song “Revere Paul Revere?” is not a
fair use of plaintiff’s song “Revere Paul Revere.” Because plaintiff cannot demonstrate,
using the four-factor analysis set out in Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S.
569, that EchoCraft’s use is not fair, defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.
Alexandra Rousseau, Attorney for Defendant
/s/ Alexandra Rousseau
103

Rousseau, Graham, & Kilmer LLP,
395 W. 55th St.
New York, NY 10027
Dated: March 17, 2025

104

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR
THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff​ ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

v.​ ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​
No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA
​

​

​

Opposition to

Motion for Summary Judgment
ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant
---------------------------------------------------------------------X
PLAINTIFF’S AFFIDAVIT IN OPPOSITION
TO DEFENDANT’S MOTION FOR SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Plaintiff Philip Riven requests that the court deny defendant's motion for summary
judgment pursuant to rule 56(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure on the grounds
that:
1.​ There are genuine issues of fact and law as to whether (i) Philip Riven was involved in a
protected activity when he investigated bonus practices at EchoCraft, (ii) EchoCraft
knew of this activity, and (ii) EchoCraft then fired Riven because of his investigation.
The evidence viewed in the light most favorable to the plaintiff could lead a reasonable
jury to find against the defendant, EchoCraft Productions.
2.​ There are genuine issues of fact and law as to whether EchoCraft Productions’ song
“Revere Paul Revere?” was a fair use of Philip Riven’s song “Revere Paul Revere.”
Riven’s song is original and creative. EchoCraft’s song is not transformative, copies
almost all Riven’s words, and harms Riven’s market. The evidence viewed in the light
most favorable to the plaintiff could lead a reasonable jury to find against the defendant,
EchoCraft Productions
John Locke, Attorney for Plaintiff
/s/ John Locke
105

Locke and Associates LLP
220 W. 50st St.
New York, NY 10027

Dated: April 4, 2025

106

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR
THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff​ ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

v.​ ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​
No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA
​

Decision and Final Order

ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant
---------------------------------------------------------------------X
DECISION AND ORDER
Before the court is Defendant EchoCraft Productions’ motion for summary judgment on
Plaintiff Philip Riven’s claims of (1) retaliation in violation of 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-3(a) and (2)
copyright infringement. The court hereby grants Defendant’s motion on both claims.

SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Summary judgment is appropriate when there is no genuine dispute as to material facts
such that the movant is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(a); Anderson v.
Liberty Lobby, 477 U.S. 242 (1986). For summary judgment motions, the burden of proof is on
the moving party, id., here, Defendant EchoCraft Productions.

107

ISSUE 1: RETALIATION
The first issue before the court is whether a reasonable fact finder could find that Riven’s
termination from EchoCraft was in violation of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. To
prevail on this claim, first, a plaintiff must establish a prima facie case of retaliation. In order to
demonstrate a prima facie case, a plaintiff must prove: (1) that he participated in a protected
activity, (2) that the defendant knew of the protected activity, (3) that a materially adverse action
was taken against him (stipulated here), and (4) that there was a relationship or causal connection
between the protected activity and the adverse action. Littlejohn v. City of New York,

795 F.3d

297, 315-16 (2015). If the plaintiff can establish a prima facie case, the burden then shifts to the
defendant to set forth a legitimate, non-retaliatory reason for the actions taken. McDonnell
Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802-04. If the defendant does so, the plaintiff must then show that the
defendant’s proffered reason is a pretext for retaliation. Id.
Here, no reasonable factfinder could find that Plaintiff Riven was engaged in a protected
activity when he engaged in his investigation. Under 42 U.S.C. § 2000e–3(a) an employee’s
conduct is characterized as protected if it was done in opposition to conduct prohibited by the
equal opportunity laws or if it was in participation of a formal EEOC complaint. Since Riven’s
investigation was not in opposition to conduct protected under the equal opportunity laws and
does not satisfy the participation clause, it is not a protected activity. Id.
Second, no reasonable factfinder could find that EchoCraft knew that Riven was engaged
in an investigation meant to determine if the bonus assignment system discriminated on the basis
of gender.
Finally, no reasonable factfinder could find a causal connection between Riven’s alleged
engagement in a protected activity and his ultimate termination. In order to show a causal
108

connection a plaintiff may show a close temporal proximity to his conduct and the adverse
action, disparate treatment in comparison to a similarly situated employee, or retaliatory
animus on the part of the defendant. Gordon v. N.Y.C. Bd. of Educ., 232 F.3d 111, 117 (2d Cir.
2000). Here, none of those apply and therefore this prong too must fail.
In conclusion, because no reasonable factfinder could find plaintiff has made out a prima
facie case, the Plaintiff's claim fails, and Defendant’s motion for summary judgement is granted.

ISSUE 2: FAIR USE
The question at issue with respect to Philip Riven’s copyright infringement claim is
whether EchoCraft’s use of “Revere Paul Revere” is protected under the fair use defense as
defined in 17 U.S.C. § 107. Because this Court finds that a balancing of the four fair use factors
favors a finding of fair use, EchoCraft is not liable for copyright infringement.
17 U.S.C. § 107 clearly outlines that a fair use of a copyrighted work is protected from
copyright infringement claims. Id. More specifically, “fair use of a copyrighted work, including
such use by reproduction in copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that
section, for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including multiple
copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research is not an infringement of copyright.” 17
U.S.C. § 107. To determine whether a use constitutes fair use, the statute provides four factors to
consider:
(1)​

The purpose and character of the use, including whether such use is

of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational purposes;
(2)​ The nature of the copyrighted work;

109

(3)​

The amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to

the copyrighted work as a whole; and
(4)​

The effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of the

copyrighted work.
Id.
In cases such as the one before us, the first factor invites us to determine “whether and to
what extent the new work is transformative.” Campbell, 510 U.S. at 579. We find that EchoCraft’s
work was highly transformative because it presented a fresh perspective on Revere’s legacy.
Moreover, there is not enough evidence to tie the publication of EchoCraft’s song to overall sales
growth. Therefore, we find that EchoCraft’s use was of a non-profit nature. See Harper & Row
Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enters., 471 U.S. 539 (1985).
Turning now to a consideration of the second factor, we find that Riven’s song is a creative
work. This cuts against a finding of fair use. See Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone
Service Co., 499 U.S. 340, 348–51 (1991). However, joined with a consideration of the other fair
use factors, this finding alone is not sufficient to disentitle EchoCraft to the fair use defense.
Campbell, 510 U.S. at 578.
The third factor requires this Court to see if the “quantity and value of the materials used
are reasonable in relation to the purpose of the copying.” Id. at 586. We find that EchoCraft’s
borrowing from Riven’s work was not so excessive as to outweigh the finding of transformation.
The extent of qualitative transformation outweighs the quantitative borrowing. Campbell, 510
U.S. at 577.
Lastly, Harper & Row Publishers, Inc. tells us that fair use is limited to “copying by
others which does not materially impair the marketability of the work which is copied.” 471 U.S.
110

539, 566-67 (1985). The highly transformative use of “Revere Paul Revere” in “Revere Paul
Revere?” did not harm the market for the former. Because EchoCraft’s version was more
historically accurate and suitable for classroom use, we find that it was not a “direct substitute”
for Riven’s song. Authors Guild v. Google, Inc., 804 F.3d 202, 223 (2d Cir. 2015).
The Court holds that under these factors, taken together, EchoCraft’s use constituted a fair
use. The defendant is thus entitled to summary judgment.

CONCLUSION
Defendant’s motion for summary judgment is hereby granted.

IT IS SO ORDERED
Date: August 14, 2025

William Rogers
/s/ William Rogers
Judge, U.S. District Court
Southern District of New York

111

IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT FOR
THE SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK
--------------------------------------------------------------------X
PHILIP RIVEN,
Plaintiff,​ ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

v.​ ​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​
No. 1:23-cv-45678-CBA
​

NOTICE OF APPEAL

ECHOCRAFT PRODUCTIONS,
Defendant.
---------------------------------------------------------------------X
Notice is hereby given that Plaintiff Philip Riven appeals the decision handed down by the
District Court for the Southern District of New York granting EchoCraft Productions’ motion
for summary judgment to United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit

John Locke, Attorney for Plaintiff
/s/ John Locke
Locke and Associates LLP
82 W. 57th St.
New York, NY 10027
Dated: September 9, 2025

112

