2026 First-Year
Moot Court Program
Handbook

Privately printed for the exclusive use of students at
Columbia Law School.
Not Published. All rights reserved.

2025-2026 Moot Court Leadership
Student Leadership
Ezeudo J. Maduka​
Executive Director​ ​
​
​
​
​
​
​
​
Courtney E. Chan & Margaret Chang ​
Managing Directors (Judicial)​
​
​
Amber Duan​
​
​
​
Managing Director (Administrative)​ ​

​
​

​
​

​

​

​ Kaylie Chen
First-Year Program Director​
​
​
​
​
​
​ Cody Huyan & Sydney A. Myers
Specialized Moot Program Directors​ ​

​
​

​
​

Marina S. Dolgova & Sophia Cronin
Stone Moot Court Directors

​

Matthew J. Dowling
Director of Community Programs​

Faculty and Staff
Sophia Bernhardt​
Exec. Director of Legal Writing and Moot Court Programs​
​
Daniel Richman​
Faculty Director of Stone Moot Court Program​
Lynnise Pantin
Pritzker Pucker Family Clinical Professor of Transactional Law;
Vice Dean for Experiential Education
​

Amanda Sen-Villalobos
Director of Legal Writing and Moot Court Programs
Jahmal Ojeda
Program Administrator

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Moot Court Spring 2026 Semester Schedule​

Page 1

Introduction​

Page 2

Moot Court CourseWorks Page​

Page 2

Summary of Rules​

Page 3

Prohibited Conduct and Materials; Plagiarism and Unauthorized Collaboration ​
​
​
Learning the Case​

Page 4

Description of the Case Assignment​

Page 6

Learning the Law​

Page 7

Writing Your Brief​

Page 8

Standard of Review​

Page 11

Relief Requested​

Page 11

Responding to Contrary Authority and Opponent’s Arguments​

Page 12

Formal Brief Writing Requirements and Regulations​

Page 15

Oral Argument​

Page 18

Appendix: Sample Brief​

Page 20

Page 5

Moot Court Spring 2026 Semester Assignments & Deadlines1

​

Week of 1/19/26​
​
Due Week 2​ ​

​

​

Records distributed

​

​

Description of the Case

Due Week 3​ ​

​

​

Outline for Moot Court brief

Consult Individual Instructors ​

First draft of Moot Court brief

Consult Individual Instructor​

Second draft of Moot Court brief, including Questions
Presented, Headings, and other formal requirements

Due 3/24/26​ ​

Final draft of Moot Court brief

​

​

NO BRIEFS WILL BE ACCEPTED AFTER THIS DEADLINE.
April 13​

​

​

​

Stone Moot Court Final Arguments (1Ls attend in the
audience)

April 14, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22 & 23​

Foundation Oral Arguments

Due four days after argument​

Self-critique of Moot Court oral argument​

1

Please consult with your instructor and your syllabus to confirm all deadlines. Many deadlines vary from one
section to the next, in part depending upon when your first class session meets.
1

Introduction
Welcome to the Columbia Law School First Year Moot Court Program. This program is a
continuation of the Legal Practice Workshop. After a semester of studying the law, this program will
provide you with your first opportunity to practice advocating. Throughout the semester, please
continue to refer to your legal writing textbook — Richard K. Neumann, Jr., et al., Legal Reasoning
and Legal Writing — as well as any other texts and materials that your instructor may distribute.
Over the next few weeks, you will research your topic thoroughly, learning the legal status of the
issue and developing the best arguments for your side. Then, with the help of your instructor and
Teaching Fellow, you will write an argument that zealously advocates your client’s position. Your
argument and your partner’s argument will form the foundation of the brief you will submit. After
Spring Break, you will argue the position set forth in your brief before a panel consisting of
Columbia Law School alumni, other legal practitioners, and upper-year student judges.
Although your client and case are fictitious, the issues you will litigate are very real. Strong legal
arguments can be made for both sides. Taken seriously, the Program will hone your rhetorical skills
and will provide you with a stimulating and enjoyable experience in written and oral advocacy.
A note about your Teaching Fellows (also referred to as “Moot Court Student Editors”): These 2Ls
and 3Ls were selected based on their own performance in the Moot Court program and their
enthusiasm about working with others. They were in your position not too long ago and are well
equipped to guide you in the coming weeks. Your Teaching Fellow’s job is to help you explore your
legal talents and to push you to do your best work. Their position relative to you in the Program is
akin to that of a senior lawyer in a law office. You should consider your Teaching Fellow to be a
colleague and peer, but keep in mind that your Teaching Fellow does have authority to set and
enforce deadlines. If a problem develops between you and your Teaching Fellow, you should contact
your instructor and/or the First-Year Program Director or the Executive Director of Legal Writing
and Moot Court Programs, who oversee both you and your Teaching Fellow.

Moot Court CourseWorks Page
There are two CourseWorks pages relevant to this class: (i) your individual LPW section’s page; and
(ii) the Foundation Moot Court page. You have been given access to both pages. Please contact
your Teaching Fellow or instructor if you have trouble accessing CourseWorks.
Much of the information you will need to successfully complete your assignments can be found on
the Foundation Moot Court CourseWorks page. Most notably, you can visit the CourseWorks page
and download your Moot Court Record if you have not received it from your LPW instructor.
Your individual LPW section’s CourseWorks page will contain information about your weekly class.
Each instructor uses this page differently, and you should check it regularly.

2

Summary of Rules
The Moot Court rules and regulations can be found throughout this Handbook. Below is a brief
summary of the pertinent rules. Please read the Handbook carefully for more details.
Deadlines
Final briefs must be turned in on time (Tuesday, March 24, 2026). Your instructor and
Teaching Fellows cannot grant extensions for the final briefs. These extensions can only be granted
by the Program Director, who will not grant them except in extraordinary and compelling
circumstances. The other due dates on the list are subject to modification by your instructor and
Teaching Fellow, who have the sole discretion to determine how many drafts you must submit (a
minimum of two) and when those drafts are due. Failure to meet intermediate deadlines may result
in the withholding of credit for Moot Court, regardless of whether you turn in a final brief on time.
Brief Requirements
Each author’s argument section must be at least 8 pages long, and must be no more than 15 pages
long. Briefs must be typed with standard 1" margins. The only permitted fonts are 12-point Calibri
and 12-point Times New Roman. All text must be double-spaced except for quotations more than
49 words in length (which should be single-spaced and indented as block quotes, pursuant to The
Bluebook), and headings. Your final brief must be signed (electronically), for online
submission.
All citations in your brief must conform to the standards set forth in the “Bluepages” section of the
current edition of The Bluebook and/or the citation rules governing the jurisdiction for your
problem. Consult your Editor about which citation rules to use. Improper citation form is a ground
for rejection of the submitted brief.
Briefs must include the following sections (note that your instructor may choose to add an additional
section(s) to this list):​
1.​
2.​
3.​
4.​
5.​
6.​
7.​
8.​
9.​
10.​
11.​

Cover Page
Table of Contents
Table of Authorities
Stipulations
Jurisdictional Statement
Statutory and Constitutional Provisions Involved
Questions Presented
Statement of the Case (including relevant facts, procedural history, and identification
of the rulings presented for review)
Summary of Argument
Argument
Conclusion
3

Prohibited Conduct and Materials; Plagiarism and
Unauthorized Collaboration
You should discuss your case with your partner early and often. You may also discuss your problem
with your classmates and take part in any peer-editing exercises assigned by your LPW instructor.
However, you are responsible for writing your portion of the brief. You should review the Law
School rules concerning plagiarism and unauthorized collaboration, including the AI policy. These
rules will be strictly enforced. In the past, violations have resulted in disciplinary action.
If your case appears to be based on an actual controversy, you are free to read the decisions
stemming therefrom. You are prohibited, however, from reading the actual briefs submitted in the
real case, even if those briefs are available online. Furthermore, under no circumstances are you to
read the briefs of other student advocates who have argued or are arguing similar issues, nor may
you read any Teaching Fellow’s Bench Memorandum on your issue or a similar issue. You are also
prohibited from viewing an oral argument on your case—except for practice arguments conducted
by your Legal Practice Workshop instructor and/or Teaching Fellow—prior to your own argument.
Violation of any of these rules is a ground for failure of Moot Court and LPW II.
Use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (“AI”):
1. Writing
Students may use a spell-check program to search for typographical errors. Aside from spell-check,
students may not use Chat GPT, Lexis Briefcheck, Lexis+AI/Protege, Westlaw Precision with
CoCounsel, Harvey, the generative AI features in Grammarly, or any other form of artificial
intelligence to generate text or edit their written work on the brief. Students are also prohibited
from uploading their moot court record to any AI platform.
In accordance with the policy above, improper uses of AI include:
●​ Using AI to generate any words, sentences, paragraphs, or any other portion of the brief.
●​ Using AI to rewrite, rephrase or edit things you have already written.
●​ Copying AI-generated legal analysis or case summaries
●​ Uploading the moot court record (or any other course materials) to any AI platform.
●​ Uploading another student’s work to any AI platform
2. Research
​
Students may use all of the research tools at their disposal, including AI-assisted tools.
However, students are cautioned that while AI is now embedded in many of the research engines
that lawyers use, this poses a significant challenge for law students and new attorneys, who are still
building the research and analytical skills needed to assess AI-generated search results. Because large
language models can generate text that sounds clear and convincing, AI-generated search results may
seem authoritative even when they are inaccurate or woefully incomplete.
4

At the very least, students must do the following to assess the accuracy of AI-generated
research results:
●​ Read each authority (case/statute/regulation/etc.) before citing or relying on it. Students
may not rely on AI-generated summaries to avoid reading the legal authorities.
●​ Before citing any case or legal authority, students should check whether the source is real and
whether it is still “good law” and has not been overturned or superseded.
●​ Students should use their own judgment to determine whether a source of law supports the
point that they wish to make, since AI-generated summaries are often inaccurate,
incomplete, or may mischaracterize the holding.

Learning the Case
Everything you need to know about your case’s facts and procedural history is contained in the
Record that you will obtain from the Moot Court CourseWorks page. The Record is a history of the
progress of the case, beginning with the initial pleadings and concluding with the final order of the
trial court and the notice of appeal or motion for permission to appeal. Your case may be criminal or
civil, and it may be set in federal or state court. The court may be real (e.g., the New York Court of
Appeals, the United States Supreme Court), or it may be fictitious (e.g., the Supreme Court of Kent,
the Thirteenth Circuit). You may be the party who lost below and is seeking review (the “Appellant”
or “Petitioner”) or the party who succeeded below and is seeking an affirmance (the “Appellee” or
“Respondent”).
The Record also serves a critical function for you as an appellate lawyer: It defines the scope of the
controversy and sets the limits of the factual setting on appeal. The Record will tell you which
questions are presented on appeal and will provide the framework in which you will argue these
questions. Be sure to read the “Stipulations” section of your Record before beginning your
research, as this section will tell you if certain issues are off-limits. Although stipulations like
these do not exist in practice, they are used in the Moot Court program as a way to limit the
potential scope of a Moot Court problem.
Rules of civil and criminal procedure play an important role in how you should view your Record.
For example, many Moot Court problems are framed as appeals from some type of summary
judgment disposition. As you learned in Civil Procedure, a court reviewing a grant of summary
judgment must construe the facts in the light most favorable to the party appealing the order.
In our Moot Court program, you enter the case after the Record has been prepared and submitted
to the appellate court. As counsel, your first step must be to familiarize yourself thoroughly with the
Record. You must fully understand the positions of the parties and the nature of the action. You
must know who made which motions and what the responses were. Was there a motion to dismiss?
A summary judgment motion? Did the case reach trial on the merits? Which judgments or orders
are on appeal? What is the appropriate standard of review? A thorough understanding of the history
and status of your case is essential to effective appellate advocacy.
Over the next few weeks, you will perform five tasks, which together constitute the brief-writing
5

process:
1.​
2.​
3.​
4.​
5.​

Learn the case and facts,
Research your issues,
Write a description of the case and preliminary statement of facts,
Outline your argument, and
Write 2-3 drafts of your brief.

While you will develop your own method of familiarizing yourself with your case, we suggest the
following: Start by reading the entire Record carefully, considering the function of each document.
Everything you need to know about the issues in your case can be found somewhere in the Record.
One of the last documents you will probably see in your Record is an opinion rendered on the legal
issues by the court below. That opinion will contain some of the reported cases relevant to those
issues. Find those, and read them carefully. Brief those cases as you read them, and begin to picture
for yourself the legal controversy at issue. Read the relevant statutes carefully as well.
Perhaps there is a “split” among the federal circuits or the states about how to resolve a dispute. In
that event, you may need to persuade your court to follow one approach while your opponent seeks
to draw them toward the other. Perhaps two lines of controlling authority appear to conflict, or
perhaps the applicability of one or the other depends on particular facts. If so, you may need to
convince the court that your case is analogous to one line of authority while your opponent tries to
link it to the other. The point is that you must articulate clearly the result you seek, and begin to
think about the most inviting line to that result and proffer the most persuasive authority to support
it.
When you know what your challenge is, spend some time thinking about which might be the most
important facts in your Record. We cannot emphasize this aspect of preparation enough. Courts do
not decide legal issues in a vacuum. Instead, they apply the law to a particular set of facts. As an
advocate, you have to do more than argue for a particular legal result. You must explain the facts to
the court and then argue that the law compels a particular result under those facts, using arguments
based on case law, statutes/regulations and, perhaps, public policy. Thus, a complete knowledge of
all the facts and their significance is essential. Remember that you are telling your client’s story
and urging the court to accept your interpretation of the significance of the facts.​

Description of the Case Assignment
Broadly speaking, this is your high-level explanation of what is going on with this appeal. In your
Description of the Case, you will include four sections: (1) Cases/Rules/Statutes Involved; (2) your
provisional theory of the case; (3) your opponent’s anticipated theory of the case; and (4) a
preliminary overview of facts. In the Cases/Rules/Statutes Involved section, you should provide the
most relevant language of the various rules, statutes, and perhaps even cases, implicated by the
appeal. If possible, you should provide the names of the 2–5 major cases that you will be drawing
upon, and generally what these are about. In the theory of the case section, describe who your client
is, what your client is trying to accomplish, and what you are going to argue on your client’s behalf.
This should be no more than one or two paragraphs; you will drill down into detail as you complete
your research and start drafting your brief. In the opponent’s theory of the case, describe what you
6

think the other side is going to say (this can be as short as one paragraph). In the preliminary
statement of facts you are simply telling your client’s story and the story of the litigation to date.
Your instructor may request this in narrative form (the default) or simply bullet points. The
expectation is that you will spend the bulk of this first week reading and thinking, and write
something up only after you have done this.

Learning the Law
Once you have become thoroughly familiar with the facts of your case, you are ready to learn the
applicable law. You should begin by reading the cases cited in the lower court opinion, if any. While
this opinion may be instructive, it will not nearly suffice to teach you what you need to know. In fact,
you should not rely upon the lower court opinion blindly; the lower court’s interpretation of
the cases is open to dispute.
You should never cite a case for a particular proposition without reading it yourself. A sharp
appellate lawyer can often find factual distinctions or opinions in dicta that may help diminish (or
further support) a decision’s precedential force. Also, a judge’s opinion rarely, if ever, refers to all the
case law that may be relevant. It may interest you to know that last semester, your Teaching Fellow
wrote a substantial legal memorandum on the issue you will research and brief, but even your
Teaching Fellow may have missed a case or two that you might find, or she may have failed to see an
argument or subtle distinction that you might raise.
How do you find other cases relevant to your case? The procedures you will follow during this
exercise are exactly the same as those you will follow as a beginning attorney. You can begin with a
single case cited in your Record, if the trial court opinion includes case law. By reading the cases
cited within that opinion, you can learn something about the law as it had developed before that
opinion. By using a database like Lexis or Westlaw, you can determine if other courts have cited the
decision, and if so, for what proposition. Also, some of the language in the opinion may give you an
idea of how to construct Lexis or Westlaw queries.
In your Fall Legal Practice Workshop course, you learned the basic techniques of legal research. The
Moot Court program is designed to help you continue to develop and refine those skills. The
secondary sources you were introduced to last semester—ALRs, case digests, legal encyclopedias,
law review articles, etc.—are still there for you. AI-enabled tools (which may be accurate in broad
strokes, but less trustworthy on specifics) may also be helpful at the outset when you are seeking a
general understanding of the issues. There is no magic formula for legal research; it is a process of
trial and error. Each time you go through this process, you’ll get better at finding what you need
quickly and efficiently. You may hit a few dead-ends, but that’s part of the process and you’ll
eventually find your way.
Your approach to Moot Court research has to be a methodical one. You certainly do not have to
read every case that deals with your issue, but you should attempt (1) to identify the approaches
courts have used to address it, and (2) to locate a few examples of cases that use each approach. You
should look for cases that explain the applicable principles in ways that are useful to you or that
apply these principles to factual situations that are analogous to those in your case. You will know
that your research is coming to an end when the cases you are finding begin to cite each other.
7

Writing Your Brief
Below are some important components of the brief that merit close attention. When writing these
sections, consult the Sample Briefs located at the back of this Handbook. While you should follow
the format of the examples, by no means are you required to mimic their styles. You may choose
to explain the facts chronologically, or in some other order. You may refer to your client and your
adversary by name, or by their current position (e.g. “Appellant” or “Appellee”). The summaries
may be very detailed, or they may include only those details you believe are immediately relevant.
Your instructor and Teaching Fellow will help you select and perfect the style best suited to your
problem.
INTRODUCTORY SECTIONS OF THE BRIEF
As you write your brief, remember that it must include a number of introductory sections (note that
your instructor may choose to add an “Introduction” or “Preliminary Statement” to this list):
1.​
2.​
3.​
4.​
5.​
6.​

Cover Page
Table of Contents
Table of Authorities
Stipulations
Jurisdictional Statement
Statutory and Constitutional Provisions Involved

The cover page should roughly duplicate the cover of your Record. In the lower right hand corner,
you should add your name and your partner’s name, along with “Columbia Law School” and your
graduation date (i.e., “Class of 2026”).
The table of contents should include, verbatim, a list of all the headings and subheadings you use in
your brief and the page number on which each appears. Word has an automatic table of contents
generators. You should learn how to use this before you begin writing. That way, you can “mark”
your subheadings for the generator as you go along.
The same is true for the table of authorities, which is a list of all cases and other materials you cite
in your brief along with every page on which reference to each authority is made. Word’s
table-of-authorities generator is relatively easy to use, but you must learn how to use it before you
begin.
You will also need to include a list of stipulations, which are nothing more than the parameters for
your problem. Stipulations may provide that you cannot cite certain cases, or that certain procedural
issues are not in dispute. Into your own brief, copy the list of stipulations listed in your Record, and
add one of your own: The last stipulation in your Brief should read: “[Partner One] wrote
Part One, and [Partner Two] wrote Part Two.”
The jurisdictional statement is a sentence or two explaining the basis of subject matter jurisdiction
over the case in the trial and appellate courts.
8

The statutory and constitutional provisions involved section quotes the statutes or constitutional
provisions cited in the Record or in your brief. It should be single-spaced.
QUESTIONS PRESENTED
These are succinct summaries of each of the issues. Each question should be a single sentence and
should be framed to favor the position of the party you are representing. For guidance on this, see
the discussion in chapter 31 of the Neumann text.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE
The Statement of the Case should (i) describe the facts relevant to the issues submitted for review,
(ii) identify the relevant procedural history, (iii) and set out the ruling(s) presented for review. Each
fact and point of procedural history that you present in the Statement should have a citation to the
page of the record where that fact may be found (e.g., “R. 3”).
​
The Statement of the Case includes what is traditionally referred to as the “Statement of the Facts.”
Once you believe that you have mastered your case’s facts, you will write a concise, well-organized
summary in paragraph form of what transpired between the time of the parties’ first relevant action
and the time the suit was commenced. You and your partner can work on this separately or together,
but ultimately you are each responsible for the content. Each team of two should submit one
joint Statement of the Case. Be careful: often a fact is only relevant to one issue and so you may
miss facts that are important for the issue that your partner is working on, and vice versa. Also, it is
important to remember that all of the critical facts must be present in the Statement of the
Case—even those that undermine your position. You will lose credibility with the court if you
present only the facts that are helpful for your side. However, be careful not to detract from
important facts with unnecessary, unhelpful details. You should feel free to emphasize the facts that
are most favorable. Finally, all facts used in the Argument section must be included in the Statement
of the Case. See the Neumann text for further guidance.
SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT
The Summary of Argument should be written after the argument sections are complete. It is a short
(roughly 1-2 pages) summary of both your argument and your partner’s argument. You should work
closely with your partner to edit this section so that it reads like it was drafted by one person. Your
instructor may also add an “Introduction” section to your brief; should they choose to do so, they
will explain the difference between these two sections.
ARGUMENT
The Argument section is where you explain your client’s legal position in detail. When you start your
research, remember what it is you are looking for: support for your client’s position. Carefully
highlight language and principles in cases or statutes you think will be useful. As you do so, start
thinking about how to structure your argument. What points are most strongly in your favor? Which
cases most effectively back up your position? What are the weak points in your position, and how
will you deal with them? Don’t be afraid to write down thoughts whenever they come to you.
9

Your Teaching Fellow and instructor will give you specific ideas about how to structure the
argument in your particular case. Once you have familiarized yourself with the applicable law, you
will be able to discuss the issues in depth with your Teaching Fellow and/or instructor. They will
help you organize your thoughts. In the end, however, it is your brief. You can argue it however and
in whatever way you think will be most effective. The following general comments are meant only to
guide you (you should also refer to chapters 23-26, and 29-31 of the Neumann text):
1.​
A brief is meant to persuade judges, and you must constantly be aware of this central
purpose while you are writing.
2.​
To be effective, a brief should make the judges’ jobs easier. Judges would obviously prefer
not to have to repeat the methodological research process you have just undertaken. They would
much rather be able to write an opinion using only the briefs as a reference to the applicable law and
facts. Your brief, therefore, should educate the judges about the relevant law at the same time as it
convinces them that your reading of the law is the correct one.
3.​
Explain the law to the judges as you would want someone to explain it to you. Don’t bore
the court with an abstract discussion of the relevant law. Instead, direct the court’s attention
specifically to what is important. It helps to have a consistent theory of the case running through
your brief that the judges can follow.
4.​
Argue your own position, and let your opponent take care of his or her own arguments.
What you are writing is not a legal memo; it is a partisan argument. This does not mean, however,
that you should ignore contrary precedent. Ethics rules require you to disclose controlling contrary
authority to the court (i.e., from the same court or from a court that is in the direct appellate line
above it). The applicable rule is Rule 3.3 (a)(2) of the Model Rules of Professional Conduct and the
New York Rules of Professional Conduct. Your reasons for disclosing adverse authority that is
merely persuasive may be more strategic: Candid recognition of contrary authority can win the
court’s confidence, provided that you go on to distinguish the cases or explain that the better policy
arguments favor your position over your opponent’s position. (See the section below on
“Responding to Contrary Authority.”)
5.​
Do not be afraid to leave out minor arguments. Choose the strongest arguments, develop
them well, and stand by them. A “laundry list” of arguments may dilute the power of your best
points by distracting the judges. The inclusion of weak points, moreover, may indicate to the judges
that you are desperate, or that you don’t know what your strongest points really are. On the other
hand, you might be able to make a series of arguments without being bogged down in them. In this,
as well as in countless other situations, lawyers must choose the approach that is most appropriate
for their particular case.
6.​
As to organization and sequence, the points of your argument should follow some logical
sequence. Within a point, however, it is effective to put the strongest argument first. Your brief is
not a work of fiction in which your aim might be to keep your reader in suspense; you want to tell
the court up front what your position is, and then support it (with relevant facts, persuasive
authority, statutory cites, policy arguments, etc.).
10

Standard of Review
When you write your Argument, you must include at least one paragraph setting forth the correct
standard of review for your issue and, if necessary, an argument for that standard. The standard of
review dictates the amount of deference an appellate court must give to the factual and legal findings
made by the lower court(s) in that particular case and limits the extent to which an appellate court
may replace a lower court’s judgment with its own. It will depend on a number of factors, including
the court itself (e.g., federal v. state, intermediate appellate v. highest appellate), the nature of the case
(civil v. criminal), and the type of error alleged. There are two general standards of review: one that
requires the appellate court to defer to the lower court unless the lower court’s decision is irrational
(i.e. “abuse of discretion” or “clearly erroneous”), and a less deferential standard that allows the
appellate court to substitute its own judgment for that of the lower court (“de novo”). The standard
of review that a court uses can have a significant impact on the outcome: Errors that are grounds for
reversal under one standard may be insignificant under another. Since the standard of review for one
issue may differ from the standard or review for any other issue on appeal, it is important to state
the correct standard for each issue in your case.
The questions presented in your case may be questions of law or mixed questions of law and fact.
When an appellate court is reviewing the choice, interpretation, or application of legal precepts, the
standard of review is typically de novo. For most of you, this will be the correct standard of review
for your issue. It is important to note, however, that factual conclusions made by the lower court
(whether by judge or by jury), and decisions about how a trial should be conducted (e.g., evidentiary
rulings) are always given great deference. For example, a challenge to the lower court’s application of
law to the facts would be reviewed de novo, whereas a challenge to a trial judge’s factual findings
would be reviewed under the more deferential abuse of discretion/clearly erroneous standard. The
standard of review for appeals from summary judgment dispositions is typically de novo, because
the lower court decided the motion on the basis of written submissions and did not examine
witnesses, assess credibility, or make any of the other purely factual findings that would warrant a
more deferential standard of review.

Relief Requested
Every party to an action is seeking some type of relief from the court. For example, at the trial level,
civil plaintiffs often request relief in the form of an injunction or monetary damages; district
attorneys or United States attorneys as prosecutors seek conviction; and both civil and criminal
defendants usually seek dismissal. At the appellate level, however, parties can only request one of
three possible outcomes: appellate courts can affirm the decision below, reverse it, or remand it for
further proceedings. You should always keep in mind the type of relief you are seeking and tailor
your brief and oral arguments to reflect that request.

11

Responding to Contrary Authority and Opponent’s
Arguments
Whether you are acting as Appellant or Appellee, you will have to devote a substantial portion of
your brief to distinguishing, refuting or otherwise responding to cases that appear to support your
opponent’s position. Each Moot Court problem is intended to be balanced; accordingly, both you
and your opponent should have a number of viable arguments to make. In order to make your own
argument effective, however, you must do more than merely assert the positive aspects of your own
position. You must also convince the court that the outcome or approach that you are advocating is
superior to that advanced by your opponent.
In attempting to distinguish or respond to cases that your opponents cite (or that you expect them
to cite), you must ask yourself four questions:
1.​
Has the holding in the adverse case been narrowed or clarified by the court that issued the
decision, i.e., has the court in subsequent opinions suggested that the holding should not be
construed as broadly as your opponent hopes?
2.​
Are there favorable lower or parallel court cases that you might be able to argue are factually
similar to your case?
3.​
If neither of the above is true, can you suggest your own factual distinction that might cast
doubt on the applicability of the adverse case?
4.​
If the holding of the earlier case is directly on point and not otherwise distinguishable, can
you suggest a policy-based reason why your court should abandon its earlier approach in favor of
the one you suggest?
Each Moot Court problem is unique, and this Handbook does not attempt to suggest a uniform
strategy for responding to contrary authority. Once you begin to master the law of your case,
however, you will instinctively know the basic direction your opponent’s argument should take.
Many Moot Court problems will be cases of first impression in the jurisdiction. In some cases, the
entire subject matter will be new to the court. In others, the court will be called on to apply existing
law to your particular situation. In these cases, your judges will be very interested in knowing how
other courts have handled similar cases. You will have your own supporting cases, of course, but
your opponents will have cases in their favor, too. You must be prepared, in both your brief and
your oral argument, to tell the judges that they should follow your line of cases and not your
opponent’s line.
1.​
At the same time you are pursuing your own line of authority in the steps outlined earlier,
you also have to conduct some “opposition research.” Your Record’s lower court opinion may cite
to cases that go against you, as well as cases that favor you. Those are the cases that your opponents
are researching in the same manner that you are researching your supportive authority. By walking a
few steps in your opponent’s shoes, you can learn how to attack their position.
12

2.​
Try Shepardizing or KeyCiting the cases that support your opponent. This time, you are
looking for cases that overrule, distinguish or narrow the holding.
3.​
This approach is not foolproof, however. Every case is different, and even cases that a
citator states as following your adverse precedent may do so for a reason that is favorable to you.
Again, it is important to actually read all cases that you are thinking of citing.
4.​
What you are looking for in these subsequent cases is simple: anything that may help you call
the applicability or persuasiveness of the original authority into question. Look for useful language
not only in majority opinions, but in concurrences and dissents.
5.​
If a case has not been cited for a while, that may itself be evidence that the case is no longer
powerful authority. If you see a citation list “trail off ”, you may want to follow the trail—the cases
most helpful to you may not even cite the case you are trying to distinguish.
What you do with the distinctions once you find them is up to you. You may want to write a
separate subsection dealing with your opponent’s position, or distinguish that position as needed
within each subsection of your own. As with the rest of the brief, you must develop your own style
for responding to adverse authority. Where you put such responses in the brief, and the tone you use
when responding, are matters of personal choice. However, some approaches are definitely more
effective than others.
Ethics rules require you to disclose contrary authority to the court if it is controlling (i.e., from the
same court or from a court that is in the direct appellate line above it). MODEL RULES OF PROF’L
CONDUCT R. 3.3(a)(2). (The New York Rules of Professional Conduct also have this provision.)
Most likely, your case will not involve such authority, but if it does, you must forthrightly state to the
court the existence of the contrary holding. You need not explain it in any detail, but you must not
misrepresent it in any way. You are free, however, to distinguish it as you see fit.
Whether you are representing the Appellant or the Appellee, remember that your job is to make
your own case. Your purpose is not to lay out your opponent’s position. An Appellee will not want
to address every single argument made by the Appellant, but will certainly want to take on the
primary points. Similarly, an Appellant (who can only try to anticipate what the Appellee will argue)
may not want to address subtle points that the Appellee may or may not make. Instead, each
Appellant should concentrate on what they think will be the primary focus of the opponent’s
argument, and then dismantle the opponent’s largest weapons case by case.
The Moot Court program differs in at least one important respect from actual practice. In actual
appellate practice, the attorney for the Appellant submits a brief first. The attorney for the Appellee
then has an opportunity – typically several weeks – to read the Appellant’s brief and prepare a brief
that will respond directly to the Appellant’s arguments. In addition, after receiving the Appellee’s
brief the attorney for the Appellant often has an opportunity to submit a “reply brief ” that responds
to the Appellee’s arguments. In the Moot Court program, such staggering of deadlines is
impractical, so the Appellants and Appellees have the same briefing deadlines. Your Editor will
work with you to help ensure that the brief you write addresses the arguments your opponent will be
making in her or his brief. Some instructors give their students an opportunity to read their
13

opponents’ briefs and make final revisions before submitting their final drafts. You should discuss
this with your instructor and Editor.
Finally, whether you are writing for the Appellant or the Appellee, tone is critically important. It may
be tempting to use sarcasm, or to try somehow to belittle your opponent or their arguments. You
should avoid doing so. Judges do not appreciate such tactics, and they will likely be held against you.
If your opponent’s position is really that strange or off-base, the court will come to that conclusion
on its own. A signal to the court that your opponent “misstates the facts” of a case, or that a “case is
inapposite,” is usually enough.

14

Formal Brief Writing Requirements and Regulations
Communications
You should check both CourseWorks sites regularly throughout the semester, as well as follow
whatever communication procedures your Teaching Fellow and/or instructor specifies. Your
Teaching Fellow and instructor are responsible for direct supervision of your case, and you should
direct all questions to them before contacting the First-Year Program Director.

Stipulations and Prohibited Materials
Your problem undoubtedly contains several stipulations. A stipulation may restrict you from using
cases decided after a certain date or from certain jurisdictions. It is also possible that additional
stipulations will be issued during the brief writing process. If such a stipulation appears in your
Record, then you may not cite, quote, or refer to those cases in your brief or at oral argument. You
may not copy the ideas appearing in those cases without citation, as this constitutes plagiarism.
As discussed above, when copying your Record’s stipulations into your brief, you should insert a
stipulation identifying the division of labor, e.g., “John Smith wrote Part One, and Sally Jones wrote
Part Two.” The first Record stipulation should then become the second brief stipulation, the second
Record stipulation should then become the third brief stipulation, and so on.

Research
You should limit yourself to the sources available in the Law School library, or in other Columbia
University libraries if your case requires non-legal materials. You may use Westlaw, Lexis, Bloomberg,
and other online databases. In connection with your research, you may avail yourself of the
assistance of reference librarians and Westlaw/Lexis/Bloomberg reference attorneys. The only
restrictions are those stated above: you may not read any brief written on a similar issue, whether
written by another student or a practitioner; you may not read any Teaching Fellow’s Bench
Memorandum, and you may not read any materials barred by the stipulations listed in your Record.
Unless your Record stipulates otherwise, you may cite unreported cases available on Westlaw or
Lexis notwithstanding court rules to the contrary. Citations to these cases should follow proper
Bluebook format.

Minimum and Maximum Length
Each author’s argument section must be at least 8 pages long, and must be no more than 15 pages
long. Within these parameters, you should note that most judges value conciseness when evaluating
briefs. A 10–12 page argument section is both typical and ideal.

15

Proofreading
Perhaps the most common complaint voiced by alumni judges is that they received briefs
containing typos, misspelled words, and citation errors. There is no substitute for
proofreading—it is not enough to spell-check. Both you and your partner should proofread the
entire brief, not just the sections that you each wrote.

Typesetting
Briefs must be typed with standard 1" margins. The only permitted fonts are 12-point Calibri and
12-point Times New Roman. All text must be double-spaced except for quotations more than 49
words in length and headings, which should be single-spaced and indented. All copies of your brief
handed in for credit must be individually signed by hand.

Citations and Footnotes
All citations in your brief must conform to the standards set forth in the current edition of The
Bluebook, unless the instructions for your problem have directed you to use the local citation rules
of a particular jurisdiction. Improper citation form is a ground for rejection of the submitted brief.
To repeat: An otherwise excellent brief may be returned to the authors, and credit for the exercise
denied, if Bluebook form is not followed.
Do not put citations in footnotes. They distract the reader’s attention from the argument. In fact,
generally avoid footnotes. If an idea is important enough to be included in your brief, it should be
included in the text. Save footnotes for those rare occasions when you have a specific tactical reason
for using them.

Division of Work and Deadlines
You should discuss your case with your partner early and often. You should choose issues and divide
work as soon as you have both read the Record. Please consult your Teaching Fellow or instructor if
you have any questions about the extent of permissible collaboration between you and your partner.
This Handbook contains a schedule that indicates the date on which the final version of your brief is
due. The schedule also contains information pertaining to how many copies of your brief must be
turned in, and where the briefs must be submitted. Your instructor and Teaching Fellow cannot
grant extensions of the final due date. These extensions can only be granted by the First Year
Program Director, who will not grant them except in the most extraordinary and compelling
circumstances. The deadlines are set in order to give the alumni judges sufficient time to review the
briefs in advance of the arguments. The other due dates on the list are subject to modification by
your instructor and Teaching Fellow, who have discretion to determine how many drafts you must
submit and when those drafts are due.
As noted above, failure to meet the intermediate deadlines may result in the withholding of credit
for Moot Court, regardless of whether you turn in a final brief on time. If a student receives an
extension of the final deadline, or if the brief is submitted late without an extension, then the student
16

may be required to hand-deliver the briefs to the alumni judges on his or her panel, or to mail those
briefs to the judges at the author’s expense. Other sanctions (including withholding of credit for
completion of Moot Court) will be determined on a case-by-case basis by the Executive Director of
Legal Writing and Moot Court Programs, in consultation with your Legal Practice Workshop
instructor and the Vice Dean for Experiential Learning.

Sample Brief
Please see the Appendix of this Handbook for a sample student brief from the Harlan Fiske Stone
Moot Court Program. The Neumann text also contains sample appellate briefs in Appendices G &
H. Your Legal Practice Workshop Instructor and Teaching Fellow may also be able to provide you
with samples.

17

Oral Argument
After Spring Break, you will be called upon to defend your position orally before a panel of alumni
and upper-year student “judges.” You should dress in a manner appropriate for attorneys appearing
in court, and sit in the appropriate location (counsel for Appellants on the left side of the room
facing the judges, counsel for Appellees on the right).
At the appointed hour, a bailiff will announce the presence of your judges. All persons in the room,
including counsel, must rise when the judges enter and must remain standing until the judges are
seated. The presiding judge (sitting in the center) will signal the first speaker for the Appellant to
begin. Counsel for the Appellee who wrote on the same issue will argue second. The court will then
hear from the other counsel for the Appellant and Appellee. Each advocate will have fifteen minutes
to speak (although the judges may extend that time allotment), and counsel for the Appellant may
reserve up to two minutes of their time to rebut arguments made by their opponents. If you are
counsel to the Appellant and wish to reserve time, you must indicate that fact to the presiding judge
at the start of your argument. The court will indicate whether it will accede to your request.
Each speaker should begin with the formal greeting, “May it please the Court.” The first words
spoken by the first attorney on either side might be similar to this:
May it please the Court, my name is Sally Jones, counsel for the Appellant, the State
of Kent. I will address the issue of whether the federal courts should consider a
habeas petition that is based on claims of suggestive and unreliable police
identification procedures. My co-counsel, John Smith, will speak on the issue of
ineffective assistance of counsel.
The second speakers for each side should re-introduce themselves and restate the issues they will
address. All four speakers should be fully familiar with the case’s facts.2
Preparation for oral argument involves comprehensive review. Complete knowledge of the Record is
essential; mastery of all the cases cited in your own and your opponent’s brief is also necessary. You
never can predict what kinds of questions the judges will throw at you, so you must be prepared for
anything. If you are caught off-guard by a question, it may be difficult for you to regain your stride.
The Court may ask you to address a point that fits more naturally in your partner’s section. If that
happens, you should provide the best answer you can, and then inform the bench that your partner
will address that issue more fully. Also, if you have discovered mistakes in your brief since you
handed it in, or if your opponent made an important argument that you failed to counter, you must
be prepared to address such issues forthrightly and directly if called upon by the judges to do so.

2

Some groups may have only two or three speakers.
18

Although it is good practice to write out portions of your argument as part of your preparation, your
purpose is to talk to the court, not to read to it. Instead, try writing out a short list of points you
want to be sure to address during the argument. If you are sufficiently prepared, then that should be
enough. This does not mean that you should not refer to the Record when necessary; in fact, you
should do so whenever it would allow you to give a judge a more precise answer to a factual inquiry.
You should therefore be intimately familiar with the Record and what it contains. You should also
prepare a set of short summaries of the cases you and your opponent have cited in your briefs.
While it is unlikely that a judge will ask you to recite the facts of a case, judges commonly ask why a
particular case is relevant.
Judges may constantly interrupt you to ask you questions. Oral argument is not a speech; it is a kind
of conversation. You should pay careful attention to the judges’ questions. They may try to lead you
off track, or they may actually try to help you. Try to think of ways to tie their questions, and your
answers, back to the strong points in your argument.
An effective oral argument supplements the arguments in your brief, rather than simply repeating
them. A common mistake is to barrage the court with every point and sub-point you wrote in the
brief. You do not have time for this, and in any event, the court does not want to hear it. Instead,
you should select the most critical issues and stress them. Be prepared to jump from point to point
as the judges do. “Loop” your answers into the next point you want to address but don’t depart
from an issue if the court plainly is not comfortable with your answers.
When a judge asks you a question, face that judge and give him or her the best answer you can.
Remember to address the judge as “Your Honor” or “Judge.” Each judge carries equal authority on
the bench and is entitled to equal courtesy. Your answers should always be direct, not evasive. If you
do not know an answer, it is better to admit that fact than to fake it. If you do not understand a
question, respectfully ask the judge to clarify it.
For additional guidance about preparing for and conducting oral argument, you should review the
Neumann text.
The First-Year Program is not a competition. We expect, however, that the judges will provide you
with feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of your oral and written advocacy. If you enjoy this
experience, please consider participating in the honors competitions open to 2Ls and 3Ls.

19

Appendix: Sample Brief

20

A WORD ABOUT THE SAMPLE BRIEF
The brief in this Appendix was written by two student finalists in the Harlan Fiske Stone Moot Court
Competition. This is not a “perfect brief ” (there is no such thing), but it is a strong example of
effective brief writing and may be helpful for you to review as you prepare your own submission.
The authors of these briefs do many things effectively. As you review these documents, pay particular
attention to the following:
●​ The Facts. The brief selects facts wisely and presents them persuasively. The authors include
all legally relevant facts as well as some “emotional” facts that draw a reader to their clients’
sides. The facts are presented in a way that tells a compelling story but does not overtly argue
for one side or the other. Finally, the facts in these briefs effectively use Record evidence to
“show not tell” the facts of the case. By doing this, an author presents the reader with details
necessary to support his legal position while still ultimately allowing the reader to draw her own
conclusion. The authors subtly persuade through effective storytelling but do not overtly argue
in this section.
●​ Organization. The brief is logically and persuasively organized at both the macro and micro
levels. With respect to large-scale organization, the brief presents the issues in a way that is
logical and clearly shows how each sub-issue relates to the next (e.g., if the court rejects
argument A, then it can consider argument B). They also make good use of high-level
“roadmapping” paragraphs that explain to the reader the organization of the issues to follow.
Headings throughout the brief provide continued signposts throughout the brief; a reader could
skim these and understand the author’s argument.
On a micro-level, the brief uses CREAC/CRAC to organize the analysis of each sub-issue.
Their analysis section both sets out basic legal rules and explores the nuances of that rule
through brief case discussions. The brief also demonstrates that CREAC is not as rigid as it
might first sound. In several instances, the authors of the briefs vary from the traditional
“formula” by, for example, weaving the explanation of a rule into the application of that rule.
Since the author’s logic is still clear in these sections, this intermingling works well.
●​ Writing Style. These authors are mindful of fundamental writing techniques. They use prose
that is clear and concise. Words are chosen wisely to persuade or emphasize a particular point.
Topic sentences are used effectively to make conclusions and drive the legal analysis forward.

21

Case No. 1:18-CR-10

In the United States Court of Appeals
for the Ninth Circuit

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Plaintiff-Appellee
v.
JORDAN CLARKSON

Defendant-Appellant
On Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of California
The Honorable Florence Allen, Presiding

BRIEF FOR APPELLANT

COLUMBIA LAW SCHOOL
435 West 116th Street
New York, NY 10027

​

Counsel for Appellant

22

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Table of Authorities​
Questions Presented​

iii
1

Stipulations​
Constitutional and Statutory Provisions​

2
3

Statement of the Case​
Statement of Facts​

4
5

A.​ The Motley Collective Criticized the Constance City Government, and the Government
Created a Citywide Task Force to Investigate​
5
B.​ The Government Targeted Streetwise Because of His Chalk Drawings on the Plaza in
Front of the Buford Street Federal Courthouse​

6

C.​ Officers Arabella and Bradwell of the Constance City Police Department Showed up
Unannounced at Mr. Clarkson’s Apartment in the Early-Morning Hours of
March 8, 2018.​
8
Summary of Argument​
10
Argument​
I.​

14

THE DISTRICT COURT ERRED IN ADMITTING INTO EVIDENCE PHOTOS
UNLAWFULLY SEIZED FROM MR. CLARKSON’S COMPUTER UNDER THE
PLAIN VIEW EXCEPTION TO THE FOURTH AMENDMENT.​

14

A.​ The Officers Were Not Lawfully in a Position to View the Computer Because
Mr. Clarkson Did Not Willingly Consent to Their Entry into His Home​

15

B.​ The Officers Did Not Have a Lawful Right of Access to the Contents of Mr.
Clarkson’s Monitor Because Examining that Content Was Beyond the Scope of
Whatever Consent Mr. Clarkson Had Allegedly Given Them, and It Was the
Officers’ Own Actions that Caused that Content to Be Revealed.​

18

1.​ The Officers Exceeded the Scope of the Consent Mr. Clarkson Allegedly Gave
When They Roamed Freely Around His Apartment and Physically Moved to
Examine His Computer.​
19
2.​ It Was the Officers’ Own Conduct that Caused the Information on the Monitors
to Be Revealed.​
21
C.​ The Information in Plain View on Mr. Clarkson’s Computer—a List of JPEG Files
with the “Last Modified” Column Showing—Was Not Immediately
Incriminating.​
22
II.​ THE INEVITABLE DISCOVERY EXCEPTION CANNOT PROVIDE AN

23

ALTERNATIVE BASIS FOR ADMITTING THE UNLAWFULLY SEIZED PHOTOS
INTO EVIDENCE​
25
A.​ The Government Has Not Met Its Burden of Showing that It Would Have Inevitably
Obtained the Photographs if Not for the Illegal Search.​
26
1.​ The Police Would Not Have Inevitably Obtained the Photographs from Another
Member of the Motley Collective​
27
2.​ The Police Also Would Not Have Inevitably Obtained the Photographs from
Google​
28
B.​ The Third-Party Doctrine Does Not Make Discovery of These Photographs
Inevitable​
1.​ The Third-Party Doctrine Does Not Allow the Police to Obtain Contents of
Emails Without a Warrant Supported by Some Showing of Cause​

29
29

2.​ Even if the Third-Party Doctrine Does Apply to Emails, the Government Has
Not Shown that It Would Have Inevitably Obtained These Photographs Absent
the Unlawful Search.​
32
III.​ THE CHALK ART DID NOT “DAMAGE” PROPERTY WITHIN THE MEANING OF
40 U.S.C. § 1316(b).​
34
A.​ The Plain Meaning of “Damaging” Does Not Include Drawing on the Sidewalk
with Chalk.​

34

B.​ The Legislative History of § 1316(b) Shows that Congress Did Not Intend to
Criminalize Conduct that Merely “Defaces” Property.​

39

C.​ Even if the Meaning of “Damaging” Is Ambiguous, the Rule of Lenity Requires
§ 1316(b) to Be Construed in Favor of Mr. Clarkson.​
41
IV.​ AS APPLIED TO THE CHALK ART IN THIS CASE, 40 U.S.C. § 1316(b) IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL UNDER THE FIRST AMENDMENT.​
A.​ As Applied to the Chalk Art in this Case, the Government Impermissibly Used
§ 1316(b) to Prohibit Speech Based on Its Viewpoint​

43
44

B.​ As Applied to the Chalk Art in this Case, § 1316(b) Is Not Narrowly Tailored to
Further Government Interests in Protecting Property, Promoting the Aesthetics of the
Plaza, or Protecting Passersby.​
48
C.​ Prohibiting Chalk Art Under § 1316(b) Would Cut Off a Unique Medium of
Expression that Does Not Have Ample Alternatives​
Conclusion​

51
53

24

TABLE OF AUTHORITIES
CASES​
ACLU of Nev. v. City of Las Vegas,
333 F.3d 1092 (9th Cir. 2003)​
Anderson v. City of Hermosa Beach,
621 F.3d 1051 (9th Cir. 2010) ​
​
​
​
​
​
Arizona v. Hicks,
480 U.S. 321 (1987)​ ​
​
​
​
​
​
​
Ballentine v. Las Vegas Metro. Police Dept.,
No. 2:14–cv–01584–APG–GWF, 2015 WL 2164145 (D. Nev. Apr. 27, 2015)​
Ballentine v. Las Vegas Metro. Police Dept.,
No. 2:14–cv–01584–APG–GWF, 2017 WL 3610609 (D. Nev. Aug. 21, 2017)​
Beck v. Ohio,
379 U.S. 89 (1964).​
Berger v. City of Seattle,
569 F.3d 1029 (9th Cir. 2009) (en banc) ​
​
​
​
​
Berry v. Dep’t of Soc. Servs.,
447 F.3d 642 (9th Cir. 2006)​
Brown v. Entm’t Merchs. Ass’n,
564 U.S. 786 (2011)​
California v. Ciraolo,
476 U.S. 207 (1986)​
Carpenter v. United States,
138 S. Ct. 2206 (2018)​
​
​
​
​
​
​
Chaker v. Adams,
No. 10-CV-2599, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 190460 (S.D. Cal. Aug. 3, 2012)​
City of Ladue v. Gilleo,
512 U.S. 43 (1994)​ ​
​
​
​
​
​
​
Clark v. Cmty. for Creative Non-Violence,
468 U.S. 288 (1984)​
Florida v. Jimeno,
500 U.S. 248 (1991)​
Grossman v. City of Portland,
33 F.3d 1200 (9th Cir. 1994) ​​
​
​
​
​
​
Gulf Oil Corp. v. Copp Paving Co., Inc.,
419 U.S. 186 (1974)​
Hague v. CIO,
307 U.S. 496 (1939)​
Horton v. California,
496 U.S. 128 (1990)​ ​
​
​
​
​
​
​
Hoye v. City of Oakland,
653 F.3d 835 (9th Cir. 2011)​
In re Grand Jury Subpoena,
828 F.3d 1083 (9th Cir. 2016)​

Page(s)
12
​

​

​

43, 52
19, 21, 22
47
47
22

​

43, 44, 49, 51
43
49
32

​

28, 29, 30, 32
36

​

​

49, 51
51
19

​

​

43, 48
39
43

​

10, 14, 18
45
31

25

In re Jacob E.,
No. F044734, 2004 WL 2601706 (Cal. Ct. App. Nov. 16, 2004)​
In re Nicholas Y.,
102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 511 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000)​
Katz v. United States,
389 U.S. 347 (1967)​
Kyllo v. United States,
533 U.S. 27 (2001)​
Long Beach Area Peace Network v. City of Long Beach,
574 F.3d 1011 (9th Cir. 2009)​
Mackinney v. Nielsen,
69 F.3d 1002 (9th Cir. 1995) ​ ​
​
​
​
​
​
Mahoney v. Doe,
642 F.3d 1112 (D.C. Cir. 2011)​
Mapp v. Ohio,
367 U.S. 643 (1961)​ ​
​
​
​
​
​
​
Maryland v. Buie,
494 U.S. 325 (1990)​
Members of City Council of Los Angeles v. Taxpayers for Vincent,
466 U.S. 789 (1984)​ ​
​
​
​
​
​
​
Menotti v. City of Seattle,
409 F.3d 1113 (9th Cir. 2005)​
Nix v. Williams,
467 U.S. 431 (1984)​ ​
​
​
​
​
​
​
Or. Nat. Res. Council, Inc. v. Kantor,
99 F.3d 334 (9th Cir. 1996)​
Oregon v. Ashcroft,
368 F.3d 1118 (9th Cir. 2004)​
Osmar v. City of Orlando,
No. 6:12–cv–185–Orl–DAB, 2012 WL 1252684 (M.D. Fla. Apr. 13, 2012)​
Pacheco-Camacho v. Hood,
272 F.3d 1266 (9th Cir. 2001)​
Patel v. City of Montclair,
798 F.3d 895 (9th Cir. 2015)​
Perry Educ. Ass’n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass’n,
460 U.S. 37 (1983)​
Santa Monica Food Not Bombs v. City of Santa Monica,
450 F.3d 1022 (9th Cir. 2006)​
Schneckloth v. Bustamonte,
412 U.S. 218 (1973)​
Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of the N.Y. State Crime Victims Bd.,
502 U.S. 105 (1991)​
Slaven v. BP America, Inc.,
973 F.2d 1468 (9th Cir. 1992)​
Smith v. Maryland,
442 U.S. 735 (1979)​

36
37
30
10
52
​

​

36, 37
44

​

​

10, 14
20

​

​

48, 50
45

​

11, 26, 27
35
39
47
41
30
43
49
15
48
39
29
26

Texas v. Brown,
460 U.S. 730 (1983).​
United Bhd. of Carpenters Local 586 v. NLRB,
540 F.3d 957 (9th Cir. 2008)​
United States v. Boatwright,
822 F.2d 862 (9th Cir. 1987) ​ ​
​
​
​
United States v. Cabaccang,
332 F.3d 622 (9th Cir. 2003) (en banc)​
United States v. Castillo,
866 F.2d 1071 (9th Cir. 1988)​
United States v. Chan-Jimenez,
125 F.3d 1324 (9th Cir. 1997) ​
​
​
​
United States v. Chesher,
678 F.2d 1353 (9th Cir. 1982)​
United States v. Davis,
332 F.3d 1163 (9th Cir. 2003) ​
​
​
​
United States v. Escobar,
309 F. Supp. 3d. 778 (N.D. Cal. 2018)​
United States v. Garcia,
768 F.3d 822 (9th Cir. 2014)​
United States v. Graham,
480 F. App’x 453 (9th Cir. 2012)​
United States v. Gust,
405 F.3d 797 (9th Cir. 2005)​
United States v. Hamilton,
701 F.3d 404 (4th Cir. 2012)​
United States v. Hill,
795 F. Supp. 2d 1304 (M.D. Fla. 2011)​
​
​
United States v. Howland,
No. 99-30179, 2000 WL 1093021 (9th Cir. Aug. 3, 2000)​
United States v. Hudson,
100 F.3d 1409 (9th Cir. 1996) ​
​
​
​
United States v. Laursen,
847 F.3d 1026 (9th Cir. 2017)​
United States v. Lopez-Cruz,
730 F.3d 803 (9th Cir. 2013)​
United States v. Lundin,
817 F.3d 1151 (9th Cir. 2016)​
United States v. Martin,
693 F.2d 77 (9th Cir. 1982)​
United States v. Mejia,
69 F.3d 309 (9th Cir. 1995)​
United States v. Mejia,
953 F.2d 461 (9th Cir. 1991)​
United States v. Miles,
247 F.3d 1009 (9th Cir. 2001)​

18
51
​

​

​

​

27, 33
41
16

​

​

​

​

15, 18
14

​

​

​

​

19, 21
19
34
14
15
31

​

​

​

​

21, 22
16

​

​

​

​

22, 23
34
19
17
14
27
19
23
27

United States v. Miller,
425 U.S. 435 (1976)​
United States v. Miller,
769 F.2d 554 (9th Cir. 1985)​ ​
​
​
​
​
United States v. Millis,
621 F.3d 914 (9th Cir. 2010)​
United States v. Miranda-Lopez,
532 F.3d 1034 (9th Cir. 2008)​
United States v. Murtari,
No. 5:07-CR-387, 2007 WL 3046746 (N.D.N.Y. Oct. 16, 2007) ​​
United States v. Payton,
573 F.3d 859 (9th Cir. 2009).​
United States v. Pepe,
895 F.3d 679 (9th Cir. 2018)​
United States v. Raile,
No. 13-PO-2190 WJ, 2014 WL 12796834 (D.N.M. Mar. 14, 2014)​
United States v. Reid,
226 F.3d 1020 (9th Cir. 2000) ​
​
​
​
​
United States v. Reilly,
224 F.3d 986 (9th Cir. 2000)​
United States v. Romo-Romo,
246 F.3d 1272 (9th Cir. 2001)​
United States v. Warshak,
631 F.3d 266 (6th Cir. 2010) ​ ​
​
​
​
​
United States v. Washington,
290 F.3d 765 (9th Cir. 2007).​
United States v. Washington,
700 F. App’x 619 (9th Cir. 2017) ​
​
​
​
​
United States v. Whitehorn,
123 F. App’x. 752 (9th. Cir. 2005)​
United States v. Wright,
667 F.2d 793 (9th Cir. 1982)​
United States v. Zavala,
541 F.3d 562 (5th Cir. 2008)​
Vista Mktg., LLC v. Burkett,
812 F.3d 954 (11th Cir. 2016)​
Ward v. Rock Against Racism,
491 U.S. 781 (1989)​
White v. City of Sparks,
500 F.3d 953 (9th Cir. 2007)​

30
​

​

​

14, 30
42
41

​

​

37, 38, 40
20
40

​

​

​

38, 40

​

​

​

20, 21
26
34

​

​

​

30, 31
16

​

​

​

27, 33
19
23
31
31
44
43

28

STATUTES AND REGULATIONS
16 U.S.C. § 470aaa-5 (2018)​
16 U.S.C. § 470ee (2018)​
18 U.S.C. § 247 (2018)​
18 U.S.C. § 2703(d) (2018)​
40 U.S.C. § 1316 (2018)​
40 U.S.C. § 1316(b) (2018) ​
​
41 C.F.R. § 102–74.380 (2012)​
Cal. Penal Code § 594 (West 2011)​

​

​

​

​

​

​

​

40
40
39
28
37
passim
37
36

OTHER AUTHORITIES
Damage, Black’s Law Dictionary (10th ed. 2014)​
Damage, OED Online (2019),
http://www.oed.com/oed2/00057264 (last visited Mar. 22, 2019)​
H.R. Rep. No. 115–479 (2017) ​ ​
​
​
​
​

35

​

​

​

35
39, 40

Leslie Elman, Where the Sidewalk Ends, Chalk Art Begins,
CNN (Sept. 10, 2013), https://perma.cc/SNJ7-MRVN​

51

29

QUESTIONS PRESENTED
1.​ Did the district court err in holding that photographs seized from Mr. Clarkson’s personal
computer during a warrantless search of his home could be admitted into evidence under
the plain view exception to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement? In the
alternative, did the district court err in admitting the photos under the inevitable
discovery exception?
2.​ Did the district court err in holding that the chalk art in this case “damaged” the federal
courthouse sidewalk within the meaning of 40 U.S.C. § 1316(b)? In the alternative, did
the district court err in holding that 40 U.S.C. § 1316(b) does not violate the First
Amendment as applied to the chalk art in this case?

30

STIPULATIONS
The parties have agreed to the following stipulations:
1.​ The only issues on appeal are the two that are listed in the “Questions Presented” section
above.
2.​ The parties have agreed that jurisdiction and venue are proper in the United States
District Court for the Western District of California and the United States Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit.
3.​ The parties have agreed that Defendant Jordan Clarkson filed a timely notice of appeal.
4.​ The parties may only cite jurisprudence decided prior to October 1, 2018.
5.​ Harmless error claims are not preserved.
6.​ Sufficiency of the evidence claims are not preserved.
7.​ The drawing at issue in this case is in a traditional public forum.

31

CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY PROVISIONS
U.S. CONST. amend. I
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or of the right of the people peaceably to
assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.

U.S. CONST. amend. IV
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable
searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause,
supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or
things to be seized.

40 U.S.C. § 1316. Preservation of Property
(1)​All persons entering in or on Federal property are prohibited from––
(a)​ Improperly disposing of rubbish on property;
(b)​Willfully destroying or damaging property;
(c)​ Stealing property;
(d)​Creating any hazard on property to persons or things; or
(e)​ Throwing articles of any kind from or at a building or climbing upon
statues, fountains or any part of the building.
(2)​Any person found in violation of the above provisions shall be fined under title
18, United States Code, imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both.

32

STATEMENT OF THE CASE
This is an appeal from two decisions of the United States District Court for the Western District of
California. On March 8, 2018, Appellant was arrested for willfully damaging property in violation of 40
U.S.C. § 1316(b), and the Information was filed on March 10, 2018. R. at 12. On July 1, 2018, Appellant
filed a Motion to Suppress Evidence on the grounds that evidence was seized from his computer without a
warrant, and no exception to the Fourth Amendment’s prohibition on warrantless searches and seizures
applied. R. at 13. The district court held a hearing on the motion on July 30, 2018 and denied the motion
on August 1, 2018. R. at 23, 50.
After conducting a bench trial, Judge Florence Allen found Mr. Clarkson guilty of one count of violating
40 U.S.C. § 1316(b). R. at 77.
Mr. Clarkson now seeks to overturn the district court’s ruling denying the motion to exclude the
evidence obtained from his computer without a warrant. Additionally, Mr. Clarkson challenges his
conviction on the grounds that he did not violate the “damage” provision of 40
U.S.C. § 1316(b) and that the statute is unconstitutional as applied because it violates his First
Amendment rights.

33

STATEMENT OF FACTS
This case is about chalk art. It centers around a group of California artists called the
Motley Collective, a prolific street artist named Streetwise, and local and federal officials who
have gone to extreme lengths to silence those who criticize the government.
A.​

The Motley Collective Criticized the Constance City Government, and the
Government Created a Citywide Task Force to Investigate.
In the winter of 2016, Defendant-Appellant Jordan Clarkson and a group of his fellow

street artists founded the Motley Collective, an artist collective dedicated to making political
protest art around Constance City, California. R. at 56. While each of the members of the Motley
Collective operated independently, the group supported each other, critiqued each other’s art, and
shared news stories to help each other respond to current events through their art. Id. The group’s
first project was to inform the public about the City Attorney election in Constance City, and they
continued to weigh in on political events throughout 2016 and 2017. Id.
In January 2018, Motley Collective Vice President Barbara O’Connor was arrested and
convicted of violating a California vandalism law. Id. In February 2018, the group’s new Vice
President, Mary Jo Crenshaw, was arrested for violating the same law. Id. This second arrest was
no coincidence. Constance City Mayor Carrie Chapman had personally authorized a task force
dedicated to investigating the Motley Collective. R. at 46. The task force was led by Lieutenant
Patsy Mink, a twenty-two-year veteran of the Constance City police force and Mayor Chapman’s
niece. R. at 46–47. In the course of arresting the two Motley Collective Vice Presidents, the task
force learned that the Motley Collective used a shared email account to communicate. R. at 46.
Because neither of the Vice Presidents had revealed the login information for the email account,
the task force was seeking another way into the account. Id. Therefore, following these arrests,
Lt. Mink started gathering information to apply for a warrant under the Stored Communications

34

Act (SCA) to gain access to the Motley Collective email account. Id. Lt. Mink testified that, by
March 2018, she estimated she was “maybe two or three weeks away, or maybe one or two more
arrests away[]” from getting the information she needed for an SCA warrant that could “crack[]
the case.” Id.
B.​

The Government Targeted Streetwise Because of His Chalk Drawings on the Plaza in
Front of the Buford Street Federal Courthouse.
When Mayor Chapman and the Constance City police force were not busy hunting down

members of the Motley Collective, they were focusing their attention on a local celebrity that
goes by the name “Streetwise.” Streetwise is an anonymous Constance City street artist who has
risen to fame because of his chalk art. R. at 57. Like the Motley Collective, Streetwise used his
art to make political statements, often with a similar message: that the government should be held
accountable for its mistakes. R. at 57–58. In early 2018, Streetwise was in the news because he
was the suspected artist behind a number of chalk drawings that had appeared on the plaza in
front of the Buford Street federal courthouse. R. at 42.
The new federal courthouse on Buford Street is a “point of pride” for Constance City. R. at
26. Constance City put in a bid to become the new seat of the Western District of California so
that the courthouse would become an “anchor point” for the town, and when the City was
selected, it spent “tens of millions of dollars” to construct a “huge complex with stores and malls
and parks.” R. at 26.
Constance City’s plan succeeded. In addition to becoming a thriving commercial center,
the courthouse plaza is an active forum for public community events. Every Fourth of July, a
veterans’ group places flags around the perimeter of the plaza. R. at 61. Hindu community groups
celebrate holidays there and create beautiful Rangoli designs on the ground using colored rice. Id.
And a restaurant next door to the courthouse advertises happy hour specials with

35

elaborate chalk artwork. R. at 58. The courthouse plaza is a place that truly facilitates the
exchange of ideas.
Despite the importance of the Buford Street plaza as a public space for community
engagement, Streetwise’s political chalk drawings on the plaza seemed to garner special attention
from Constance City officials. By March 2018, Mayor Chapman and Lt. Mink had ramped up
the pressure on the Constance City police force to arrest Streetwise and put an end to his political
chalk art in the federal plaza. R. at 39, 41–42. As Officer Mary Bradwell testified at trial, “[W]e
had a lot of pressure from the lieutenant to get this guy.” R. at 41.
On March 8, 2018, the Constance City Police Department received a call from a woman
named Alexa Carpenter reporting potential criminal activity. R. at 26. Ms. Carpenter, a lifelong
resident of Constance City, is no stranger to the Constance City Police Department. By her own
count, she calls the police more than once a week to report “suspicious activity” like “doubleparked cars.” R. at 28. Constance City police officers know of her and have testified that she
“isn’t the most reliable informant” and that “she is always crying wolf.” R. at 32. To Ms.
Carpenter’s knowledge, none of her many prior calls to the authorities had ever led to an arrest,
investigation, or any sort of police activity. R. at 28.
On the night of March 8, around 3:00 a.m., Ms. Carpenter was walking her dog when she
came across a masked figure drawing with chalk on the sidewalk in front of the Buford Street
courthouse. R. at 24–25. The drawing featured a skull and crossbones, a dollar sign, a pill bottle,
and the phrase “prosecutorial discretion.” R. at 64. Ms. Carpenter followed the masked figure on
foot. R. at 26. She “nearly lost him a couple of times,” before eventually arriving at an apartment
complex at 100 Canal Street. Id. She then called the police and reported what she had seen,

36

including the fact that she believed the person she followed went into one of the first-floor
apartments. Id.
C.​

Officers Arabella and Bradwell of the Constance City Police Department Showed up
Unannounced at Mr. Clarkson’s Apartment in the Early-Morning Hours of March 8,
2018.
At approximately 4:50 a.m. on March 8, 2018, Officers Sarah Arabella and Mary Bradwell

of the Constance City Police Department were dispatched to 100 Canal Street in response to Ms.
Carpenter’s tip. R. at 29. The Constance City police, at the time, had been facing political pressure
to make an arrest in the Streetwise investigation. R. at 34. If not for that pressure, the officers—by
their own admission—“never would have responded” in the middle of the night to a report of
chalk art. R. at 29. Although Ms. Carpenter had not given any indication regarding which of the
first-floor apartments the individual entered, the officers approached Mr. Carpenter’s apartment
because they could see a light on through the window. R. at 29. When the officers knocked on the
front door of his apartment, Mr. Clarkson opened it to find two bright lights shining in his eyes. R.
at 54. The officers did not have a search warrant. R. at 35. When the officers asked if they could
come inside to speak with him, Mr. Clarkson—confused and alarmed by the middle-of-the-night
disturbance—muttered “sure.” R. at 30, 54. The officers entered the apartment. Id.
Once inside, Officer Bradwell began walking around the perimeter of the apartment as
Officer Arabella asked Mr. Clarkson questions about himself. R. at 31. Because Mr. Clarkson is a
professional artist, the officers observed art supplies in his home, but they did not see any chalk,
nor did they observe anything threatening or incriminating. R. at 31, 38. Mr. Clarkson told the
officers that he had been in his apartment all evening. R. at 31. Meanwhile, as Officer Bradwell
walked around his apartment, Mr. Clarkson had sat down near his desk, on which two computer
monitors stood. R. at 32. At this point, Officer Bradwell asked to search Mr.

37

Clarkson’s computer and began moving toward the monitors, which had been in sleep mode. R.
at 43. Mr. Clarkson denied this request and moved to stop Officer Bradwell from looking at his
computer. Id. Officer Bradwell may have shaken the table and woken up the monitor, or Mr.
Clarkson may have bumped the mouse in his attempt to stop Officer Bradwell from conducting
an illegal search of his computer. Id.
Either way, the computer monitors woke up, revealing an email draft on one screen and a
computer folder, titled “Photos of Courthouse,” on the other with ten numbered JPEG files. R. at
32. Those files were attached to the email. Id. The computer folder had a “Last Modified”
column visible, and all of the files were last modified on that machine between 3:50 a.m. and
4:00 a.m. that night. Id. These image files turned out to be photographs of the chalk art in front of
the courthouse, although the officers could not see the contents of the photographs at the time.
R. at 39. The officers were under the mistaken impression that the “Last Modified” column of Mr.
Clarkson’s computer showed the time that these photographs were taken and not simply the time
that the files were last edited, saved, or downloaded on his computer. R. at 34, 39. Based on this
false belief, the officers arrested Mr. Clarkson and read him his Miranda rights. R. at 32. After the
arrest, Officer Bradwell inserted a flash drive into the computer and seized the photographs as
evidence. R. at 39.

38

SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT
The district court erred in failing to suppress photographs that had been unlawfully seized
from Mr. Clarkson’s personal computer during the police’s warrantless search of his home. “With
few exceptions, the question whether a warrantless search of a home is reasonable and hence
constitutional must be answered no.” Kyllo v. United States, 533 U.S. 27, 31 (2001). The narrow
exceptions to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement apply only in cases of urgent
necessity. They were not intended to allow the police to make middle-of-the-night entries into an
individual’s home in order to facilitate their investigation of chalk art. The district court relied on
two exceptions to the warrant requirement in deciding that the photographs seized from Mr.
Clarkson’s computer could be admitted into evidence—the plain view exception and the
inevitable discovery exception. Neither is applicable here. Because no exception justifies the
warrantless seizure of this evidence, the proper remedy is suppression. See Mapp v. Ohio, 367
U.S. 643, 657 (1961).
In order to invoke the plain view exception, the Government bears the burdens of
showing that the police were lawfully in the position to see the relevant item, that they had a
right of access to that item, and that the item was immediately incriminating. Horton v.
California, 496 U.S. 128, 136–37 (1990). The Government failed to meet its burden on all three
prongs. First, officers were not lawfully in a position to see the allegedly incriminating material
on Mr. Clarkson’s computer monitors because they did not obtain his willing consent for them to
enter his apartment. Second, the officers did not have a lawful right of access to Mr. Clarkson’s
computer because they only saw the contents of his monitors in the process of conducting an
illegal search of the apartment that far exceeded whatever consent Mr. Clarkson had allegedly
given them. On top of that, it was through their own actions that the contents of the monitors

39

were revealed. Finally, the information displayed on the monitors—a list of JPEG files and the
times when those files were last modified on that computer—was not immediately incriminating
because it did not give the officers probable cause to believe that the material was useful
evidence of a crime. It was only by relying on information gained after-the-fact, that the
Government has been able to piece together a semblance of a probable cause theory—a theory
that, in fact, is based on faulty assumptions and not logically consistent.
The Government similarly failed to meet its burden of showing that the inevitable
discovery exception applies. This exception requires that the Government prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that it would have inevitably obtained the photographs through
alternative means even without the unlawful search. Nix v. Williams, 467 U.S. 431, 444 (1984).
The district court committed clear error in accepting the Government’s speculative arguments
that either (1) a member of the Motley Collective would suddenly decide to cooperate with the
police’s ongoing investigation or (2) the police would uncover additional evidence that would
enable them to obtain a warrant and seize the photos directly from the service provider that
hosted the Motley Collective’s email account. These theories of “inevitability” are based on
nothing more than wishful thinking and pure speculation. The district court was also wrong, as a
matter of law, to hold that the third-party doctrine would allow the Government to issue a
subpoena and seize the photographs without any showing of cause. Such a sweeping ruling
contravenes recent precedent from the Supreme Court and from the circuit courts, including this
Court, and it would significantly expand the police’s power to intrude into Americans’ private
lives. Because no exception justifies this warrantless seizure, the district court’s denial of Mr.
Clarkson’s Motion to Suppress Evidence should be reversed.

40

The district court also erred by holding that Mr. Clarkson violated the “damage” provision
of 40 U.S.C. § 1316(b) for several reasons. First, the plain meaning of “damaging” property
under § 1316(b) only includes activity that injures or reduces the value or usefulness of property,
as compared to activity that merely “defaces” the physical appearance of property. This plain
reading of the statute is supported not only by the ordinary meaning of the verb “damage,” but
also by numerous court opinions that consistently note the distinction between “damaging” and
“defacing” in criminal statutes and regulations––including the regulatory predecessor to
§ 1316, 41 C.F.R. § 102–74.380. Because chalk art does not injure property and can be easily
wiped or washed away, it therefore does not fall within the plain meaning of § 1316(b). Second,
the legislative history of § 1316(b) confirms that Congress did not intend for the term “damaging”
to include activities that merely “deface” the physical appearance of property. While the original
draft of the statute contained the word “defacing,” that term was removed from the final version
of § 1316(b), demonstrating that Congress did not intend to criminalize activity that merely
“defaces” property. Third, even if the Court determines that the term “damaging” is ambiguous
after looking at its plain meaning and legislative history, the rule of lenity requires that § 1316(b)
be construed in favor of Mr. Clarkson.
Even if the district court did not err in holding that Mr. Clarkson violated § 1316(b), it
erred in refusing to hold that the statute was unconstitutional as applied to the chalk art in this
case. The parties agree that the chalk drawing was made in a traditional public forum. A time,
place, or manner restriction on expressive activity in a public forum must meet three criteria to
survive First Amendment scrutiny: (1) it must be content-neutral and refrain from restricting
expression based on its viewpoint; (2) it must be narrowly tailored to serve a significant
government interest; and (3) it must leave open ample alternative channels for communication of

41

the message conveyed. ACLU of Nev. v. City of Las Vegas, 333 F.3d 1092, 1106 (9th Cir. 2003).
As applied to the chalk drawing at issue in this case, § 1316(b) does not meet any of these three
criteria. First, although § 1316(b) is content-neutral on its face, the government applied it in a
discriminatory manner, prohibiting the chalk art in this case based on its viewpoint. The
government had previously allowed other displays to appear on the Buford Street federal
courthouse plaza but chose to prosecute only the chalk art at issue in this case, which criticized
the government. Second, § 1316(b) as applied to the chalk art in this case is not narrowly tailored
to serve the significant government interests in preserving the aesthetic appearance of the plaza or
protecting motorists or passersby from distractions or crowding. Allowing chalk art will not
change the aesthetic of the plaza any more than other types of displays the government has
permitted, nor will it cause any greater hazard to motorists or pedestrians. Moreover, § 1316(b) as
applied in this case burdens significantly more speech than necessary to serve the government’s
interests. Third, prohibiting chalk art under § 1316(b) would eliminate a unique form of
expression with no permissible alternatives in the federal plaza. As applied to the chalk art in this
case, § 1316(b) therefore violates the First Amendment.

42

ARGUMENT
I.​

THE DISTRICT COURT ERRED IN ADMITTING INTO EVIDENCE PHOTOS
UNLAWFULLY SEIZED FROM MR. CLARKSON’S COMPUTER UNDER THE
PLAIN VIEW EXCEPTION TO THE FOURTH AMENDMENT.
The district court ruled that material seized during the police’s warrantless search of Mr.

Clarkson’s home could be admitted into evidence because the seizure was justified by the plain
view exception. That exception—which applies only in “narrow circumstances,” United States v.
Chesher, 678 F.2d 1353, 1357 (9th Cir. 1982)—allows an officer to seize an object in plain sight,
without a warrant, provided that: (1) the officer is lawfully in position from which she could see
the object, (2) the officer has a lawful right of access to the object, and (3) the object’s
incriminating nature is immediately apparent. Horton v. California, 496 U.S. 128, 136–37 (1990).
“The burden is on the government to prove that the departure from the warrant requirement [is]
justified.” United States v. Martin, 693 F.2d 77, 78 (9th Cir. 1982). The Government has failed to
meet that burden, and the district court’s cursory analysis of the three Horton factors committed
clear legal and factual errors at every prong. Its ruling should be reversed, and the photos
unlawfully seized from Mr. Clarkson’s computer should be suppressed. See Mapp v. Ohio, 367
U.S. 643, 657 (1961) (“[A] federal prosecutor may make no use of evidence illegally seized . . .
.”).
The denial of a motion to suppress presents mixed questions of fact and law that an
appellate court reviews de novo. United States v. Graham, 480 F. App’x 453, 454 (9th Cir. 2012).
Although the factual findings underlying a trial court’s decision are reviewed only for clear error,
those “findings have significance only as measured against the complex legal standard governing
the plain view exception.” United States v. Miller, 769 F.2d 554, 556 (9th Cir. 1985). Thus, on
numerous occasions, this Court has reversed a district court decision on the applicability of a
Fourth Amendment exception, even when that decision was based in part on
43

factual findings reviewed only for clear error. See, e.g., United States v. Gust, 405 F.3d 797,
797–99 (9th Cir. 2005) (overturning a denial of a motion to suppress because of the district
court’s misapplication of the “single-purpose container” exception); Miller, 769 F.2d at 556
(overturning a denial of a motion to suppress because the district court was too broad in its
application of the plain view exception). The district court committed several clear factual errors
that ought to be set aside. But, for the sake of argument, even accepting the facts exactly as the
district court found them, when those facts are applied in the proper legal framework, the seizure
of material from Mr. Clarkson’s computer cannot be justified by the plain view exception.
A.​

The Officers Were Not Lawfully in a Position to View the Computer Because Mr.
Clarkson Did Not Willingly Consent to Their Entry into His Home.

The plain view exception cannot justify this warrantless seizure, because the police
officers did not have willing permission from Mr. Clarkson to enter his home and, therefore, could
not have lawfully been in a position to see the computer monitors on his desk. Determining
whether an individual has consented to a police officer’s intrusion necessitates a “most careful
scrutiny” that cannot possibly be satisfied by the exactly two sentences that the district court
devoted to the question. See Schneckloth v. Bustamonte, 412 U.S. 218, 229 (1973). Specifically,
the Supreme Court has instructed that a court must examine “the totality of all the circumstances,”
id. at 227, and conduct a “careful sifting of the unique facts,” id. at 233. This Court has further
clarified that “the government bears the heavy burden of demonstrating that the consent was
freely and voluntarily given” and must show that consent was “unequivocal and specific.” United
States v. Chan-Jimenez, 125 F.3d 1324, 1327–28 (9th Cir. 1997).
This Court has outlined five factors that indicate that consent to a police search was not
truly voluntary: (1) the officer did not inform the individual of his right to refuse consent, (2) the
officer failed to give a Miranda warning, (3) the officer threatened to return with a search

44

warrant, (4) the individual was in the officer’s custody, and (5) the officer had his weapon
drawn. Id. at 1327; United States v. Castillo, 866 F.2d 1071, 1082 (9th Cir. 1988). Though no
factor is dispositive, this Court has indicated that whether an officer informed an individual of
his right to withhold consent may be the “most important[].” See United States v. Howland, No.
99-30179, 2000 WL 1093021, at *1 (9th Cir. Aug. 3, 2000).
Applying these factors to this case—which the district court was bound to do, as a matter
of law—the Government has failed to meet its burden of showing that Mr. Clarkson’s consent
was “unequivocal and specific.” Most importantly, the officers never told him he had right to
refuse their request to enter. See R. at 30, 38, 41, 54. The officers also did not inform Mr.
Clarkson of his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination until after the illegal search of
his computer. R. at 32. The record is not sufficiently developed to determine whether the officers
threatened to come back with a warrant, and the district court’s sparse opinion certainly does not
make a factual determination on that question. See R. at 51. All told, only two of the five factors
weigh clearly in favor of the Government—that the officers did not have their weapons drawn
and that Mr. Clarkson was not in the officers’ custody. R. at 30.
These five factors are a starting point and not the end of the analysis in a totality of the
circumstances test. When, as is the case in many instances involving a question of consent, some
factors favor the defendant and some favor the Government, a court must still consider the
broader context of the police encounter to determine whether the defendant’s alleged consent was
willingly given. See, e.g., United States v. Washington, 490 F.3d 765, 775 (9th Cir. 2007) (taking
into account the “the unique situation in Portland between the African-American community and
the Portland police” in reversing a district court’s finding that consent was willingly given). The
ultimate question is whether a reasonable person in the defendant’s

45

position would have felt free to “terminate the encounter.” Id. This Court has also held that,
although the police typically have license to knock at an individual’s door and ask him
questions—a so-called “knock and talk”—barring exigent circumstances, they may not do so in
the middle of the night when a reasonable person would not expect visitors. United States v.
Lundin, 817 F.3d 1151, 1159 (9th Cir. 2016) (explaining that a police officer acts unlawfully when
he conducts a “knock and talk” during early-morning hours “without a reason for knocking that a
resident would ordinarily accept as sufficiently weighty to justify the disturbance”).
This particular police encounter looks all the more coercive when one considers its
broader context. Two officers knocking on a person’s door at 4:50 a.m., in pitch darkness, and
shining lights in his face, R. at 38, 54, does not create an environment where a reasonable person
would generally feel that he is at liberty to deny the officers’ requests. Indeed, a reasonable
person, when confronted in the middle of the night with two police officers banging on his door,
would likely conclude that some emergency requires immediate attention. It is for that very
reason that this Court requires the police to offer a “sufficiently weighty” justification in order to
conduct a “knock and talk” during non-waking hours. See Lundin, 817 F.3d at 1159. The officers’
decision to conduct an unreasonable early-morning “knock and talk”—all in the name of
investigating chalk art—should strongly counsel against a court finding that Mr. Clarkson’s
consent was willingly given. The fact that Officer Bradwell admitted that the officers would not
necessarily have honored Mr. Clarkson’s request to leave, even if he had directly asked them to,
should remove any doubt. R. at 41 ( “[I]t’s not like we were just going to say ‘oh okay,’ and
leave, we would have asked a few more questions.” (quoting Officer Bradwell)). If Officer
Bradwell—who was later suspended for allegedly violating another defendant’s Fourth
Amendment rights, R. at 40–41—takes that attitude, when testifying in a court of law, toward an

46

individual’s right to refuse consent to a police request, one can only imagine the attitude she
takes when she is demanding entry to an individual’s home at 4:50 a.m.
In light of all this, it is difficult to see how the district court could determine that Mr.
Clarkson’s alleged consent rose to the “unequivocal and specific” standard that this Court
requires. Chan-Jimenez, 125 F.3d at 1327. To determine whether Mr. Clarkson willingly
consented to allow the officers into his home, the district court was bound, as a matter of law, to
conduct a totality of the circumstances test and to consider this Court’s five-factor framework as
well as the context surrounding this encounter. In failing to do so—or indeed, to conduct any
meaningful analysis—the district court committed a reversible error of law. This Court should
apply a proper totality of the circumstances test and find that Mr. Clarkson did not willingly
consent to the officers’ entry into his home.
B.​

The Officers Did Not Have a Lawful Right of Access to the Contents of Mr.
Clarkson’s Monitor Because Examining that Content Was Beyond the Scope of
Whatever Consent Mr. Clarkson Had Allegedly Given Them, and It Was the
Officers’ Own Actions that Caused that Content to Be Revealed.

Even if the officers were lawfully present inside Mr. Clarkson’s home, that did not give
them lawful right of access to the contents of his computer. See Horton, 496 U.S. at 137. An
officer may only lawfully seize an item under the plain view exception if the “officer’s access to
the object has some prior justification under the Fourth Amendment.” Texas v. Brown, 460 U.S.
730, 738 (1983). The Government contended and the district court agreed that the “prior
justification” in this case was Mr. Clarkson giving consent for the officers to enter his apartment.
But even if consent had been willfully given to enter the apartment, the officers exceeded the
bounds of that consent and invaded Mr. Clarkson’s privacy by putting themselves in a position to
read text on his computer screen without his permission. What is more, it is an uncontroverted
principle of the plain view exception that officers may not take any action that causes an item to

47

come into plain view. See, e.g., Arizona v. Hicks, 480 U.S. 321, 325 (1987); United States v.
Davis, 332 F.3d 1163, 1168 n.3 (9th Cir. 2003). It was the officers’ own conduct inside Mr.
Clarkson’s home that caused the monitors to wake up. Therefore, the content of those monitors
was not in plain view, and the police had no right to that content.
1.​

The Officers Exceeded the Scope of the Consent Mr. Clarkson
Allegedly Gave When They Roamed Freely Around His Apartment
and Physically Moved to Examine His Computer.

The Supreme Court has made clear that “[t]he standard for measuring the scope of a
suspect’s consent under the Fourth Amendment is that of ‘objective’ reasonableness.” Florida v.
Jimeno, 500 U.S. 248, 251 (1991). In other words, “what would the typical reasonable person
have understood by the exchange between the officer and the suspect?” Id. Under that objective
standard, this Court has on numerous occasions found searches and seizures to be unreasonable
because they violated the initial grant of consent that the Government claimed justified the
search. See, e.g., United States v. Lopez-Cruz, 730 F.3d 803, 809–10 (9th Cir. 2013) (holding that
a suspect who had given a Border Patrol agent permission to search his phone had not given the
agent permission to answer an incoming call); United States v. Whitehorn, 123 F. App’x.
752, 754–55 (9th. Cir. 2005) (holding that a suspect who had allowed the police to search her
purse for stolen property had not consented to a search of a small container inside that purse).
Additionally, an individual’s consent to allow the police to enter his home does not give
the police the right to go anywhere they like in that home. United States v. Mejia, 953 F.2d 461,
466 (9th Cir. 1991); see also United States v. Escobar, 309 F. Supp. 3d. 778, 785 (N.D. Cal.
2018) (holding that a suspect who allowed the police to come into the vestibule of his hotel room
to speak with him had not consented to the police entering and searching the sleeping area of the
room). Specifically, this Court has held that the police cannot conduct a warrantless protective
sweep of a private residence unless they demonstrate “articulable facts” that the residence
48

“harbors an individual posing a danger” to the officers on the scene. United States v. Reid, 226
F.3d 1020, 1028 (9th Cir. 2000) (quoting Maryland v. Buie, 494 U.S. 325, 334 (1990)). This Court
has also cautioned that law enforcement officers must tread carefully around computers for Fourth
Amendment purposes. Computers “contain a great deal of private information,” and searches of
these devices entails “a degree of intrusiveness much greater” than searching other items. United
States v. Payton, 573 F.3d 859, 861–62 (9th Cir. 2009). Because of the sensitive privacy concerns
at stake, even searches conducted pursuant to a warrant must “explicitly authorize” the search of a
computer in order for an officer to examine it. Id.
In this case, if Mr. Clarkson gave any willing consent at all, it was consent only to the
officers’ narrow request to, in their own words, “come inside briefly to talk to him.” R. at 30.
That narrow grant of consent cannot serve as the “prior justification” that would give the officers
a right of access to the private information on Mr. Clarkson’s computer. Immediately upon
entering Mr. Clarkson’s apartment, Officer Bradwell began “walk[ing] around the perimeter of
the living room[,] . . . looking for drugs, guns, another person, anything obviously illegal or
anything that might pose a threat to Officer Arabella and [her].” R. at 38 (quoting Officer
Bradwell). Evaluating the scope of the officers’ initial request from an objective standard, as the
law requires, a reasonable person would not have assumed that it included an invitation for the
officers to walk around Mr. Clarkson’s home and approach his desk and computer—areas that
officers knew, and that this Court has cautioned, are likely to contain private information. See
Payton, 573 F.3d at 861–62. Additionally, by walking around Mr. Clarkson’s apartment and
actively looking for contraband or potential hazards, Officer Bradwell engaged in an illegal
protective sweep. Absent a showing of “articulable facts” that the apartment “harbor[ed] an
individual posing a danger” to the officers—a showing the Government has never even

49

attempted to make—Officer Bradwell could not lawfully conduct that search. See Reid, 226 F.3d
at 1028. The moment that the officers went beyond the scope of their initial request of simply
talking with Mr. Clarkson and began conducting an illegal search of his apartment, they ceased
having any lawful right of access to anything that might expose itself in plain view.
2.​

It was the Officers’ Own Conduct that Caused the Information on the
Monitors to Be Revealed.

An item is only in plain view if an officer’s own conduct does not in any way cause the
item to be revealed. See, e.g., Hicks, 480 at 325 (holding that moving an item just a few inches to
read the serial number meant that the serial number was not in plain view); Davis, 332 F.3d at
1168 n.3 (holding that moving a bag from under a bed to look at the contents, even though the bag
itself could be plainly seen without moving it, was an unlawful search). Although the question of
when an officer will be deemed to have “caused” a computer monitor to have woken up for the
purposes of the plain view exception is one of first impression in this Court, a district court in
Florida has addressed that question and decided that the standard was whether the officer “did
something intentionally which caused the computer to cease its sleep mode and display the
images.” United States v. Hill, 795 F. Supp. 2d 1304, 1308 (M.D. Fla. 2011). Note carefully what
level of intentionality is required under this common-sense standard that this Court should adopt.
It does not examine whether the officer intentionally woke up the computer, but rather, whether
the officer intentionally did “something” that caused the computer to be woken up.
Applying that standard here, there can be no doubt that Officer Bradwell’s actions caused
the computer to wake up, and the district court erred in finding to the contrary. Even if the officers
did not intentionally touch the mouse, the record clearly indicates that Officer Bradwell asked to
search the contents of the computer and had begun moving to examine the computer before Mr.
Clarkson even had a chance to verbally deny this unreasonable request. R. at 43. It is

50

not clear what exactly ensued next, but the precise sequence of events is irrelevant. Whether
Office Bradwell intentionally shook the table and woke up the computer—an occurrence that Mr.
Clarkson testified to, R. at 54, and that Officer Bradwell says might have happened, R. at 43—or
whether Mr. Clarkson inadvertently bumped the mouse during his attempt to stop Officer
Bradwell from conducting an illegal search of his computer, it is uncontroverted that Officer
Bradwell’s actions triggered the entire episode. The police should not be able to hide behind the
formalistic distinction of whether the instrumentality that directly woke up the computer screen
was Officer Bradwell shaking the table or Mr. Clarkson’s elbow. Applying the standard from Hill,
this Court should find that Officer Bradwell caused the monitors to wake up by moving to
examine the computer. The contents of those monitors were, therefore, not in plain view.
C.​

The Information in Plain View on Mr. Clarkson’s Computer—a List of
JPEG Files with the “Last Modified” Column Showing—Was Not
Immediately Incriminating.

Even if this Court were to find that the police officers had a lawful right to enter Mr.
Clarkson’s apartment and a lawful right of access to the contents of his monitor, the plain view
exception still cannot justify the seizure in this case because the allegedly criminal nature of the
information in plain view was not immediately apparent. A list of numbered image files with
certain non-probative metadata barely visible simply does not meet the standards for what makes
evidence immediately incriminating. The Supreme Court has held that “probable cause is
required” for an officer to seize any evidence under the plain view exception. Hicks, 480 U.S. at
326. Under this standard, it is not enough for an item to arouse an officer’s suspicion or make her
feel that a suspect is not being fully truthful. Rather, the incriminating nature of an object is
immediately apparent only “where the officer [has] probable cause to associate the property with
criminal activity.” United States v. Hudson, 100 F.3d 1409, 1420 (9th Cir. 1996). Probable cause is
an objective standard. E.g., Beck v. Ohio, 379 U.S. 89, 91 (1964). The inquiry focuses on
51

whether a “reasonable” person, finding himself in the position that the police officer was in at the
time of the search, would “belie[ve] that certain items may be contraband . . . or useful evidence
of a crime.” Hudson, 100 F.3d at 1420.
Police cannot justify a probable cause determination using information gained from the
illegal search itself or any other after-the-fact rationalization. Only “the facts available to the
officer” at the time when an item comes into plain view can justify a determination that the item
was immediately incriminating. Id. Applying that standard, this Court has, on multiple occasions,
excluded evidence that turned out to be plainly incriminating because the incriminating nature of
the evidence was not apparent to the officer when he initially seized the item. See, e.g., United
States v. Wright, 667 F.2d 793, 799 (9th Cir. 1982) (holding that, even though an officer had a
warrant to search a residence, the contents of a ledger that revealed an unrelated narcotics crime
had to be suppressed because the nature of that crime was only apparent upon close examination
of the ledger); see also United States v. Miles, 247 F.3d 1009, 1014 (9th Cir. 2001) (ordering
contraband discovered during a Terry stop suppressed because the incriminating nature of the
material became apparent only after the arresting officer unlawfully examined it).
The problems with the district court’s decision on this prong are manifest. First, it is not
at all clear based on its two sentences of analysis that it even conducted the requisite probable
cause review of the seizure. See R. at 51. Second, the district court committed an error of law by
assessing the incriminating nature of the item in question based on information learned after the
search, instead of relying solely on information the officers had before the search. The district
court wrote, “The pictures at issue in this case, from fresh vandalism, found with timestamps, in
the very home of a top suspect, create the context necessary to make them immediately
incriminating.” Id. But the officers testified that they could not see the contents of the photos

52

when the computer screen woke up. R. at 39. Therefore, it is not the subject matter of the photos
(i.e., “fresh vandalism”) that the police can rely on to “create the context” that makes the
computer files immediately incriminating; it is only what was available in plain view to the
officers before the unlawful search of the computer—that is, the folder name and metadata.
Under the proper analysis, the officers were sorely lacking in probable cause. Here is what
the officers knew at the time the computer screen entered plain view: (1) They were sent to
investigate an apartment building based solely on the account of someone who the officers
themselves said “isn’t the most reliable informant” and “is always crying wolf,” R. at 32; (2) Mr.
Clarkson was a professional artist who made his living working in visual media and had various
art supplies and political material in his apartment, R. at 31; (3) Mr. Clarkson, a visual artist, had
a folder on his computer entitled “Photos of Courthouse” with ten numbered JPEG image files in
it, R. at 32; (4) those files were attached to an email with a politically charged subject line; and
(5) the files were last modified on that computer between 3:50 a.m. and 4:00 a.m. that morning,
id., apparently corroborating Mr. Clarkson’s statement that he had been home working at that
time. In sum, the police officers knew that a visual artist had image files on his computer that
likely depicted a courthouse and that the files were last edited or saved earlier that night. They did
not know what exactly the images depicted. They did not know which courthouse was contained
in the images. Indeed, there are two courthouses within walking distance of Mr. Clarkson’s
apartment, R. at 25, and of course, the officers had no idea if the images depicted a courthouse
even located in Constance City. The officers did not know when the image files were created. And
on top of all that, the officers did not even know whether the person seen leaving the Buford
Street courthouse had indeed entered Mr. Clarkson’s apartment. R. at 26. That record, and the
totality of what the police did not know, cannot support a probable cause finding.

53

Furthermore, in attempting to cobble together an after-the-fact theory of probable cause,
the officers relied on the false assumption that information in the “Last Modified” column of the
file folder gave dispositive evidence of when these photographs were taken. That mistake was a
crucial component of the Government’s case that the officers were justified in seizing the photos.
Officer Bradwell explained during the suppression hearing that, “Once we saw the subject of the
folder, and when [the photos] were taken, they looked like pretty good evidence that he did it
because they were taken so soon afterwards.” R. 39. The district court, too, committed this clear
error of fact in its opinion denying the motion to suppress and referred to the photos being found
“with timestamps.” R. at 51. In fact the “Last Modified” column is not even especially probative
of when the photographs were taken. The column shows exactly what it advertises: when the files
were last modified on the machine on which the files appear—for example, through editing or
download. It does not show when the underlying image files first came into being on a different
machine such as a digital camera or cell phone. The officers’ mistake—and their resulting
subjective belief that the metadata implicated Mr. Clarkson—cannot justify a determination that
there was probable cause to seize the photographs: Probable cause is an objective standard that is
based on what reasonable officers would have thought in the same situation. The officers lacked
probable cause to believe, based only on the folder name and metadata, that these files were
immediately incriminating under the plain view doctrine. The photographs should, therefore, be
suppressed.
II.​

THE INEVITABLE DISCOVERY EXCEPTION CANNOT PROVIDE AN
ALTERNATIVE BASIS FOR ADMITTING THE UNLAWFULLY SEIZED
PHOTOS INTO EVIDENCE.
The district court also held that, even if the officers were not justified in seizing the

photographs from Mr. Clarkson’s computer under the plain view exception, the photos could be
admitted under the inevitable discovery exception. That exception, however, requires not only
54

that there exist alternate lawful means for the authorities to obtain the disputed evidence, but also
that the authorities would have inevitably succeeded in pursuing those means. Nix v. Williams, 467
U.S. 431, 444 (1984). The district court mistakenly concluded that, because someone else
theoretically could have shared these photos with the police, that person inevitably would have
shared the photos. In so reasoning, the district court failed to properly apply the inevitable
discovery exception and appeared instead to have based its decision on something that might be
more accurately termed the “possible discovery exception.” This clear error cannot stand, and this
Court should reverse. See, e.g., United States v. Reilly, 224 F.3d 986, 994 (9th Cir. 2000) (noting
that, while the determination of inevitability is a factual inquiry reviewed for clear error, reversal
is appropriate when the district court misapplies the doctrine). The district court also suggested
that discovery would be inevitable in this case because the third-party doctrine would justify the
police coercively seizing these photographs from another party without a warrant or any showing
of cause. That position is wrong. Barring a drastic expansion of the doctrine, police would have
needed a warrant—a warrant that they would not have inevitably obtained or even sought—to
seize these photos from any party notwithstanding the third-party doctrine.
A.​

The Government Has Not Met Its Burden of Showing that It Would Have
Inevitably Obtained the Photographs if Not for the Illegal Search.

In order to invoke this narrow exception to the Fourth Amendment, the Government has
the burden to “establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the information ultimately or
inevitably would have been discovered by lawful means.” Nix, 467 U.S. at 444. This is an
exacting standard, and “inevitable discovery involves no speculative elements but focuses on
demonstrated historical facts capable of ready verification.” Id. at 450 n.6. Crucially, “the
doctrine requires that the fact or likelihood that makes the discovery inevitable arise from
circumstances other than those disclosed by the illegal search itself.” United States v.

55

Boatwright, 822 F.2d 862, 864–65 (9th Cir. 1987); see also United States v. Mejia, 69 F.3d 309,
320 (9th Cir. 1995) (“This court has never applied the inevitable discovery exception so as to
excuse the failure to obtain a search warrant where the police had probable cause but simply did
not attempt to obtain a warrant.”). In other words, the Government cannot use the forbidden fruit
of an illegal search to help it pursue other lawful means of obtaining the illegally seized evidence.
See United States v. Washington, 700 F. App’x 619, 621 (9th Cir. 2017) (explaining that the
inevitable discovery doctrine “endeavors to place the police in the same position that they would
have been in had no illegal behavior occurred”).
Thus, the Government cannot rely on the contents of the photographs or anything from
the warrantless search of Mr. Clarkson’s apartment to bolster its claim that it would have
inevitably obtained these photographs in another manner. Instead it must provide specific “facts
capable of verification” that it would have obtained these photographs from a different source if
not for the search of Mr. Clarkson’s apartment. See Nix, 467 U.S. at 450 n.6. The Government
and the district court identified two potential alternative sources of the photos: another member
of the Motely Collective or Google (the provider of the Motley Collective’s email account). But
neither was an inevitable, or even likely, alternative source for these photos.
1.​

The Police Would Not Have Inevitably Obtained the Photographs
from Another Member of the Motley Collective.

The Government cannot credibly claim that its ongoing investigation into the Motley
Collective would have inevitably turned up these photographs. In fact, the very testimony of the
law enforcement officer leading that investigation directly refutes that notion. In describing what
would have had to have happened in order to obtain the photos from a member of the Motley
Collective, Lt. Mink explained, “[I]f just one of them got arrested and agreed to log in for me,
then I could get access to the entire email drive.” R. at 47. The Government’s theory of

56

inevitability, then, turns on: (1) a crime being committed by a member of the Motley Collective,
(2) the police lawfully arresting that member, and (3) that member agreeing to cooperate with the
police. This is pure speculation that falls miles short of the certainty Nix demands. Lt. Mink even
acknowledged that, after two arrests, no member of the Motley Collective had yet agreed to
cooperate. R. at 48. Indeed, the Motley Collective has a demonstrated history of trying to evade
the observation of law enforcement, and it set up its current communication system specifically to
avoid what the Government now contends is inevitable. R. at 56–57. The district court’s finding
that a member of the Motley Collective would have inevitably shared the photographs should be
set aside as clearly erroneous; it is not at all supported by the record or basic logic.
2.​

The Police Also Would Not Have Inevitably Obtained the
Photographs from Google.

The district court also found that the police would have inevitably obtained the
photographs from Google. This claim, too, is patently refuted by Lt. Mink’s own testimony. She
explained that, at the time of the illegal search of Mr. Clarkson’s computer, she was in the
process of seeking a warrant under the Stored Communications Act (SCA) to compel Google to
share the contents of the Motley Collective’s account, but she admitted that she thought she was
“one or two arrests away” from obtaining the warrant. R. at 46. The evidentiary standard
required for a court to issue an SCA warrant may be lower than the probable cause the police
generally need to secure a search warrant. See 18 U.S.C. § 2703(d) (2018) (requiring the
government to offer “specific and articulable facts showing that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that the contents of a wire or electronic communication . . . are relevant and material to
an ongoing criminal investigation”). As discussed below, following the Supreme Court’s decision
in Carpenter v. United States, 138 S. Ct. 2206 (2018), there are reasons to think that a lower
evidentiary standard in this context is unconstitutional. But even accepting this lowered

57

standard for the sake of argument, the record does not support the conclusion that the police had
the “specific and articulable facts” to make a showing that the Motley Collective email account
was material to a criminal investigation. Indeed, the officer in charge of the investigation did not
even believe the Government would inevitably secure an SCA warrant, as she herself thought she
still had to arrest one or two more people before she could get a warrant. R. at 46. The district
court’s finding that the Government would have inevitably obtained these photos from Google,
therefore, is clearly erroneous and should be set aside.
B.​

The Third-Party Doctrine Does Not Make Discovery of These Photographs
Inevitable.

Finally, the district court suggested that, under the third-party doctrine, the Government
might have obtained these photographs by lawfully compelling production from a Motley
Collective member or Google—even without a warrant or cooperation. That would be a
significant expansion of the third-party doctrine and is strongly contravened by the Supreme
Court’s latest ruling on digital privacy in Carpenter. What is more, even if this Court were to
reach an alternative conclusion on the scope of the third-party doctrine and find that it did apply
to emails, the Government still bears the burden of showing that it would have inevitably sought
and obtained these photographs absent the unlawful search of Mr. Clarkson’s apartment. It has
failed to make that showing.
1.​

The Third-Party Doctrine Does Not Allow the Police to Obtain Contents
of Emails Without a Warrant Supported by Some Showing of Cause.

The third-party doctrine holds that an individual does not have a Fourth Amendment right
of privacy to certain information—such as bank statements, phone logs, or business records—
shared with third parties. See Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735, 745–46 (1979) (finding that there
is no reasonable expectation of privacy to the phone numbers one has dialed); United States v.

58

Miller, 425 U.S. 435, 442 (1976) (finding that there is no reasonable expectation of privacy to
certain financial information one has shared with one’s bank). But this doctrine does not displace
the Supreme Court’s other Fourth Amendment jurisprudence, and the “touchstone” of Fourth
Amendment doctrine remains “whether a person has a ‘constitutionally protected reasonable
expectation of privacy.’” Patel v. City of Montclair, 798 F.3d 895, 898 (9th Cir. 2015) (quoting
Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347, 360 (1967)). Citing its “reasonable expectation of privacy”
jurisprudence, the Supreme Court recently refused to extend the third-party doctrine to cell- phone
location data in Carpenter and held that the SCA violated the Fourth Amendment insofar as it
allowed law enforcement official to obtain cell-phone location records from service providers
with anything less than a showing of probable cause. Carpenter, 138 S. Ct. at 2219–21 (“There is
a world of difference between the limited types of personal information addressed in Smith and
Miller and the exhaustive chronicle of location information casually collected by wireless carriers
today.”). Although that case dealt only with location metadata and not with the content of any
digital communication, even the Carpenter dissenters—who would have held that law
enforcement could subpoena metadata without a probable cause showing—made clear that they
thought a higher standard should apply to content material. Id. at 2230 (Kennedy, J., dissenting)
(noting that the third-party doctrine “may not apply when the Government obtains the
modern-day equivalent of an individual’s own ‘papers’ or ‘effects,’ even when those papers or
effects are held by a third party”). As an example of what type of content material they had in
mind, the Carpenter dissenters cited favorably to United States v. Warshak, where the Sixth
Circuit held “that a subscriber enjoys a reasonable expectation of privacy in the contents of emails
that are stored with, or sent or received through, a commercial ISP.” 631 F.3d 266, 283– 88 (6th
Cir. 2010); see also Carpenter, 138 S. Ct. at 2230 (Kennedy, J., dissenting).

59

This Court and other circuit courts that have recently taken up the question of what
privacy rights attach to the content of digitally stored communications have generally held that
such content is worthy of Fourth Amendment protection. See, e.g., In re Grand Jury Subpoena,
828 F.3d 1083, 1086 (9th Cir. 2016) (squashing a subpoena on the grounds that a former
government employee “had a reasonable expectation of privacy in much of his personal email”);
Vista Mktg., LLC v. Burkett, 812 F.3d 954, 969 (11th Cir. 2016) (“The legislative history of [the
SCA] suggests (and we agree) that the Fourth Amendment demands that the government
demonstrate probable cause both to intercept real-time wire, oral, and electronic communications
and to review the content of stored electronic communications.”); United States v. Hamilton, 701
F.3d 404, 408 (4th Cir. 2012) (“[E]mail has become the modern stenographer. . . . [E]mails today,
in common experience, are confidential.” (internal quotation marks omitted)); Warshak, 631 F.3d
at 288; United States v. Zavala, 541 F.3d 562, 577 (5th Cir. 2008) (“[C]ell phones contain a
wealth of private information, including emails [and] text messages . . . . [The defendant] had a
reasonable expectation of privacy regarding this information.”).
The fact that the email at issue in this case was a draft contained in a shared account is a
distinction without a difference. There is no functional difference between sending an email to a
small group of close acquaintances and allowing those same close acquaintances access to a
password-protected account where they can view that message. If anything, the fact that the
Motley Collective was especially concerned about keeping its communications secret and
organized its messaging system to achieve that objective, R. at 56–57, suggests that their emails
are more worthy of Fourth Amendment protection. The Supreme Court’s Fourth Amendment
jurisprudence requires a two-part inquiry: First, whether the individual has “manifested a
subjective expectation of privacy,” and second, whether society is “willing to recognize that

60

expectation as reasonable.” California v. Ciraolo, 476 U.S. 207, 211 (1986). Given their efforts
to keep their communications secret, it is eminently clear that Mr. Clarkson and the Motley
Collective have evinced a strong subjective expectation of privacy to their emails. And the
objective prong of the analysis should be unaffected by whether this was a draft email in an
account shared by close colleagues or a conventional email sent to those same colleagues.
The law is far from settled on digital-communication privacy. But the clear majority of
American courts to address the topic in recent years have held that the contents of email
communication are worthy of Fourth Amendment protection. An alternative holding would grant
law enforcement officials sweeping new power to intrude into the intimate, private lives of
American citizens. Given the “seismic shifts in digital technology,” individuals in the modern
world increasingly rely on digital technology and communication platforms to conduct their
business; interact with acquaintances, friends, family members, and romantic partners; and
organize most facets of their daily lives. See Carpenter, 138 S. Ct. at 2219. Americans would no
doubt be dismayed—and surprised—if a court were to hold that any law enforcement agency
could access any of their personal digital communications stored with a third party without any
showing of cause. The district court is wrong, both as a matter of law and taking into account the
significant policy considerations at stake, to hold that Mr. Clarkson did not have a reasonable
expectation of privacy to the draft email that the officers saw on his computer screen.
2.​

Even if the Third-Party Doctrine Does Apply to Emails, the Government
Has Not Shown that It Would Have Inevitably Obtained These
Photographs Absent the Unlawful Search.

Even assuming, for the sake of argument, that the police could issue a subpoena, without
a showing of cause, to obtain the contents of emails in a general case, they still cannot use the
third-party doctrine to support their inevitable discovery claim in this case. The purpose of the
inevitable discovery doctrine is to “put the police in the same position that they would have been
61

in had no illegal behavior occurred.” Washington, 700 F. App’x at 721. Relying on the third- party
doctrine, the Government is claiming that they could simply subpoena Google for this draft email.
But they have failed to show that, if not for the illegal search, they would in fact be issuing such a
subpoena. Indeed, without this unlawful search, they would have had no way of knowing that this
particular draft email even existed. Allowing the Government to issue this subpoena, only having
discovered through an illegal search that there was anything worth subpoenaing, would violate the
very core of the inevitable discovery doctrine—“that the fact or likelihood that makes the
discovery inevitable arise from circumstances other than those disclosed by the illegal search
itself.” Boatwright, 822 F.2d at 864–65.
Nor can the Government credibly claim that it would have issued a sweeping subpoena for
all the draft emails in the Motley Collective’s account even without the illegal search. Indeed, Lt.
Mink said as much when she explained that the only two avenues the Government was exploring
to obtain the contents of the Motley Collective’s account were to coerce the cooperation of a
member of the Motley Collective or to secure an SCA warrant against Google.
R. at 46–48. Thus, the question of whether the Government has the power under the third-party
doctrine to issue a sweeping subpoena to obtain the entire contents of an email account is beside
the point. The fact is, the Government has not shown that it inevitably would have done so absent
the illegal search. And it has not shown, if it had issued such a subpoena, that this draft email
would even have still existed. Therefore, even assuming that the third-party doctrine would in
theory grant the Government the broad power to subpoena Google for a draft email, these
photographs are still not admissible under the inevitable discovery exception.

62

III.​

THE CHALK ART DID NOT “DAMAGE” PROPERTY WITHIN THE
MEANING OF 40 U.S.C. § 1316(b).
This Court reviews challenges to the sufficiency of the evidence, including questions of

statutory interpretation, de novo. See United States v. Garcia, 768 F.3d 822, 827 (9th Cir. 2014).
The “damage” provision of 40 U.S.C. § 1316 prohibits willfully “destroying or damaging
property.” 40 U.S.C. § 1316(b) (2018). The district court erred in holding that this “damage”
provision should be construed broadly to include “defacement of federal government property”
and that “chalking” can constitute such “defacement.” R. at 75. The district court’s reading of
§ 1316(b) ignores the plain meaning of “damaging,” which courts have repeatedly recognized
does not include conduct that merely “defaces” property––and specifically does not include
drawing with chalk. The district court also ignored the legislative history of § 1316(b), which
reveals that Congress deliberately excluded the term “defacing” from the statute. Finally, the
district court’s unnecessarily broad reading of § 1316(b) runs afoul of the rule of lenity, which
states that ambiguous criminal statutes should be construed in favor of the defendant. This Court
should therefore reverse the district court’s erroneous reading of § 1316(b) and hold that
“damaging” under § 1316(b) does not include drawing chalk art on a sidewalk.
A.​

The Plain Meaning of “Damaging” Does Not Include Drawing on the
Sidewalk with Chalk.

When examining the meaning of statutory terms, this Court “should usually give words
their plain, natural, ordinary and commonly understood meanings.” United States v. Romo-Romo,
246 F.3d 1272, 1275 (9th Cir. 2001). To determine the meaning of a term that has not been
defined in the statute, this Court frequently “commence[s] with the plain and common meaning of
the word derived from dictionary definitions.” United States v. Laursen, 847 F.3d 1026, 1032 (9th
Cir. 2017). Furthermore, if the language in a statute is clear, this Court “‘look[s] no further than
that language in determining the statute’s meaning.’” Romo-Romo, F.3d at 1275 (quoting
63

Or. Nat. Res. Council, Inc. v. Kantor, 99 F.3d 334, 399 (9th Cir. 1996)).
Section 1316 does not define the term “damaging” in § 1316(b). Looking to dictionary
definitions for the plain meaning of the term, the Oxford English Dictionary defines the verb
“damage” as “to hurt, harm, injure; now commonly to injure (a thing) so as to lessen or destroy
its value.” Damage, OED Online (2019), http://www.oed.com/oed2/00057264 (last visited Mar.
22, 2019). Similarly, Black’s Law Dictionary defines “damage” as “[l]oss or injury to person or
property; esp., physical harm that is done to something.” Damage, Black’s Law Dictionary (10th
ed. 2014). These definitions reveal that “damaging,” as the term is ordinarily understood, requires
causing some sort of lasting harm, injury, or loss of value.
Drawing with chalk on a sidewalk therefore cannot be understood as “damaging” the
sidewalk, because it causes no harm to the sidewalk reducing the sidewalk’s value. Carving one’s
initials into the cement or even spray painting it with indelible paint could perhaps qualify as
“damaging” the sidewalk. These activities actually leave a lasting mark and, at the very least,
require chemicals to remove that could eat away at the sidewalk’s surface. By contrast, chalk
drawings can be easily washed away with water. Indeed, as Officer Bradwell testified, that is
exactly what the Constance City Police Department has done to remove sidewalk chalk drawings
in the past: they have washed them down with a hose. R. at 42. Because chalk drawings can be so
easily removed without leaving any trace, and because the government has presented no evidence
that chalk drawings cause any “[l]oss or injury to . . . property,” drawing on a sidewalk with chalk
does not “damage” a sidewalk as that term is ordinarily used. Damage, Black’s Law Dictionary
(10th ed. 2014).
Court opinions construing statutes and regulations similar to § 1316(b) confirm this
ordinary meaning of the term “damage.” While no courts have interpreted § 1316(b) in its

64

current form, in Mackinney v. Nielsen, this Court held that chalk drawings did not “damage” a
sidewalk under a California criminal vandalism law with comparable language to § 1316(b).
Mackinney v. Nielsen, 69 F.3d 1002, 1005 (9th Cir. 1995). Like Mr. Clarkson, the defendant in
Mackinney was arrested for allegedly drawing on a sidewalk with chalk. Id. at 1004. The statute at
issue in Mackinney made it illegal to “deface with paint or any other liquid, . . . damage or . . .
destroy any real or personal property that is not one’s own.” Id. at 1005 (internal quotation marks
omitted). Because chalk is not a “paint or other liquid,” the Mackinney court held that it was not
reasonable to arrest the defendant under the “defacement” provision. Id. More importantly for Mr.
Clarkson’s case, however, the Mackinney court also held that it was unreasonable to arrest the
defendant under the “damage” provision of the California law, because “[n]o reasonable person
could think that writing with chalk would damage a sidewalk.” Id.
Despite Mackinney’s clear holding that the term “damage” does not include chalk
drawings, the district court reasoned that “changes to California vandalism law since Mackinney”
justify a different reading of § 1316(b). R. at 75. On the contrary, cases interpreting the revised
version of the California vandalism law in Mackinney actually reaffirm Mackinney’s interpretation
of the term “damage.” See, e.g., Chaker v. Adams, No. 10-CV-2599, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS
190460, at *22–23 (S.D. Cal. Aug. 3, 2012) (citing Mackinney for the proposition that “[t]he
damage––or lack thereof––caused by chalk on a sidewalk is readily apparent”); In re Jacob E.,
No. F044734, 2004 WL 2601706, at *2 (Cal. Ct. App. Nov. 16, 2004) (citing Mackinney to
support the holding that “[p]owder on the floor and walls of [a bathroom], which was later
cleaned up, does not constitute damage”). While it is true that the “defacement” provision of the
vandalism law in Mackinney was amended after that case, the “damage” provision has remained
unchanged. See Cal. Penal Code § 594 (West 2011); In re Nicholas Y.,

65

102 Cal. Rptr. 2d 511, 513 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000). This expansion of the defacement provision
could suggest that new activities are punishable as “defacement” under California law, but this
has no bearing on the plain meaning of “damaging” in § 1316(b). Therefore, Mackinney’s
observation that “[n]o reasonable person could think that writing with chalk would damage a
sidewalk” still holds true. Mackinney, 69 F.3d at 1005.
In addition to Mackinney’s interpretation of the California analogue to § 1316(b), the
regulation that Congress codified as § 1316(b), 41 C.F.R. § 102–74.380, has also been
interpreted to permit chalk drawings like the one at issue in this case. This is perhaps even more
persuasive evidence that chalk cannot “damage” property under § 1316(b), because 41 C.F.R.
§ 102–74.380 contained exactly the same language as §1316(b). See 41 C.F.R. § 102–74.380
(2012) (prohibiting “destroying or damaging property”); 40 U.S.C. § 1316 (2018) (same).
In United States v. Murtari, the defendant, like Mr. Clarkson, was arrested for allegedly
writing political messages on a sidewalk outside a federal plaza in chalk. United States v.
Murtari, No. 5:07-CR-387, 2007 WL 3046746, at *1–2 (N.D.N.Y. Oct. 16, 2007). Also like Mr.
Clarkson, the defendant in Murtari was charged with “damaging” property with his chalk
drawings, in violation of 41 C.F.R. § 102–74.380(b), the regulatory predecessor to § 1316(b). Id.
at *2. And just like the government in this case, the government in Murtari argued that the
“damage” provision of the regulation should be construed broadly to encompass “defacement,”
and that chalk drawings were therefore prohibited under the regulatory predecessor to § 1316(b).
Id. Unlike the district court in this case, however, the district court in Murtari held that a mere
chalk drawing does not “damage” property. Id. at *5. Importantly, the Murtari court rejected the
government’s argument that “damaging” property includes mere “defacing.” Id. Rather, the court
held that “damaging” property requires “injury or harm to property that decreases its value or

66

involves loss of efficiency,” and that the defendant’s chalk drawings did not meet that definition.
Id. Murtari’s interpretation of the regulatory predecessor to § 1316(b)––as applied to remarkably
similar facts to the facts in this case––therefore reinforces that the plain meaning of “damaging”
in § 1316(b) does not include drawing on the sidewalk with chalk.
Moreover, in United States v. Raile, another court embraced Murtari’s interpretation of the
regulatory predecessor to § 1316(b). United States v. Raile, No. 13-PO-2190 WJ, 2014 WL
12796834, at *5 (D.N.M. Mar. 14, 2014). In Raile, the court upheld the defendant’s conviction
under 41 C.F.R. § 102–74.380(b) for “damaging” property by spray painting the glass front doors
of a federal courthouse. Id. at *4–5. The defendant argued that Murtari was controlling and that
his conduct merely “defaced” the courthouse, rather than “damaging” it. Id. The Raile court
accepted Murtari’s definition of “damaging” as conduct that involves “injury or harm to property
that decreases its value or involves loss of efficiency.” Id. at *5. But the court distinguished
Murtari because of the differences between spray paint and chalk drawings. Id. First, the spray
paint was under a portico, so it was protected from rain and the elements. Id. Second, the spray
paint in Raile was weather-proof, meaning that “[u]nlike a food item or chalk that might just wash
away with water, specialized solutions are required to clean the specific paint that was used.” Id.
at *5 n.8. Finally, the spray paint obstructed the view of the court security officers, such that it
actually interfered with regular courthouse operations. Id. at *5. None of these factors are present
in Mr. Clarkson’s case, just as they were not present in Murtari. As discussed above, chalk will
fade away on its own, and it does not require a “specialized solution[]” to clean up that might
itself erode the surface of the cement. Thus, by embracing Murtari’s definition of “damaging” and
distinguishing chalk from permanent spray paint, Raile further confirms that the plain meaning of
“damaging” does not include chalk art.

67

B.​

The Legislative History of § 1316(b) Shows that Congress Did Not Intend to
Criminalize Conduct that Merely “Defaces” Property.

Although the plain meaning of § 1316(b) is unambiguous, and therefore an inquiry into
legislative intent is unnecessary, the legislative history of § 1316 also makes clear that
“damaging” should not be interpreted to include chalk drawings. “When the statute is ambiguous
or the statutory language does not resolve an interpretive issue, [this Court’s] approach to
statutory interpretation is to look to legislative history.” Oregon v. Ashcroft, 368 F.3d 1118,
1127–28 (9th Cir. 2004) (citation omitted). In particular, “Congress’s earlier express rejection of
certain statutory language counsels strongly against interpreting the statute in a manner consistent
with the rejected language.” Slaven v. BP America, Inc., 973 F.2d 1468, 1474 (9th Cir. 1992); see
also Gulf Oil Corp. v. Copp Paving Co., Inc., 419 U.S. 186, 200 (1974) (holding that the deletion
of a provision from a bill “strongly militates against a judgment that Congress intended a result
that it expressly declined to enact”).
In the process of enacting 40 U.S.C. § 1316, the House Judiciary Committee deleted the
term “defacing” from the original draft of § 1316(b). See H.R. Rep. No. 115–479 (2017); R. at
7–8. While the original bill prohibited “[w]illfully defacing, destroying or damaging property,”
the bill as enacted only prohibits “[w]illfully destroying or damaging property.” H.R. 1930,
115th Cong. (as referred to H. Comm. on Judiciary, Sept. 21, 2017) (emphasis added); H.R.
1930, 115th Cong. (as enacted, Oct. 26, 2017); R. at 7, 11. The district court therefore ignored
Congress’s deliberate deletion of the term “defacing” by interpreting the word “damaging” to
also mean “defacing.” See R. at 75. If Congress had intended § 1316(b) to be interpreted so
broadly, the original text of the bill shows that Congress knew how to include such language.
Moreover, several federal statutes related to § 1316 make distinctions between conduct that
“damages” property and conduct that merely “defaces” it. See, e.g., 18 U.S.C. § 247 (2018)

68

(making it a felony to “intentionally deface[], damage[], or destroy[] any religious real property,
because of the religious character of that property”); 16 U.S.C. § 470aaa-5 (2018) (making it a
felony to “damage . . . or deface” any “paleontological resources located on Federal land”); 16
U.S.C. § 470ee (2018) (making it a crime to “damage . . . or deface” any “archeological resource
located on public lands or Indian lands”). These related statutes therefore reinforce that
“defacing” and “damaging” have distinct meanings, and that Congress did not intend to subsume
“defacing” into the definition of “damaging” when it removed that term from § 1316(b).
The legislative history also does not suggest that Congress was concerned about
redundancy or otherwise believed that the definition of “damaging” included “defacing.” On the
contrary, the House Report accompanying the bill enacting § 1316 recognized that “[t]he language
in this bill, as amended, is identical to 41 C.F.R. § 102–74.380,” and that “the provisions herein
do not change the existing law[.]” H.R. Rep. No. 115–479 (2017); R. at 8. At the time of
enactment, as discussed above, the cases interpreting 41 C.F.C. § 102–74.380 drew a clear
distinction between conduct that “damages” property, thereby falling within the scope of the
regulation, and conduct that merely “defaces” property. See Raile, 2014 WL 12796834, at *4;
Murtari, 2007 WL 3046746, at *5. By clarifying that § 1316 was not intended to “change the
existing law,” the House Report reinforces that Congress did not intend to supersede these
decisions by incorporating “defacing” into the definition of “damaging” in § 1316(b). Cf. United
States v. Pepe, 895 F.3d 679, 692 (9th Cir. 2018) (recognizing that this Court “presume[s] that
Congress had knowledge of the interpretation given to [an] incorporated law, as least insofar as it
affects the new statute”) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
To arrive at its decision that drawing on a sidewalk with chalk “damages” property within
the meaning of § 1316(b), the district court relied on the conclusion “that the ‘damage’ provision

69

should be construed to include a prohibition on defacement of government property.” R. at 75.
By contrast, the earlier draft of § 1316(b), the House Report accompanying the enacted bill, and
similar federal statutes all reveal that Congress explicitly rejected such a broad interpretation of
§ 1316(b). In light of this legislative history, this Court should reverse the district court’s
erroneous interpretation of § 1316(b).
C.​

Even if the Meaning of “Damaging” Is Ambiguous, the Rule of Lenity
Requires § 1316(b) to Be Construed in Favor of Mr. Clarkson.

Even if this Court finds that the meaning of “damaging” in § 1316(b) is ambiguous after
considering its ordinary meaning, the interpretation courts have previously given the term, and the
clear legislative history behind § 1316(b), this Court should still reverse the district court’s overly
broad interpretation of the statute under the rule of lenity. “The longstanding rule of lenity
requires [courts] to resolve any ambiguity in the scope of a criminal statute in favor of the
defendant.” United States v. Miranda-Lopez, 532 F.3d 1034, 1040 (9th Cir. 2008) (citation and
internal quotation marks omitted). The rule is grounded in considerations of notice, ensuring that
criminal laws are “sufficiently clear, so that individuals do not accidentally run afoul of them and
courts do not impose prohibitions greater than the legislature intended.” Pacheco-Camacho v.
Hood, 272 F.3d 1266, 1271 (9th Cir. 2001). As a result, where a criminal statute’s text and history
reveal more than one reasonable reading, courts should not criminalize a defendant’s conduct
unless the government’s interpretation of the statute is “unambiguously correct.” United States v.
Cabaccang, 332 F.3d 622, 635 (9th Cir. 2003) (en banc) (citation omitted) (emphasis in original).
This Court has applied the rule of lenity to statutes like § 1316 that are ambiguous about
whether they penalize seemingly innocent conduct on government property. In United States v.
Millis, for example, the court considered the defendant’s conviction under a regulation

70

prohibiting “littering, disposing, or dumping in any manner [] garbage . . . within any national
wildlife refuge.” United States v. Millis, 621 F.3d 914, 916 (9th Cir. 2010). The defendant in
Millis had been convicted for leaving gallon-sized plastic bottles of water on wildlife refuge
trails to help alleviate exposure deaths among undocumented immigrants crossing into the
United States. Id. at 914. The defendant challenged his conviction on the grounds that the term
“garbage” in the regulation did not unambiguously include bottles of purified water. Id. at 916.
The court agreed, holding that in light of “the common meaning of the term ‘garbage,’ coupled
with the regulatory structure,” the anti-littering provision “was sufficiently ambiguous in this
context that the rule of lenity should apply.” Id. at 918.
Like in Millis, this Court should apply the rule of lenity and reverse Mr. Clarkson’s
conviction because “damaging” property does not unambiguously include drawing on a sidewalk
with chalk. Indeed, the district court’s interpretation of § 1316(b) would criminalize a whole host
of seemingly innocent conduct. Would a kindergarten teacher “damage” property if he drew a
chalk hopscotch court on the sidewalk after taking his students on a field trip to the courthouse?
Under the district court’s reading of § 1316(b), he would. If the exact same drawing in this case
were made on cellophane and taped to the sidewalk with easily removable tape, would that
“damage” the sidewalk? Under the district court’s reading, it would seem so. This is not to say
that the government couldn’t criminalize such behavior under a more specifically worded statute.
But under the district court’s unreasonably broad reading of § 1316(b), it is unclear whether such
activities would be criminal. Combined with the plain meaning of “damaging” and the legislative
history of § 1316(b), these examples show that “damaging” does not “unambiguously” include
easily removable markings that leave nothing behind when they are gone. Under the rule of lenity,
this Court should therefore construe § 1316(b) in favor of Mr. Clarkson.

71

IV.​

AS APPLIED TO THE CHALK ART IN THIS CASE, 40 U.S.C. § 1316(b) IS
UNCONSTITUTIONAL UNDER THE FIRST AMENDMENT.
This Court reviews a district court’s legal determinations, including constitutional rulings,

de novo. See Berry v. Dep’t of Soc. Servs., 447 F.3d 642, 648 (9th Cir. 2006). “Where, as here, the
key issues aris[e] under the First Amendment,” this Court also “conducts an independent review
of the facts.” Berger v. City of Seattle, 569 F.3d 1029, 1035 (9th Cir. 2009) (en banc) (citation and
internal quotation marks omitted).
The parties have stipulated that the chalk drawing in this case was made in a traditional
public forum: the sidewalk of the federal plaza in downtown Constance City. See R. at 4. This
Court has previously deemed it a “bedrock principle” that First Amendment protections “are
nowhere stronger than in streets and parks, both categorized for First Amendment purposes as
traditional public fora.” Berger, 569 F.3d at 1035–36. This is because traditional public fora
“have immemorially been held in trust for the use of the public and, time out of mind, have been
used for purposes of assembly, communicating thoughts between citizens, and discussing public
questions.” Grossman v. City of Portland, 33 F.3d 1200, 1204–05 (9th Cir. 1994) (quoting Hague
v. CIO, 307 U.S. 496, 515 (1939)). The government therefore bears the burden of justifying any
regulation of expressive activity in a traditional public forum. See Perry Educ.
Ass’n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass’n, 460 U.S. 37, 45 (1983).
Before the district court, the government did not contest that chalk art is a form of
expressive speech protected by the First Amendment. This Court has previously held that various
types of visual art are expressive speech protected under the First Amendment, including
paintings sold by artists on the street, tattoos, and even balloon art. See Anderson v. City of
Hermosa Beach, 621 F.3d 1051, 1060 (9th Cir. 2010) (tattoos); Berger, 569 F.3d at 1034–35
(balloon art); White v. City of Sparks, 500 F.3d 953, 957 (9th Cir. 2007) (street paintings). And

72

the only other court of appeals to address the issue with reference to political chalk art has held
that “the creation of words or images through chalk is an expressive act.” Mahoney v. Doe, 642
F.3d 1112, 1116 (D.C. Cir. 2011). In light of these other cases recognizing similar visual art as
expressive, the chalk art at issue in this case––which made a political statement by depicting
prescription drugs underlined by the phrase “prosecutorial discretion,” R. at 64––is a form of
expressive speech warranting First Amendment protection.
Instead of holding that chalk drawings are non-protected speech, the district court held
that § 1316(b) as applied to the chalk drawing in this case was a reasonable time, place, or
manner restriction on speech as permitted under the First Amendment. R. at 76. Despite the
broad protections afforded to expressive activity in a traditional public forum, the First
Amendment allows reasonable time, place, or manner restrictions on speech, so long as a
particular restriction meets three criteria: (1) it must be content-neutral and refrain from
discriminating based on the viewpoint of the speaker; (2) “it must be ‘narrowly tailored to serve
a significant government interest’”; and (3) “it must ‘leave open ample alternative channels for
communication of the information.’” Berger, 569 F.3d at 1036 (quoting Ward v. Rock Against
Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 791 (1989)). As demonstrated in the following sections, the “damage”
provision of § 1316(b) as applied to the chalk art in this case fails to meet any of these three
criteria. Mr. Clarkson’s conviction is therefore unconstitutional under the First Amendment.
A.​

As Applied to the Chalk Art in this Case, the Government Impermissibly
Used § 1316(b) to Prohibit Speech Based on Its Viewpoint.

On its face, § 1316(b) appears to be content-neutral. Without referencing the nature or
content of a type of expression, it prohibits all conduct that willfully “damag[es] or destroy[s]”
property. 40 U.S.C. § 1316(b) (2018). Nevertheless, as applied to the chalk art in this case, the
government used § 1316(b) in a manner that discriminated against the viewpoint expressed in the

73

chalk drawing, which is unconstitutional under the First Amendment.
As this Court has made clear, “discriminatory enforcement of a speech restriction
amount[ing] to viewpoint discrimination” violates the First Amendment. Menotti v. City of
Seattle, 409 F.3d 1113, 1146 (9th Cir. 2005) (citation omitted). The rationale behind this
prohibition on viewpoint discrimination in a public forum is that the government “may not grant
the use of a forum to people whose views it finds acceptable, but deny use to those wishing to
express less favored or more controversial views.” Id. at 1128–29 (citation omitted). “Courts
must be willing to entertain the possibility that content-neutral enactments are enforced in a
content-discriminatory manner. If they were not, the First Amendment’s guarantees would risk
becoming an empty formality.” Hoye v. City of Oakland, 653 F.3d 835, 854 (9th Cir. 2011).
In prosecuting Mr. Clarkson under § 1316(d), the government discriminated based upon
the viewpoint expressed in the federal plaza chalk art. Mayor Chapman and Lt. Mink’s
unwavering focus on the Motley Collective and Streetwise reveals that they were intent on
eliminating the political street art around Constance City. The City even set up a task force
specially dedicated to the Motley Collective R. at 46. And in early 2018, the mayor specially set
her sights on Streetwise, in part because “his chalk drawings apparently disrupt the ‘look’ of the
federal plaza.” R. at 42 (testimony of Officer Bradwell).
The record makes clear that the “look” of the federal plaza the government wished to
preserve was not one free of all markings or displays altogether. Indeed, the government has
previously allowed veterans’ groups to place flags around the perimeter of the plaza and has
allowed religious groups to make elaborate Rangoli art on the plaza. See R. at 61. Under the
district court’s broad reading of § 1316(b), these permitted activities would have similarly
“damaged” the plaza. It therefore appears that the only “look” of the federal plaza that bothers

74

the government is one that includes Streetwise’s politically provocative chalk art. At trial, it was
revealed that the chalk drawing of prescription drugs on the plaza appeared while a consolidated
opioid case was being tried in the federal courthouse. R. at 55. Regardless of the message
Streetwise was trying to convey, it contained no threats, foul language, or obscenity. Id. It merely
contained the words “prosecutorial discretion,” suggesting that it was somehow critical of the
government’s handling of the opioid case. Id. This sort of anti-government message was typical of
Streetwise’s previous work. See R. at 57–58. The government’s decision to prosecute this
particular piece of chalk art, and not previous displays that also affected the “look” of the plaza,
therefore strongly indicates a discriminatory application of § 1316(b).
At the suppression hearing, Officer Bradwell testified that the pressure to arrest Streetwise
was also motivated by the fact that Streetwise’s art draws attention from visitors to the plaza,
which “creates a hazard for pedestrians.” R. at 42. As a preliminary matter, it seems unlikely that
pedestrians stopping to look at art somehow creates a “hazard” for others walking around the
plaza. But Officer Bradwell’s testimony also reveals the pretextual reasoning behind prosecuting
Mr. Clarkson, because the government regularly allows large groups to congregate in and around
the federal plaza. For example, Mr. Clarkson testified that he once witnessed a religious event in
the plaza involving several hundred people, and that people regularly protested in front of the
courthouse. R. at 61. These other events created just as much of a “hazard for pedestrians” as the
chalk art in this case, further demonstrating the government’s discriminatory use of § 1316(b).
The facts in this case bear a striking resemblance to another case in the Ninth Circuit
involving discriminatory prosecutions of people using chalk to criticize the government. In
Ballentine v. Las Vegas Metro. Police Dept., police arrested a group of activists under a Nevada

75

anti-graffiti statute because they had allegedly used chalk to write messages critical of the police
department on the sidewalk in front of the police headquarters and a courthouse. No. 2:14–cv–
01584–APG–GWF, 2015 WL 2164145, at *1 (D. Nev. Apr. 27, 2015). Like Mr. Clarkson, the
activists in Ballentine were members of an activist collective that had been protesting the
government for several years. Id. Like Streetwise, their preferred medium was chalk, and they
had made a series of “chalking protests” leading up to their arrest not unlike Streetwise’s
drawings in the federal plaza. Id. at *1–2. And also similar to this case, the activists claimed that
the police department did not arrest other people for writing on sidewalks––so long as they did
not criticize the police department. Id. at *2. Under these facts, the court held that the activists
had adequately alleged that the graffiti statute had been selectively enforced against them in
1

violation of the First Amendment. Id. at *4.

Ballentine shows that even facially neutral laws violate the First Amendment when they
are used to limit expression in a public forum based on the viewpoint of the speaker. See also
Osmar v. City of Orlando, No. 6:12–cv–185–Orl–DAB, 2012 WL 1252684, at *4–6 (M.D. Fla.
Apr. 13, 2012) (holding, like Ballentine, that a city’s selective enforcement of an anti-graffiti
ordinance against only certain chalk drawings on a public plaza violated the First Amendment).
Given the substantial evidence in the record that the chalk art in this case was prohibited on the
basis of its message, while other similar displays in the plaza have been allowed, this Court
should find § 1316(b) unconstitutional as applied to the chalk art in this case.

1

Following discovery, the court in Ballentine granted summary judgment in favor of the police
defendants, but only because the activists failed to produce evidence of similarly situated individuals
who had not been prosecuted under the anti-graffiti statute. See Ballentine v. Las Vegas Metro. Police
Dept., No. 2:14–cv–01584–APG–GWF, 2017 WL 3610609, at *5 (D. Nev. Aug. 21, 2017). By contrast,
in Mr. Clarkson’s case, there is ample evidence in the record that other individuals who had used the
federal plaza in a similar manner to Mr. Clarkson were not charged under § 1316(b). See R. at 61.
76

B.​

As Applied to the Chalk Art in this Case, § 1316(b) Is Not Narrowly Tailored to
Further Government Interests in Protecting Property, Promoting the Aesthetics of
the Plaza, or Protecting Passersby.

Before the district court, the government argued that applying § 1316(b) to prohibit chalk
art was necessary to further three significant government interests: (1) promoting the aesthetic
appeal of the federal courthouse; (2) preventing damage to public property; and (3) minimizing
hazardous distractions to motorists and pedestrians. R. at 72. As a preliminary matter, the district
court’s conclusion that § 1316(b) was narrowly tailored because it prevented damage to public
property is circular: chalk art only “damages” public property if one adopts the district court’s
unreasonably broad definition of “damaging,” which includes “defacement of federal government
property.” R. at 75–76. Such an approach would impermissibly allow the government to use the
effect of the statute to justify its constitutionality. See Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of the
N.Y. State Crime Victims Bd., 502 U.S. 105, 120 (1991) (explaining that “this sort of circular
defense can sidestep judicial review of almost any statute, because it makes all statutes look
narrowly tailored”).
Thus, because chalk can be easily washed off and leaves no residue behind, only two of
the government’s significant interests could be served by applying § 1316(b) to chalk art: (1)
promoting the aesthetic appeal of the plaza; and (2) protecting passersby. Mr. Clarkson does not
dispute that that both of these are significant government interests. See, e.g., Members of City
Council of Los Angeles v. Taxpayers for Vincent, 466 U.S. 789, 805 (1984) (holding that aesthetic
values can be significant interests); Grossman, 33 F.3d 1206 (same, as to public safety). Instead,
he argues that § 1316(b) as applied to the chalk art in this case is not narrowly tailored to advance
these government interests.
A narrowly tailored time, place, or manner regulation “need not be the least restrictive
means” of furthering a significant government interest, but the regulation “may not[] burden
77

substantially more speech than necessary to achieve a scheme’s important goals.” Santa Monica
Food Not Bombs v. City of Santa Monica, 450 F.3d 1022, 1038 (9th Cir. 2006). Moreover, a
statute is not narrowly tailored when it is significantly underinclusive––that is, when it fails to
regulate large swaths of conduct that also undermine the government’s purported interests. See
Berger, 569 F.3d at 1043. This is because “[u]nderinclusiveness can raise doubts about whether
the government is in fact pursuing the interest it invokes, rather than disfavoring a particular
speaker or viewpoint.” Brown v. Entm’t Merchs. Ass’n, 564 U.S. 786, 802 (2011) (citing City of
Ladue v. Gilleo, 512 U.S. 43, 51 (1994)).
As applied to the chalk art in this case, § 1316(b) is not narrowly tailored to promoting the
aesthetic appearance of the federal plaza, because the plaza is regularly filled with other sorts of
displays. The government has previously allowed veterans’ groups to line the plaza with flags and
has allowed religious organizations to make rice Rangoli art on the plaza sidewalk––the groups
even left some rice behind after they left. See R. at 61. Furthermore, a restaurant next to the
courthouse commissioned an elaborate chalk art drawing on the sidewalk in front of the restaurant
just a few months before the chalk art at issue in this case. See R. at 58. Thus, it does not further
any government interest in protecting the “aesthetic” of the federal plaza to use
§ 1316(b) to prohibit chalk art drawings on a patch of sidewalk that (1) has contained other
displays in the past, and (2) is right next to another patch of sidewalk that recently displayed
even more extensive chalk drawings.
Where courts have upheld speech restrictions as narrowly tailored to promoting aesthetic
interests, those restrictions have applied uniformly and have not left significant amounts of
aesthetically displeasing material unregulated. In Taxpayers for Vincent, for example, the Los
Angeles ordinance at issue prohibited affixing “any hand-bill or sign to or upon any sidewalk,

78

crosswalk, curb, curbstone, street lamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, electric
light or power or telephone or telegraph or trolley wire pole, . . . street sign or traffic sign.” 466
U.S. at 791 n.1. The Supreme Court upheld the ordinance as a reasonable time, place, or manner
restriction, concluding that it was narrowly tailored to the city’s significant interest “in
eliminating visual clutter.” Id. at 807. Importantly, the Court noted that there was nothing in the
record suggesting that the ordinance was underinclusive, such that it would have no meaningful
impact on promoting the city’s aesthetic interests. Id. at 811–12. Rather, the ordinance banned
posting any kinds of signs or leaflets on all public property, thereby ridding the city of a
particular type of distracting “visual blight.” Id. at 810. By contrast, § 1316(b) is significantly
underinclusive as applied in this case; it fails to regulate all of the other displays, discussed
above, that similarly impact the aesthetic appearance of the plaza. Thus, unlike the ordinance in
Taxpayers for Vincent, § 1316(b) is not narrowly tailored because it “would have an
inconsequential effect on the esthetic values with which the City is concerned.” Id. at 811.
For similar reasons, prohibiting chalk art under § 1316(b) is not narrowly tailored to the
government’s interest in protecting motorists from distraction or preventing passersby from
congregating and creating a “hazard” on the sidewalk. See R. at 72. The government has
presented no evidence that chalk art would distract passing motorists any more than the
permissible Rangoli art, protests, or demonstrations on the plaza. See R. at 61. And as for the
alleged “hazard” chalk art might cause to interested pedestrians, the Rangoli art on the plaza
attracted “several hundred” visitors and was made of thousands of grains of rice––which could
more plausibly produce a “hazard” by causing inattentive pedestrians to slip. Id. Moreover,
§ 1316(b) as applied to the chalk art in this case would ban it completely from the plaza, which is
an unnecessarily broad restriction on expression. A more narrowly tailored restriction might

79

require chalk artists to clean up after themselves or make sure their art does not block pathways.
See Berger, 569 U.S. at 1041 (recognizing that “the existence of obvious, less burdensome
alternatives” is a relevant consideration in determining whether a provision is narrowly tailored).
Thus, as this Court has previously recognized, the type of outright ban on expression in a public
forum that § 1316(b) imposes is not narrowly tailored to achieving public safety. See, e.g., United
Bhd. of Carpenters Local 586 v. NLRB, 540 F.3d 957, 968–69 (9th Cir. 2008) (holding that a
complete ban on carrying or wearing signs in a mall burdened significantly more speech than was
necessary to protect customers from being injured by picketers’ signs).
C.​

Prohibiting Chalk Art Under § 1316(b) Would Cut Off a Unique Medium of
Expression that Does Not Have Ample Alternatives.

Statutes restricting speech in a traditional public forum violate the First Amendment if
they fail to “leave open ample alternative channels for communication of the information.” Clark
v. Cmty. for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 293 (1984). Speech-restrictive laws are
particularly suspect if they “completely foreclose[] a venerable means of communication that is
both unique and important.” City of Ladue, 512 U.S. at 55.
Barring chalk art from the federal plaza would foreclose a medium of communication
“that is both unique and important.” Id. Chalk art has existed at least since the 16th Century, and
recent chalk art festivals around the world prove that the medium fascinates onlookers by
temporarily transforming an ordinary piece of sidewalk into a canvas. See, e.g., Leslie Elman,
Where the Sidewalk Ends, Chalk Art Begins, CNN (Sept. 10, 2013), https://perma.cc/SNJ7MRVN. It is these two features, its temporariness and its ability to make pedestrians see the
pavement in a new light, that make chalk art particularly unique. In contrast to spray-paint
graffiti, murals, or signs, chalk art is fleeting: it will naturally fade away within a few days or
disappear after a rainstorm. Chalk art therefore lets viewers know that what they are seeing is

80

current and up-to-date, like Streetwise’s chalk art responding in real time to political happenings.
Chalk art also makes pedestrians pay attention without being intrusive. It lets visitors engage with
the drawings at their leisure, instead of forcing signs or leaflets in their faces, as the government
would apparently allow. See R. at 72. This is perhaps why a local restaurant commissioned Mr.
Clarkson to draw a chalk mural advertising its happy hour instead of, say, paying him to hand out
coupons or spin a sign. See R. at 58. Chalk art is therefore not merely a “more effective” means of
conveying a message; it “often carries a message quite distinct from other media.” Anderson, 621
F.3d at 1067 (quotation omitted) (emphasis in original).
Finally, it is not clear that the alternative channels the government proposed below,
leafleting, picketing, or applying for a permit “to create [] chalk art legally on property close to
the courthouse,” R. at 72–73, would have avoided any of the First Amendment concerns raised by
applying § 1316(b) to chalk art. First, the government offers no proof that it would have allowed
the politically provocative chalk art in this case even with a permit. Second, due to the
government’s broad discretion in granting permits, this Court has held that permitting schemes
raise even more First Amendment concerns than prohibitions like § 1316(b). See, e.g., Long
Beach Area Peace Network v. City of Long Beach, 574 F.3d 1011, 1025 (9th Cir. 2009) (holding
that time, place, and manner restrictions with a permitting scheme must satisfy additional criteria
and not “confer unbridled discretion on a permitting or licensing official”). Finally, activities like
leafletting and picketing create even more crowding on the sidewalk than a simple chalk drawing,
calling into question the government’s sincerity in preventing a “hazard” in front of the
courthouse. Thus, prohibiting chalk art under § 1316(b) would remove a unique form of
expression in a traditional public forum without any clear alternatives.
​

​

​

​

CONCLUSION

For the above reasons, the district court erred in admitting photos unlawfully seized from
81

Mr. Clarkson’s computer into evidence under the plain view exception and inevitable discovery
exception. This Court should reverse the district court’s denial of Mr. Clarkson’s Motion to
Suppress Evidence. In addition, the Court should reverse the district court’s denial of Mr.
Clarkson’s Motion for Judgment of Acquittal on the grounds that he did not “damage” property
within the meaning of § 1316(b), or in the alternative, that § 1316(b) as applied to Mr.
Clarkson is unconstitutional under the First Amendment.
Respectfully submitted,
/s/ Jeremy Patashnik, Christian B. Ronald
COLUMBIA LAW
SCHOOL
435 West 116th
Street New York,
NY 10027
Counsel for Appellant Jordan Clarkson

82

