1/14/2016 Cover-Up in Chicago - The New York Times

The New York Gimes _ http://nyti.ms/1xsenu

The Opinion Pages OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR

Cover-Up in Chicago

ByBERNARD E. HARCOURT NOV. 30, 2015

THERE’S been a cover-up in Chicago. The city’s leaders have now brought
charges against a police officer, Jason Van Dyke, for the first-degree murder of
17-year-old Laquan McDonald. But for more than a year, Chicago officials

delayed the criminal process, and might well have postponed prosecution
indefinitely, had it not been for a state court forcing their hand.

They prevented the public from viewing crucial incriminating evidence —
first one police car’s dashboard camera video; now, we learn, five such videos
in total. And these senior officials turned a blind eye to the fact that 86
minutes of other video surveillance footage of the crime scene was

unaccountably missing.

The Cook County prosecutor, Anita Alvarez, must have had probable
cause to indict Officer Van Dyke for the Oct. 20, 2014, shooting death of Mr.
McDonald the moment she viewed the police dash-cam video, after her office
received it two weeks later. That video, in her own words, was “everything that
it has been described to be by the news accounts. It is graphic. It is violent. It is
chilling.”

http:/Awww.nytimes.com/2015/11/30/opinion/cover-up-in-chicago.htm!?_r=0 1/4


1/14/2016

Cover-Up in Chicago - The New York Times

Ms. Alvarez, and other city leaders, surely knew they would have to indict
Mr. Van Dyke for murder as soon as the public saw that footage. “I have
absolutely no doubt,” Ms. Alvarez finally said last week, “that this video will
tear at the hearts of all Chicagoans.”

But the timing, in late 2014, was not good.

Then up for re-election, the mayor of Chicago, Rahm Emanuel, was
looking ahead to a contested election on Feb. 24, 2015, which would ultimately
result in a runoff election on April 7. In Ferguson, Mo., a grand jury was
hearing testimony on the police shooting of Michael Brown. The video of Eric
Garner being choked to death during an arrest in New York had gone viral.
The Black Lives Matter movement was gaining momentum across the country.

The video of a police shooting like this in Chicago could have buried Mr.
Emanuel’s chances for re-election. And it would likely have ended the career of
the police superintendent, Garry F. McCarthy.

And so the wheels of justice virtually ground to a halt. Mayor Emanuel
refused to make the dash-cam video public, going to court to prevent its
release. The city argued that releasing the video would taint the investigation
of the case, but even the attorney general of Illinois urged the city to make it

available.

Then the city waited until April 15 — one week after Mr. Emanuel was re-
elected — to get final approval of a pre-emptive $5 million settlement with Mr.
McDonald’s family, a settlement that had been substantially agreed upon
weeks earlier. Still, the city’s lawyers made sure to include a clause that kept
the dash-cam video confidential.

Around the time the freelance journalist Brandon Smith filed suit for
release of the dash-cam video, on Aug. 5, 2015, the Chicago Police Department
told him that it had already received, and rejected, 14 other Freedom of

Information Act requests for the evidence. The city spent thousands of dollars

http:/Awww.nytimes.com/2015/11/30/opinion/cover-up-in-chicago.htm!?_r=0 2/4


1/14/2016 Cover-Up in Chicago - The New York Times

in legal expenses to keep the video under wraps. And it would probably have
continued to do so, had Judge Franklin Valderrama of the Cook County Circuit

Court not ordered its release.

Meanwhile, the state’s prosecutor, Ms. Alvarez, concluded that there had
been no evidence of tampering when police officers allegedly erased 86
minutes of video footage from Burger King surveillance cameras close to the
location of Mr. McDonald’s shooting by Officer Van Dyke. The missing footage
was from 9:13 to 10:39 p.m. — bracketing the time when Mr. McDonald was
shot (around 9:50 p.m.).

City leaders did everything in their power to keep the homicide from the
public as long as possible. Indeed, Mr. Van Dyke was indicted only after the

forced release of the videos.

We can surmise that each had particular reasons. Mayor Emanuel was
fighting for re-election in a tight race. Superintendent McCarthy wanted to
keep his job. Ms. Alvarez needed the good will of the police union for her
coming re-election campaign and probably wished to shield the police officers

who bring her cases and testify in court.

None of that alters the fact that these actions have impeded the criminal
justice system and, in the process, Chicago’s leaders allowed a first-degree
murder suspect, now incarcerated pending bail, to remain free for over a year
on the city’s payroll.

There is good reason to appoint an independent commission to
investigate the conduct of these public servants. But frankly, at this point, who
would trust Chicago’s political institutions or criminal justice system?

An investigation would create further delay in justice and distract our
attention from the real issues at hand: the senseless death of a 17-year-old, and
the systemic problems of excessive police violence and lack of accountability.

http:/Awww.nytimes.com/2015/11/30/opinion/cover-up-in-chicago.htm!?_r=0 3/4


1/14/2016 Cover-Up in Chicago - The New York Times

Rather than hold hearings, investigate and perhaps prosecute its leaders,
the city of Chicago needs to restore trust. These officials no longer have the

public’s confidence. They should resign.

Bernard E. Harcourt

Exposed: Desire and Disobedience in the Digital Age

© 2016 The New York Times Company

http:/Awww.nytimes.com/2015/11/30/opinion/cover-up-in-chicago.htm!?_r=0

44
