Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
tebc !Jork lbnts
~C\V Reprints
This copy is for your personal, noncommercial use only. You can order presentation-ready copies for distribution to
your colleagues, clients or customers here or use the "Reprints" tool that appears next to any article. Visit
www.nytreprints.com for samples and additional information. Order a reprint of this article now.
April 1, 2012
Race, Tragedy and Outrage Collide After
a Shot in Florida
By DAN BARRY, SERGE F. KOVALESKI, CAMPBELL ROBERTSON and LIZETTE ALVAREZ
SANFORD, Fla.- Once again, a river of protest raged through Sanford this weekend to
demand justice in the name of an unarmed black teenager shot dead. It gathered strength in
front of the historic Crooms Academy, the first high school for black students in Seminole
County; surged through the streets; and formed a flood of grief and outrage just outside the
Sanford Police Department.
Once again, thousands chanted the name ofTrayvon Martin, 17, the youth killed with one
bullet while returning to a home in a gated community where he was a guest. Once again, they
cried for the arrest of George Zimmerman, 28, the neighborhood watch coordinator who has
claimed self-defense under a Florida law with the assertive name Stand Your Ground.
With five weeks' passage, the fateful encounter between a black youth who wanted to go to
college and a Hispanic man who wanted to be a judge has polarized the nation.
And, now this modest central Florida community finds its name being mentioned with Selma
and Birmingham on a civil rights list held sacred in black American culture, while across the
country, the parsing of the case has become cacophonic and political, punctuated by pleas for
tolerance, words of hatred, and spins from the left and right.
The racial divide that once partly defined Sanford, with U.S. 17-92 serving as the inviolable
line separating black and white, has faded over the decades, leaving a casually integrated
downtown. Yet the sense remains among residents of both races that the Police Department
has not come as far as the city as a whole.
Velma Williams, its sole black city commissioner, calls Sanford "a small, friendly, good city."
But she said that a string of unsolved cases had raised questions over whether the police had a
"cavalier attitude" whenever "a black male is murdered." Nonsense, countered its acting police
chief, Darren Scott, who is also black. "Everyone here in the city gets fair and equal
treatment."
That assertion of justice for all- in Sanford and throughout the United States- has been
99
1 of 13 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
challenged, though, by a progression of events that began so innocently, so ordinarily: A
teenage boy in a gray hooded sweatshirt leaves a 7-Eleven's neon brightness with his purchase
of some candy and an iced tea, and heads back into the wet Sunday evening of Feb. 26, back to
a residential complex with a forbidding gate and a comforting name.
Trayvon Martin was more than welcome there; he was expected.
With his hood up as the rain came down, Trayvon made his way to one gated community
among many, the Retreat at Twin Lakes. Past a dozen storefronts, four of them vacant. Past
signs and billboards shouting "Now Leasing!" and "Rent Specials!" His was a tour of a
post-bust stretch of Sanford.
For more than two years now, Trayvon's father, Tracy Martin, a truck driver from Miami, had
been dating Brandy Green, a juvenile detention officer in Orlando. She lived at the Retreat
with her 14-year-old son, Chad, and it was not uncommon for the Martins to drive up from
Miami for overnight visits.
Over six feet tall and lanky, Trayvon was interested in girls, computer games, sports and the
beat of the rap and hip-hop emanating from the ear buds of his smartphone. Sleeping in
Miami Dolphins bedsheets, he was all teenage boy, and more.
He called himself "Slimm" on Twitter, and used a handle, @no_limit_nigga, that echoed a
song by the rappers Kane & Abel. On Face book, he expressed interest in airplanes and "South
Park"; Bob Marley and LeBron James. On MySpace, he posted snapshots of his young life:
admiring an airplane; fishing with his father; displaying a cake decorated with the words
"Happy Birthday Tray."
Easygoing, with a default mood set at "chillin'," as one schoolmate, Suzannah Charles, put it.
The kind of kid who made tiny cakes in an Easy-Bake Oven with his 7-year-old cousin; who
spoon-fed a close uncle, Ronald Fulton, who is quadriplegic, when his nurse was unavailable;
who was an integral part of a close-knit family- raised properly, family members say, by Mr.
Martin and his ex-wife, Sybrina Fulton, who works for Miami-Dade County's housing agency.
Ms. Green described him as the kind of kid who did not bring attitude into a house, and who
knew how to behave respectfully in the homes of others. "He was smooth, quiet," she said. "He
took care of his appearance. He had swag."
But Trayvon was a teenager, not an angel. In his last year at his high school in north
Miami-Dade County, he had received three suspensions- for tardiness, for graffiti and, most
recently, for having a baggie with a trace of marijuana in his backpack.
100
2 of 13 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
This last suspension, for 10 days, was enough for Trayvon's father, who stayed on top of him
about his whereabouts and middling grades; after all, he wanted to go to college, just like his
quiet older brother, Jahvaris Fulton, 21, a student at Florida International University.
Mr. Martin said that he had taken Trayvon with him to Sanford to keep him from hanging
around Miami, doing nothing, and to talk some sense into him.
These recent problems, all nonviolent, hardly reflected the essence of Trayvon Martin, his
family and friends say. He was kindhearted, even-tempered and very thoughtful. That night,
for example, while his father and Ms. Green were out having dinner in Orlando, Trayvon
asked Chad, Ms. Green's son, if he wanted anything from the store.
Skittles, the younger boy said.
A Wary Community
The teenager with candy entered the Retreat at Twin Lakes, either passing the front gate or
taking a not-so-secret shortcut. Here was an orderly cluster of 260 or so sandy-colored,
two-story town houses that illustrate an all-too-familiar American tale.
According to David Johnson, the Seminole County property appraiser, the Retreat was being
built just as Florida's housing bubble was about to burst. When the first units came onto the
tax rolls in 2007, he said, they were selling in the vicinity of $250,000, he said. Now, "I think
those units are selling for about half."
The Retreat has had a "significant number" of foreclosures, Mr. Johnson said, which have
prompted investors to buy the properties at a discount and then rent them out. "A lot of
activity in and out of there," he said. "Maybe you don't know the neighbor, because the one
who was there before, maybe they got foreclosed on."
Adding to the uncertainty and flux was the sense among some residents that this secured
community was no longer so secure. There had been burglaries; at least seven in 2011,
according to police reports. Strangers had started showing up, said Frank Taaffe, 55, a
marketing specialist, originally from the Bronx, who works out of his home in the Retreat. He
made it clear that he was not talking about just any strangers.
"There were Trayvon-like dudes with their pants down," Mr. Taaffe said.
Last August, the homeowners association decided to create a neighborhood watch, and a
Sanford police official came to the Retreat to explain the guidelines: volunteers do not possess
police powers; they should not be armed; and they should be the eyes and ears for the police
101
3 of13 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
- but not vigilantes.
The group chose as its neighborhood watch coordinator the very man who had invited the
official to speak: a man with thinning dark hair and an average build named George
Zimmerman. The next month, the newsletter for the homeowners association included a
cartoon of a man peering through a magnifying glass, ala Sherlock Holmes, next to a call for
help: "We have recently experienced an increased incidence of crime within the community,
including three break-ins in the past month, which is why having residents committed to being
members of the Neighborhood Watch and reporting suspicious activities is so important. We
must send a message that we will not tolerate this in our community!"
To get involved, the newsletter said, "Call George Zimmerman."
From Virginia to Florida
Now, on this dark, wet night, the neighborhood watch coordinator for the Retreat at Twin
Lakes- armed with a licensed, slim 9-millimeter handgun that he kept in a holster tucked in
his waistband - was in his truck when he noticed a hooded figure walking through the
complex.
He may have been about to go on an errand to Target, as he later told his family, but his
commitment to vigilance kicked in. This, it seems, was part of who George Zimmerman was.
He, too, was from someplace else- the second of three children raised in a red-brick home in
a cul-de-sac in Manassas, Va. His father, Robert, was a magistrate judge and a veteran of the
Vietnam War, and Robert's father worked in Army intelligence. His mother, Gladys, a
Peruvian immigrant, worked as a deputy court clerk. They ran a disciplined household that
emphasized service, responsibility and the Roman Catholic faith.
"Some kids would have said, 'That's like a prison,'" recalled George W. Hall, a retired pastor
who lived across the street. "But they were so polite. They always looked after you before
themselves."
George was an altar boy looked upon so favorably by the priests that he became a receptionist
in the rectory. He also joined a youth education program called the Young Marines, wearing a
uniform, marching in step and learning about good citizenship.
"He was very caring toward everyone," his father said. "Toward anyone who needed
anything."
But George could be a character. In middle school, a black boy named Anthony Woodson
102
4 ofl3 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

TrayVon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
stumbled over a chair while walking into a classroom, prompting a student he did not know to
joke, "Do you know how to walk, or did you trip over your lip?"
From that jarring remark, a friendship was born. Mr. Woodson said that he knew that the
student, George Zimmerman, meant nothing racist, mostly because of the friends sitting with
him. "Two other black kids, an Asian kid and a Hispanic," recalled Mr. Woodson, 30, now a
pastry chef in Virginia. His new, bilingual friend seemed comfortable in a multicultural world.
After graduating from high school in 2001, Mr. Zimmerman moved to Florida, into a home
that his parents had just bought for their retirement in Lake Mary, near Sanford. He began
working as an insurance agent with an uncle, but he became a mortgage broker when the real
estate market started booming. According to his father, he was making at least $10,000 a
month by his early 20s.
When his parents retired to Florida around 2006, Mr. Zimmerman moved into an apartment
in Lake Mary with a friend. Then the housing market went bust and, according to his father,
George's employer went out of business. After that, he held several jobs, including at CarMax
and Target. He also talked about becoming a police officer.
He seemed to be a young man in search of a path, one who could also show flashes of violence,
according to court records detailing Mr. Zimmerman's difficult summer of 2005. That July, he
was arrested after pushing a state alcohol agent during a raid to root out under-age drinking at
a popular college bar; the felony charge was reduced and then dropped altogether when he
agreed to enter a pretrial diversion program.
About a month later, Mr. Zimmerman and a woman who identified herself as his ex-fiancee
traded petitions for injunction, both claiming that the other had resorted to violence: she said
he "smacked" her; he said she hit him with a baseball bat. Both injunctions were issued and
they expired a year later.
Still, Mr. Zimmerman seemed to have a protective streak a sense of right and wrong- that
others admired. For example, Stephanie, a neighbor of the elder Zimmermans in Lake Mary
and a family friend, recalled how George Zimmerman struck up a friendship with one of her
sons, Douglas, who is autistic, swimming with him, taking him for car rides and letting him
play with Mr. Zimmerman's dog, Princess.
"He just felt comfortable with George," she said. "For Dougie, everything was 'George, George,
George.'"
Stephanie also recalled a party in early December to celebrate Mr. Zimmerman's graduation
from Seminole State College (though he still needed a few more credits to receive his
103
5 of13 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
associate's degree). He shared his hope to be a judge someday with a small gathering that
included two black teenagers whom, she was later told by Mrs. Zimmerman, George was
mentoring.
It seemed in character. A 16-year-old boy named Austin, who for a long time has mowed the
lawn at the Zimmerman home in Lake Mary, described George Zimmerman as a role model
for younger boys, often providing advice while throwing a football around or shooting hoops.
George would stick up for a chubby boy in the neighborhood who was being bullied, recalled
Austin (who, like Stephanie, asked that his last name not be used). "And if George saw bullies
walking by his house, he would pull out his hose and spray them down and tell them they
were wasting their time and to go and do something else."
Mr. Zimmerman was also security-minded, Austin said. "He would knock on people's doors at
night and say that it was late and that 'You better close your garage door.' "
But not everyone saw Mr. Zimmerman as their protector.
A 17-year-old Mrican-American, Teontae Arnie, who lives at the Retreat, recalled that Mr.
Zimmerman once wrongly accused his friend of stealing a bike. "When you see him, you think
automatically that he might try something," said Teontae, who added that he kept his distance
from the neighborhood watch coordinator.
George Zimmerman seems to have taken a private vow to protect and defend - but, for some
reason, he has not realized his stated desire to become a police officer. (In 2009, though, he
was accepted into Seminole County's Community Law Enforcement Academy, in which
students take tours of the courthouse and jail, go on ride-alongs with Sheriffs Department
employees and visit a firing range.)
"I don't think it was safety that he was concerned with as much as people's rights and people's
welfare," his father said. "And where he was living has a lot of problems with people coming in
and burglarizing. I think he became alarmed, and he helped organize the neighborhood
watch.''
Police records over the last several years suggest a man who was quite familiar with 911
dispatchers; who seemed, somehow, to be always in the middle of things. In October 2003, for
example, on perhaps his greatest day in civic vigilance, Mr. Zimmerman chased after and
assisted in the capture of a man who had stolen two 13-inch TV /DVD players from an
Albertsons.
Mostly, though, his calls were less exciting, more anticipatory. Dangerous potholes. Stray dogs.
104
6 of13 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
Speeding vehicles. Open garage doors. Suspicious characters. On Feb. 2, he reported seeing a
black man in a black leather jacket and printed pajamas in the Retreat; nothing came of it.
This is what George Zimmerman did.
Married now to Shellie Nicole Dean, a cosmetologist who is studying to be a nurse, he was
attending college and working full-time at Digital Risk, a fraud-detection company retained by
financial institutions. The job seemed a natural fit.
Digital Risk helps institutions like Bank of America and Freddie Mac to rid their balance
sheets of the kinds of toxic loans that led to the 2008 banking crisis. Mr. Zimmerman was
among hundreds of auditors who work in a four-story office building in nearby Maitland,
mining borrowers' files, sniffing out lies and scrutinizing hardship letters for any hint of deceit
that would allow the lender to file a claim.
The role of Digital Risk, as its chief executive likes to put it, is to be "the independent
watchdog of the financial world" - though a more apt phrase might be "the independent
watchdog for the financial world."
Mr. Zimmerman, then, was a watchdog- at work and at home, in the Retreat at Twin Lakes.
And here in the night rain came another suspicious person, in a hood.
Once again, George Zimmerman dialed 911.
'A Real Suspicious Guy'
"Hey, we've had some break-ins in my neighborhood," Mr. Zimmerman said to start the
conversation with the dispatcher. "And there's a real suspicious guy."
This guy seemed to be up to no good; like he was on drugs or something; in a gray hoodie.
Asked to describe him further, he said, "He looks black."
"Now he's just staring at me," he said.
The incomplete knowledge of the next six minutes, from about 7:11 to about 7:17, comes from
recorded 911 calls; a few witnesses who often heard more than saw; Mr. Zimmerman's
account, as told to others; the police account, as told to the Martin and Zimmerman families;
and a 16-year-old girlfriend in Miami who was on the telephone at the time with Trayvon.
Mr. Zimmerman told the dispatcher that this "suspicious guy" was in his late teens, with
something in his hands. He asked how long it would be before an officer arrived, because
"these assholes, they always get away."
105
7 of13 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals- NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
Mr. Zimmerman's father said that what largely aroused his son's suspicion was how this
person was walking close to the town houses, and not on the sidewalk or in the street. Perhaps
someone up to no good- or, perhaps, someone disoriented in a maze of identical structures,
ducking the rain and looking for the house he had left less than an hour before.
Around the same time, Trayvon told the girlfriend he was talking to by cellphone that
somebody was watching him, according to Benjamin Crump, a lawyer for Trayvon's family.
The lawyer said that the girl, whose name has not been released, said she told Trayvon to run
- and that Trayvon responded by saying, "I'm going to walk fast."
Mr. Zimmerman told the dispatcher that the hooded figure was now running. He jumped out
of his car to follow him, the beep-beep of his car, as recorded on the 911 call, announcing the
instant that he moved beyond his understood mandate as neighborhood watch coordinator.
The wind could be heard whooshing through Mr. Zimmerman's cellphone as he tried to keep
the visitor in view. Also heard is a garbled epithet that some have interpreted to be a racial
slur, though his father insisted that his son would never say anything like that. Dispatcher:
"Are you following him?"
Mr. Zimmerman: "Yeah."
Dispatcher: "O.K., we don't need you to do that."
Mr. Zimmerman: "O.K."
He and the dispatcher arranged for Mr. Zimmerman to meet a police officer near the
mailboxes at the development's clubhouse, and the call ended with a "thank you" and a
"you're welcome."
Some of what happened next, along a poorly lighted path that runs between the back ends of
two long rows of town houses, is lost to the night.
According to what the girlfriend has told Mr. Crump, Trayvon asked the man why he was
following him, and the man responded by asking what Trayvon was doing there. She said she
heard what sounded like the earpiece to Trayvon's cell phone falling away before the line went
dead. There was no answer when she tried calling back.
Mr. Zimmerman's father provided a different account, based on his conversations with his
son. He said that George Zimmerman had lost sight of the hooded figure and was beginning to
walk back to his vehicle when Trayvon appeared from his rear left side. He also described a
conversation that began far differently than the one recalled by the girl on the phone.
106
8 ofl3 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

TrayVon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayVon-martin-shooting-promp ...
"He did not see Trayvon until he was right there," he said, at which point, Trayvon, cursing,
asked if George Zimmerman had "a problem."
"And George said, 'No, I don't have a problem,' or 'No, there is no problem.' And Trayvon said,
'You do now,' and he punched George in the nose.''
Here even Mr. Zimmerman acknowledges that there is some confusion. He told an Orlando
news station that George was reaching for his cell phone when Trayvon punched him. But, in a
later interview with The New York Times, he said that he was unsure whether his son made
that movement and that he might have conflated news media reports with what he thought
his son may have told him.
However it started, witnesses described to the 911 dispatcher what resulted: the neighborhood
watch coordinator, 5 foot 9 and 170 pounds, and the visitor, 6 foot 1 and 150, wrestling on the
ground.
Screams for help echoed off the backs of town houses. Hearing those screams, now preserved
on recorded 911 calls, Sybrina Fulton says they are the cries of her baby, Trayvon. And Robert
Zimmerman says they are the pleas of his younger son, George.
No one answered those calls for help. But several people called 911. A man reported, "They're
wrestling right in the back of my porch." A boy said that he was about to help when his dog
slipped his leash and he had to track the animal down. A woman called to report the screams,
a report that was underscored by the plaintive wail in the background.
"H-E-E-E-E-L-P!"
"Does he look hurt to you?" the dispatcher asked.
"I can't see him," the woman answered. "I don't want to go out there. I don't know what's
going on, so.''
"So you think he's yelling help?"
"Yes," the caller answered, over the calls for help in the background. "All right," the dispatcher
sm' d . "Wh at 'IS your ... "
The sudden crack of gunfire cut the night. A single shot. Then silence.
Here is what Robert Zimmerman said is his son's explanation: Trayvon was on top, punching
and slamming his head into the paved sidewalk. When nobody answered his calls for help, he
tried to slide onto the grass. But in doing so, the holstered gun in his waistband became
107
9 ofl3 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
visible.
"It is a little bit cloudy," the father said. "But George believes Trayvon saw the pistol, was
going to get it, and said, 'You are going to die tonight.' Shortly after that, George drew the
pistol and shot him."
The police have said that this account, at least in its broadest outlines, is backed up by
witnesses, most of whom have not spoken publicly.
But some witnesses have challenged it, including Mary Cutcher, 31, who said that she saw Mr.
Zimmerman straddling Trayvon's body in the grass, with his hands on the teenager's back,
moments after the shot was fired. Her roommate, Selma Mora Lamilla, 36, called out three
times to Mr. Zimmerman, who did not appear to be hurt, Ms. Cutcher said. After the third Gall,
he told her to summon the police.
Soon, callers to 911 were describing the presence of police officers, and the beams of
flashlights gliding over a section of grass a few dozen yards from Trayvon's destination, where
a boy inside was waiting for Skittles.
Another woman, a former teacher, struggled with her words and her emotions as she told the
dispatcher everything she was seeing from her window, as officers roamed around the area
behind her back porch.
"They were wrestling each other and then I heard the man saying, 'Help, help.' I would have
helped if I ... "
She began to sob: "Oh, my God! To see someone killed, lying in the grass. Oh my God. I want
to know what happened. Why would this man just shoot him?"
Differing Accounts
Less than half an hour after Trayvon Martin died face down in gated grass, a privileged crowd
of 17,000 rose to their feet at the N.B.A. All-Star game in Orlando, 20 miles to the south, to
sing the national anthem. Then, while people enjoyed their after-parties, his body, not yet
identified, was taken to the medical examiner's office in Volusia County.
Mr. Zimmerman, meanwhile, was taken to Sanford police headquarters, where, he told his
father, the police took many photographs of his injuries. His father said that he had a broken
nose, a swollen and cut lower lip, and two cuts on the back of his head.
In a grainy police video that shows a handcuffed Mr. Zimmerman being led out of a police car
and through the police station, he does not appear to be badly injured; nor is there noticeable
108
10 of 13 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
blood on his clothing. To many who have been following the case, the video presents a crucial
rebuttal of Mr. Zimmerman's account.
But Mr. Zimmerman's father said that by that time, his son had been cleaned up at the scene
by medics.
"They were not huge gashes," the father said. "When he went to the doctor the next day, he
said he could stitch it, but that he would have to recut it since it had started to heal. He may
not have gone to the hospital earlier than that because he was in police custody for a while,
and was very shaken up afterwards."
Back at the Retreat at Twin Lakes, Tracy Martin and Brandy Green returned to her town
house around 10:30 p.m. to find her son, but not his. Trayvon had gone to the store, Chad
explained.
The adults did not panic. Trayvon was 17, after all. Maybe he had gone to visit a cousin in
nearby Oviedo, or maybe he had met a girl along the way, and was chatting her up. Mr. Martin
called Trayvon's cell phone, but it went straight to voice mail. Then he called the cousin, who
did not answer, but he expected the young man to call back. They went to sleep.
Early next morning, no sign ofTrayvon, still. Mr. Martin called his son's cellphone, which
again went to voice mail. He then repeatedly called the cousin until he answered, only to share
the distressing news that he had not seen Trayvon.
Now it was Mr. Martin calling gn. He reported that his son was missing, and then described
what his son was wearing. Soon he was outside, meeting a couple of responding police
officers. One of them took out a photograph of a body from a folder.
"Next thing I heard was a scream," Ms. Green said. "I never want to see anybody in that kind
of pain again."
Mr. Martin cried and cried. At the police station later that day, he said, detectives told him
that they had not arrested the man who had shot and killed his son. They explained that
George Zimmerman was claiming self-defense.
"That was the first thing that came out of the detective's mouth," Mr. Martin said. "That he
had a squeaky-clean record, a license to carry a weapon and is studying criminal justice."
Mr. Martin said he asked the officers whether they had checked his son's record, and they said
yes. He said that he asked because he knew that Trayvon had no record.
"My son only had snacks in his pocket, no weapon whatsoever," he said. "Not even a fingernail
109
11 of 13 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
file."
The Sanford police have said that once Mr. Zimmerman declared that he had shot Trayvon in
the chest in self-defense, they were barred from arresting him by the state's now-famous
Stand Your Ground law, the broadest protection of self-defense in the country. It immediately
requires law enforcement officials to prove that a suspect did not act in self-defense, and sets
the case on a slow track.
Angela B. Corey, the state attorney for the Jacksonville are,a who has been appointed special
prosecutor in the Trayvon Martin case, said that the controversial 2005 law has changed the
rules for prosecutors. Making arrests, filing charges and securing convictions are more
difficult and time consuming. Now, she said, "there is a different standard."
Ms. Corey said her office has handled hundreds of these self-defense cases - at least three or
four every month. The law constantly challenges the authorities, with people citing it for
conflicts like bar fights and road rage. "We've lost Stand Your Ground motions that in my
experience showed the shooter should not have shot," she said. "Stand Your Ground needs a
second look."
But Mr. Crump and Natalie Jackson, the lawyers for Trayvon's family, said that the law does
not preclude the police from properly investigating a homicide: collecting evidence,
thoroughly interviewing the suspect and aggressively questioning witnesses - much of which,
they maintained, did not occur in the death of Trayvon Martin.
For example, the lawyers said that as of late last week, no investigator had interviewed
Trayvon's girlfriend.
Exactly what the police have been considering remains uncertain. Ms. Corey said the Sanford
police had filed a request for an arrest warrant with the state attorney usually responsible for
the Sanford area, Norm Wolfinger. But no warrant was issued.
Above all, the lawyers for Trayvon's family say, there is simply this: a young man shot dead,
and a month later, still no arrest.
The day after the shooting, George Zimmerman, according to his father, returned with at least
three police officers to the Retreat at Twin Lakes, back to that grassy area where plaintive
cries for help had gone unanswered. The investigators, accompanied by someone with a video
camera, wanted him to re-enact the events of the night when the two strangers had stood their
ground.
Mr. Zimmerman's father watched from nearby. "They started where his vehicle was," he
110
12 ofl3 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

Trayvon Martin Shooting Prompts a Review ofldeals-NYTimes.com http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/02/us/trayvon-martin-shooting-promp ...
recalled. "They walked him down the sidewalk and to the end of the sidewalk, to the street
where he got an address and then walked him back towards his vehicle, near where the
incident occurred."
In the days and weeks to come, Trayvon Martin would be remembered as an easygoing young
man who had simply gone to the store for some candy and a drink. And George Zimmerman
would go into hiding, amid hundreds of death threats against him and his family. Both would
become rhetorical devices in the heated, never-ending national disagreements about race and
guns.
All that lay ahead. For now, the neighborhood watch coordinator stood under the bright sun
that had replaced the previous night's obscuring rain and told his side of a two-sided story
about standing ground, and losing it.
Reporting was contributed by Joseph Freeman from Sanford; Beth Raymer from West Palm
Beach, Fla.; Sabrina Tavernise and Timothy Williams from Manassas, Va.; and Jennifer
Preston from New York. Alain Delaqueriere and Sheelagh McNeill contributed research.
111
13 of 13 4/4/2012 10:40 AM

112

113

114

115

116

117

The 2011 Florida Statutes
Title XLVI Chapter 776 View Entire Chapter
CRIMES JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE
CHAPTER 776
JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE
776.012Use of force in defense of person.
776.013Home protection; use of deadly force; presumption of fear of death or great bodily harm.
776.031 Use of force in defense of others.
776.0321mmunity from criminal prosecution and civil action for justifiable use of force.
776.041 Use of force by aggressor.
776.05Law enforcement officers; use of force in making an arrest.
776.051 Use of force in resisting arrest or making an arrest or in the execution of a legal duty;
prohibition.
776.06Deadly force.
776.07Use of force to prevent escape.
776.08Forcible felony.
776.085Defense to civil action for damages; party convicted of forcible or attempted forcible
felony.
776.012Use of force in defense of person.-A person is justified in using force, except deadly
force, against another when and to the extent that the person reasonably believes that such
conduct is necessary to defend himself or herself or another against the other's imminent use of
unlawful force. However, a person is justified in the use of deadly force and does not have a duty
to retreat if:
(1 )He or she reasonably believes that such force is necessary to prevent imminent death or
great bodily harm to himself or herself or another or to prevent the imminent commission of a
forcible felony; or
(2)Under those circumstances permitted pursuant to s. 776.013.
History.-s. 13, ch. 74-383; s. 1188, ch. 97-102; s. 2, ch. 2005-27.
776.013Home protection; use of deadly force; presumption of fear of death or great bodily
harm.-
(1 )A person is presumed to have held a reasonable fear of imminent peril of death or great
bodily harm to himself or herself or another when using defensive force that is intended or likely to
cause death or great bodily harm to another if:
(a)The person against whom the defensive force was used was in the process of unlawfully and
forcefully entering, or had unlawfully and forcibly entered, a dwelling, residence, or occupied
118

vehicle, or if that person had removed or was attempting to remove another against that person's
will from the dwelling, residence, or occupied vehicle; and
(b)The person who uses defensive force knew or had reason to believe that an unlawful and
forcible entry or unlawful and forcible act was occurring or had occurred.
(2)The presumption set forth in subsection (1) does not apply if:
(a)The person against whom the defensive force is used has the right to be in or is a lawful
resident of the dwelling, residence, or vehicle, such as an owner, lessee, or titleholder, and there
is not an injunction for protection from domestic violence or a written pretrial supervision order of
no contact against that person; or
(b)The person or persons sought to be removed is a child or grandchild, or is otherwise in the
lawful custody or under the lawful guardianship of, the person against whom the defensive force is
used; or
(c)The person who uses defensive force is engaged in an unlawful activity or is using the
dwelling, residence, or occupied vehicle to further an unlawful activity; or
(d)The person against whom the defensive force is used is a law enforcement officer, as
defined in s. 943.1 0(14), who enters or attempts to enter a dwelling, residence, or vehicle in the
performance of his or her official duties and the officer identified himself or herself in accordance
with any applicable law or the person using force knew or reasonably should have known that the
person entering or attempting to enter was a law enforcement officer.
(3)A person who is not engaged in an unlawful activity and who is attacked in any other place
where he or she has a right to be has no duty to retreat and has the right to stand his or her ground
and meet force with force, including deadly force if he or she reasonably believes it is necessary to
do so to prevent death or great bodily harm to himself or herself or another or to prevent the
commission of a forcible felony.
(4)A person who unlawfully and by force enters or attempts to enter a person's dwelling,
residence, or occupied vehicle is presumed to be doing so with the intent to commit an unlawful
act involving force or violence.
(5)As used in this section, the term:
(a)"Dwelling" means a building or conveyance of any kind, including any attached porch,
whether the building or conveyance is temporary or permanent, mobile or immobile, which has a
roof over it, including a tent, and is designed to be occupied by people lodging therein at night.
(b)"Residence" means a dwelling in which a person resides either temporarily or permanently
or is visiting as an invited guest.
(c)"Vehicle" means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not motorized, which is designed to
transport people or property.
History.-s. 1, ch. 2005-27.
119

776.031 Use of force in defense of others.-A person is justified in the use of force, except
deadly force, against another when and to the extent that the person reasonably believes that such
conduct is necessary to prevent or terminate the other's trespass on, or other tortious or criminal
interference with, either real property other than a dwelling or personal property, lawfully in his
or her possession or in the possession of another who is a member of his or her immediate family or
household or of a person whose property he or she has a legal duty to protect. However, the person
is justified in the use of deadly force only if he or she reasonably believes that such force is
necessary to prevent the imminent commission of a forcible felony. A person does not have a duty
to retreat if the person is in a place where he or she has a right to be.
History.-s. 13, ch. 74-383; s. 1189, ch. 97-102; s. 3, ch. 2005-27.
776.0321mmunity from criminal prosecution and civil action for justifiable use of force.
(1 )A person who uses force as permitted ins. 776.012, s. 776.013, or s. 776.031 is justified in
using such force and is immune from criminal prosecution and civil action for the use of such force,
unless the person against whom force was used is a law enforcement officer, as defined in s.
943.10(14), who was acting in the performance of his or her official duties and the officer
identified himself or herself in accordance with any applicable law or the person using force knew
or reasonably should have known that the person was a law enforcement officer. As used in this
subsection, the term "criminal prosecution" includes arresting, detaining in custody, and charging
or prosecuting the defendant.
(2)A law enforcement agency may use standard procedures for investigating the use of force as
described in subsection (1 ), but the agency may not arrest the person for using force unless it
determines that there is probable cause that the force that was used was unlawful.
(3)The court shall award reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, compensation for loss of
income, and all expenses incurred by the defendant in defense of any civil action brought by a
plaintiff if the court finds that the defendant is immune from prosecution as provided in subsection
(1).
History.-s. 4, ch. 2005-27.
776.041 Use of force by aggressor.-The justification described in the preceding sections of
this chapter is not available to a person who:
(1 )Is attempting to commit, committing, or escaping after the commission of, a forcible felony;
or
(2)1nitially provokes the use of force against himself or herself, unless:
(a)Such force is so great that the person reasonably believes that he or she is in imminent
danger of death or great bodily harm and that he or she has exhausted every reasonable means to
escape such danger other than the use of force which is likely to cause death or great bodily harm
to the assailant; or
120

(b)ln good faith, the person withdraws from physical contact with the assailant and indicates
clearly to the assailant that he or she desires to withdraw and terminate the use of force, but the
assailant continues or resumes the use of force.
History.-s. 13, ch. 74-383; s. 1190, ch. 97-102.
776.05Law enforcement officers; use of force in making an arrest.-A law enforcement
officer, or any person whom the officer has summoned or directed to assist him or her, need not
retreat or desist from efforts to make a lawful arrest because of resistance or threatened
resistance to the arrest. The officer is justified in the use of any force:
(1 )Which he or she reasonably believes to be necessary to defend himself or herself or another
from bodily harm while making the arrest;
(2)When necessarily committed in retaking felons who have escaped; or
(3)When necessarily committed in arresting felons fleeing from justice. However, this
subsection shall not constitute a defense in any civil action for damages brought for the wrongful
use of deadly force unless the use of deadly force was necessary to prevent the arrest from being
defeated by such flight and, when feasible, some warning had been given, and:
(a)The officer reasonably believes that the fleeing felon poses a threat of death or serious
physical harm to the officer or others; or
(b)The officer reasonably believes that the fleeing felon has committed a crime involving the
infliction or threatened infliction of serious physical harm to another person.
History.-s. 13, ch. 74-383; s. 1, ch. 75-64; s. 1, ch. 87-147; s. 54, ch. 88-381; s. 1191, ch. 97-102.
776.051Use of force in resisting arrest or making an arrest or in the execution of a legal
duty; prohibition.-
(1 )A person is not justified in the use of force to resist an arrest by a law enforcement officer,
or to resist a law enforcement officer who is engaged in the execution of a legal duty, if the law
enforcement officer was acting in good faith and he or she is known, or reasonably appears, to be a
law enforcement officer.
(2)A law enforcement officer, or any person whom the officer has summoned or directed to
assist him or her, is not justified in the use of force if the arrest or execution of a legal duty is
unlawful and known by him or her to be unlawful.
History.-s. 13, ch. 74-383; s. 1192, ch. 97-102; s. 1, ch. 2008-67.
776.06Deadly force.-
(1 )The term "deadly force" means force that is likely to cause death or great bodily harm and
includes, but is not limited to:
(a)The firing of a firearm in the direction of the person to be arrested, even though no intent
exists to kill or inflict great bodily harm; and
(b)The firing of a firearm at a vehicle in which the person to be arrested is riding.
121

(2)(a)The term "deadly force" does not include the discharge of a firearm by a law
enforcement officer or correctional officer during and within the scope of his or her official duties
which is loaded with a less-lethal munition. As used in this subsection, the term "less-lethal
munition" means a projectile that is designed to stun, temporarily incapacitate, or cause
temporary discomfort to a person without penetrating the person's body.
(b )A law enforcement officer or a correctional officer is not liable in any civil or criminal action
arising out of the use of any less-lethal munition in good faith during and within the scope of his or
her official duties.
History.-s. 13, ch. 74-383; s. 1, ch. 99-272.
776.07Use of force to prevent escape.-
(1 )A law enforcement officer or other person who has an arrested person in his or her custody is
justified in the use of any force which he or she reasonably believes to be necessary to prevent the
escape of the arrested person from custody.
(2)A correctional officer or other law enforcement officer is justified in the use of force,
including deadly force, which he or she reasonably believes to be necessary to prevent the escape
from a penal institution of a person whom the officer reasonably believes to be lawfully detained in
such institution under sentence for an offense or awaiting trial or commitment for an offense.
History.-s. 13, ch. 74-383; s. 7, ch. 95-283; s. 1193, ch. 97-102.
776.08Forcible felony.-"Forcible felony" means treason; murder; manslaughter; sexual
battery; carjacking; home-invasion robbery; robbery; burglary; arson; kidnapping; aggravated
assault; aggravated battery; aggravated stalking; aircraft piracy; unlawful throwing, placing, or
discharging of a destructive device or bomb; and any other felony which involves the use or threat
of physical force or violence against any individual.
History.-s. 13, ch. 74-383; s. 4, ch. 75-298; s. 289, ch. 79-400; s. 5, ch. 93-212; s. 10, ch. 95-195.
776.085Defense to civil action for damages; party convicted of forcible or attempted
forcible felony.-
(1 )It shall be a defense to any action for damages for personal injury or wrongful death, or for
injury to property, that such action arose from injury sustained by a participant during the
commission or attempted commission of a forcible felony. The defense authorized by this section
shall be established by evidence that the participant has been convicted of such forcible felony or
attempted forcible felony, or by proof of the commission of such crime or attempted crime by a
preponderance of the evidence.
(2)For the purposes of this section, the term "forcible felony" shall have the same meaning as
in s. 776.08.
(3)Any civil action in which the defense recognized by this section is raised shall be stayed by
the court on the motion of the civil defendant during the pendency of any criminal action which
122

forms the basis for the defense, unless the court finds that a conviction in the criminal action
would not form a valid defense under this section.
(4)1n any civil action where a party prevails based on the defense created by this section:
(a)The losing party, if convicted of and incarcerated for the crime or attempted crime, shall, as
determined by the court, lose any privileges provided by the correctional facility, including, but
not limited to:
1.Canteen purchases;
2.Telephone access;
3.0utdoor exercise;
4. Use of the library; and
5. Visitation.
(b )The court shall award a reasonable attorney's fee to be paid to the prevailing party in equal
amounts by the losing party and the losing party's attorney; however, the losing party's attorney is
not personally responsible if he or she has acted in good faith, based on the representations of his
or her client. If the losing party is incarcerated for the crime or attempted crime and has
insufficient assets to cover payment of the costs of the action and the award of fees pursuant to
this paragraph, the party shall, as determined by the court, be required to pay by deduction from
any payments the prisoner receives while incarcerated.
(c)lf the losing party is incarcerated for the crime or attempted crime, the court shall issue a
written order containing its findings and ruling pursuant to paragraphs (a) and (b) and shall direct
that a certified copy be forwarded to the appropriate correctional institution or facility.
123

124

125

126

127

128

129

130

131

132

133

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

142

143