Bernard E. Harcourt
Methodological Interlude: Law & Economics
Glossary of Law & Economics Terms
[These definitions are all from Boyes/Melvin, Economics, 8th ed. (2011) © Boyes/Melvin]
adverse selection: the situation in which higher-quality goods, consumers, or producers are driven
out of the market by lower-quality examples because of limited information about the quality.
asymmetric information: when the parties to a transaction do not have the same information
about the transaction.
common good: a good that is rivalrous but nonexcludable
externality: the costs or benefits of a transaction that are borne by someone who is not directly
involved in the transaction
free rider: a consumer or producer who enjoys the benefits of a good or service without paying
for that good or service
internalized: when external costs of benefits are borne by the transactors creating them
lemons market: market in which adverse selection occurs
logrolling: an inefficiency in the political process in which legislators support one another's
projects in order to ensure support for their own
market failure: a situation in which resources are not allocated to their highest-valued use
moral hazard: the problem that arises when people change their behavior from what was
expected of them when they engaged in a trade or contract
principle of mutual exclusivity: the rule that an owner of private property is entitled to enjoy
the consumption of that property
private cost: cost that is borne solely by the individuals involved in the transaction that created
the costs
public good: a good whose consumption by one person does not diminish the quantity or quality
available for others and access to which cannot be restricted
rent seeking: the use of resources simply to transfer wealth from one group to another without
increasing production or total wealth
social cost: the total cost of a transaction, the private cost plus the external cost
transactions costs: the cost of carrying out a transaction

Bernard E. Harcourt
Methodological Interlude: Law & Economics
Seven social dilemmas of game theory
Chicken: You should know this from popular culture. Two adversaries push each other to the
brink of disaster to see who is stronger; one of them has to back down, and the one that backs down
loses the game. But it can also lead to disaster if neither back down…
Battle of the sexes [perhaps we could rename, battle of the partners]: This is a classic coordination
problem where one partner wants to go to the opera and the other partner wants to go to the soccer
match, but neither want to go alone… You have to look at the pay offs:
Opera Football
Opera 3,2 0,0
Football 0,0 2,3
Tragedy of the commons: Another classic problem based on the 18th century common green:
When individuals acting self-interestedly all deplete a common good and in the process ruin it
for everyone…. The result is that the individuals work against the interests of the group.
Volunteer’s dilemma: One person must sacrifice themselves for all the others to benefit.
Free-rider dilemma: When someone (the free-rider) benefits from something that others do
without paying any of the costs or doing their fair share.
Prisoner’s dilemma: Where two people are cornered, say by the police, and they are separated
and made to confess a crime. If they both stay silent, they are best off, but it is the worst if the
other rats against you, so you have a big incentive to rat against them. The payoffs are:
Prisoner B stays Prisoner B betrays
silent (cooperates) (defects)
Prisoner A stays Each serves 1 year Prisoner A: 3 years
silent (cooperates) Prisoner B: goes free
Prisoner A betrays Prisoner A: goes free Each serves 2 years
(defects) Prisoner B: 3 years
Stag hunt: Cooperation game that is also called the trust dilemma: two people can either
cooperate and hunt a stag together, which gives more to them, or go it alone and hunt for a hare.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau developed this dilemma a lot in his work. The payoff is:
Stag Hare
Stag 2, 2 0, 1
Hare 1, 0 1, 1