1/14/2016 In Rahm Emanuel’s Chicago Surveillance State, Controlling the Data Is Key

The
Intercept_

IN RAHM EMANUELS
CHICAGO SURVEILLANCE
STATE, CONTROLLING THE
DATA IS KEY

Dec. 14 2015, 11:07 a.m.

51

POWER CIRCULATES DIFFERENTLY in the digital age. It’s all

about controlling the digital traces — collecting, mining, sharing,
exposing, delaying, or erasing the data. Inevitably, some handling

https://theintercept.com/2015/12/14/in-rahm-emanuels-chicago-surveillance-state-controlling-the-data-is-key/



1/14/2016 In Rahm Emanuel’s Chicago Surveillance State, Controlling the Data Is Key
will occur in ordinary politics. But when the data are manipulated
in order to obstruct criminal justice or steal an election, then it’s
no longer ordinary politics; it becomes a cover-up.

With each new day, there is growing evidence of a cover-up in
Chicago.

First, late on Friday night, December 4, 2015, Chicago’s mayor,
Rahm Emanuel, released hundreds of pages of police reports from
the October 2014 Laquan McDonald murder — including false
statements by police officers who were at the scene of the crime.
The data dump came at such a late hour that the Chicago Tribune
was not able to report on the massive discrepancies between those
statements and the dashcam video of McDonald’s death until an
article posted early Saturday morning, at 1:25 a.m., while most of
the city was asleep.

Then, in a Saturday op-ed simultaneously placed in the Chicago
Tribune and Chicago Sun-Times, Emanuel offered a different story
than he had previously about why he did not view the dashcam
video in the months before its November 2015 release. In an earlier
interview with Politico, Emanuel said that he didn’t watch the
dashcam footage because if he had seen it, reporters and the
public would be asking why they didn’t get to see it too. But in his
op-ed, Emanuel wrote that he didn’t watch it “because my own
emotions should not interfere with criminal investigations.”

The discrepancy is striking in itself. It also goes against everything
Emanuel had previously said about the fact that he does not
interfere with or control the timing of criminal investigations. Is
the mayor now suggesting that he could have pushed the state’s

https://theintercept.com/2015/12/14/in-rahm-emanuels-chicago-surveillance-state-controlling-the-data-is-key/ 218


1/14/2016 In Rahm Emanuel’s Chicago Surveillance State, Controlling the Data Is Key
attorney, Anita Alvarez, to charge Officer Jason Van Dyke in
November 2014, in the middle of his heated reelection campaign?

The timing of the op-eds also raises suspicion. They went online
earlier Friday afternoon and were in print Saturday morning, just
in time to wash out the late Friday data dump. Once again, it
seems, the city’s leader was gaming the data flow.

The fact is, the digital traces were everywhere in the murder of 17-
year-old Laquan McDonald, who was shot 16 times by Officer Van
Dyke. The scene was extensively recorded from multiple angles. At
least five dashcam videos — maybe eight — filmed the shooting.
Private security cameras were running as well, with at least 12
camera angles from inside and outside the Southwest Side Burger
King next door.

Everything was digitally captured. But then, the data were
suppressed for 13 months, and would likely have been suppressed
indefinitely if a state court had not compelled their release under
the state’s open records act.

You might think this is paradoxical. After all, Mayor Emanuel has
been a champion of total awareness and has helped turn Chicago
into the most surveilled metropolis in the United States. Back in
2013, he boasted that Chicago had thousands of public and private
surveillance cameras in place to protect city residents: “I will say,
as I always have, because we have continued to put cameras
throughout the city for security ... purposes, they serve an
important function for the city in providing the type of safety on a
day-to-day basis — not just for big events like a marathon, but day-
to-day purposes.”

https://theintercept.com/2015/12/14/in-rahm-emanuels-chicago-surveillance-state-controlling-the-data-is-key/ 3/8


1/14/2016 In Rahm Emanuel’s Chicago Surveillance State, Controlling the Data Is Key
In February 2011, the ACLU estimated that Chicago had around
10,000 surveillance cameras. In November 2011, Emanuel
supported the installation of 1,700 additional Chicago Transit
Authority security cameras. He also introduced an ordinance,
during the Occupy movement in advance of the G8 and NATO
summits, that included installing more surveillance cameras. As of
April 2015, Chicago had “an integrated system of 22,000 cameras
citywide,” which transmit their footage to the Chicago Crime
Prevention Center. As the New York Times noted, “One legacy of
Rahm Emanuel is digitally clear. Security cameras will follow us
like a bad credit rating.”

But in our digital age, seeing, monitoring, and recording the
digital footprints is quite different from sharing, releasing,
revealing, or publicizing the data. We are all exposed today, most
of us out of our own desires and passions. The political struggle,
though, is over who controls those digital traces. It’s not a question
of privacy anymore, since we so often crave publicity; itis a
question of controlling the data flows.

This may explain why the city’s leaders apparently did everything
in their power to suppress the existing digital traces of the Laquan
McDonald murder. They want total awareness and constant
surveillance, but not truly for “safety on a day-to-day basis” — they
were not concerned that a first-degree murder suspect was free for
13 months — rather for tightening the grip on political power.

Continuing, on Monday, December 7, 2015, the wheels of justice all
of a sudden began to turn in a separate, 14-month-old police
killing — revealing just how fast the state’s prosecutor can move a
case when no one obstructs Illinois’ open records act.

https://theintercept.com/2015/12/14/in-rahm-emanuels-chicago-surveillance-state-controlling-the-data-is-key/ 4/8


1/14/2016 In Rahm Emanuel’s Chicago Surveillance State, Controlling the Data Is Key
Seeing the writing on the wall following Cook County Judge
Franklin Valderrama’s order to turn over the dashcam evidence in
the McDonald case, Mayor Emanuel reversed course and decided to
release the dashcam video of police officer George Hernandez
firing five shots and fatally wounding Ronald Johnson, also in
October 2014. With lightening speed, State’s Attorney Alvarez
declined to prosecute Officer Hernandez; moments later, the city
released the full video to the public.

It all happened in a matter of hours, dizzyingly fast once again, the
minute the digital traces were going to be exposed —
demonstrating that it certainly does not take over a year to decide
these cases.

Then, on Wednesday, December 9, 2015, we learn that Emanuel
and the city’s top lawyer, Steven Patton, buried a 73-page internal
report calling for major reforms of the police department by
timing its release just before Christmas 2014 — and then never
followed up on the report. It now seems that City Hall in effect
obstructed former police superintendent Garry McCarthy’s efforts
at police reform. The timing of the data dump is again telling — as
is the fact that Mayor Emanuel is now calling for the same kind of
task force review that was already conducted a year ago.

Who controls the digital traces and their dissemination or erasure
— that’s what this is all about. A recent poll showed that if Mayor
Emanuel hadn’t delayed the release of the Laquan McDonald
dashcam video until after the runoff election in April 2015, he
would not have been reelected. The problem, it seems, is not that
Emanuel has now lost the public’s confidence, rather it’s that he
never genuinely had it to begin with.

https://theintercept.com/2015/12/14/in-rahm-emanuels-chicago-surveillance-state-controlling-the-data-is-key/ 5/8


1/14/2016 In Rahm Emanuel’s Chicago Surveillance State, Controlling the Data Is Key

as
CONTACT THE AUTHOR:

Newsletter

https://theintercept.com/2015/12/14/in-rahm-emanuels-chicago-surveillance-state-controlling-the-data-is-key/ 6/8


1/14/2016 In Rahm Emanuel’s Chicago Surveillance State, Controlling the Data Is Key

https://theintercept.com/2015/12/14/in-rahm-emanuels-chicago-surveillance-state-controlling-the-data-is-key/



1/14/2016 In Rahm Emanuel’s Chicago Surveillance State, Controlling the Data Is Key

https://theintercept.com/2015/12/14/in-rahm-emanuels-chicago-surveillance-state-controlling-the-data-is-key/

