Criminal Law Bernard E. Harcourt Spring 2019
APB April 4, 2018
Saheed Vassell, age 34, was a local resident in Brooklyn suffering from bipolar disorder.
Neighbors and neighborhood police officers knew him as the broom handler for a local
barbershop, an idiosyncratic fixture on the block who was mentally ill and liked to drink outside.
Local patrol officers chatted with him and sometimes bought him Jamaican food. They had taken
him to the nearby hospital to be treated for mental illness a number of times in recent years.
Mr. Vassell was known as quirky and occasionally erratic, but never violent, neighbors said.
Almost every morning he visited St. Matthew Roman Catholic Church near Utica Avenue and
Eastern Parkway, showing up before 7:30 a.m. Mass. He would walk in, cross himself and then
pace the aisles of the church, bobbing his head without ever stopping to sit in the pews.
According to neighbors, Mr. Vassell sank into mental illness and started drinking after a best
friend was murdered in front of him around 15 years ago. One friend, Henry E. Christian, said
that when Mr. Vassell was drinking he would sometimes act out the killing.
Mr. Vassell tried to get help, but haltingly, inquiring just last month about health insurance
options for people with bipolar disorder outside a United Healthcare office. But while he had
taken medication for bipolar disorder in the past, he was not taking any currently, his father, Eric
Vassell, said.
He hoarded artifacts he found on the street and stashed them on the roof of his apartment
building: locks, segments of pipe, a boiler casting, fingernail clippers, a razor blade, a bicycle
chain and a shoe. Among his possessions there were also soiled latex gloves from his mother’s
medical job and an envelope addressed to his father.
Police officers dealt with Mr. Vassell many times over the years, giving him 120 summonses and
classifying him as emotionally disturbed after several calls during which they took him to a
hospital.
On Wednesday April 4, 2018, Mr. Vassell strode up and down a busy Brooklyn street lunging at
passers-by—someone pushing a cart, someone holding a young child’s hand—with a curved
silver pipe resting on his fingers like the barrel of a gun.
Anonymous callers called 911 telling the dispatcher that a black man with a brown jacket and
blue jeans was pointing at people with something that looked like a gun.
The first 911 calls came in at 4:40 p.m. In total, the police got three 911 calls about Mr. Vassell, a
spokesman said.
One caller described a man “pointing a silver thing in a lady’s face,” then told a dispatcher: “I
don’t know if it’s a gun, ma’am. It seems like a gun. It’s silver.”
Another caller said a man outside a laundromat had a gun in his hand.
Page 1 of 3

Criminal Law Bernard E. Harcourt Spring 2019
And a third caller told a dispatcher: “He looks like he is crazy, but he’s pointing something at
people that looks like a gun and he’s like popping it like he’s pulling the trigger. He’s not pulling
a trigger, but he’s making a motion as if he is, and there is something sticking out of his jacket.”
The dispatcher then sent a smartphone alert with this information to all NYPD officers.
Several plainclothes anti-crime officers from another part of town answered the smartphone alert.
They screeched to a stop at the corner where Mr. Vassell spent most days and, after he crouched
and aimed the pipe at them, almost instantly shot and killed him.
The three plainclothes officers were not assigned to the incident, but saw an alert about it in their
car and decided to respond. They asked a dispatcher for more details and reached the scene by
4:42 p.m., the police said.
Because the officers were sent to an intersection rather than a street address, they lacked
information that there had been previous incidents regarding Mr. Vassell.
Three uniformed officers from the Strategic Response Group, which handles major events and hot
spots of crime, happened to be in the area and responded to the scene, too.
When they all converged on the corner of Montgomery Street and Utica Avenue, the six officers
saw Mr. Vassell assume a shooting stance, the police said. Four of them — three plainclothes
officers and one uniformed officer — rapidly fired a total of 10 shots. Witnesses said they did not
hear the officers say anything.
According to the police, security camera footage shows Mr. Vassell getting into a shooting stance
and raising the pipe before the police shot him. The police said he was pointing it toward
responding officers.
The police said it took 5 to 10 seconds from the moment officers pulled up to the corner of
Montgomery Street and Utica Avenue to the moment they shot Saheed Vassell.
Several witnesses said they did not hear officers shout a warning or command before shooting.
The police said that the officers repeatedly told the man: “Drop it.”
The police released the following details about the four officers who fired at Mr. Vassell, who
was black:
The three plain clothed officers were from a plainclothes anti-crime unit in the 71st
Precinct: a white officer with four years of experience (Officer Adam); a white officer
with six years of experience (Officer Bruce); and a black officer with five years of
experience (Officer Charles). They fired nine shots between them.
The fourth was a uniformed officer from the Strategic Response Group, which handles
major events and hot spots of crime. He is Indian, the police said, and has six years of
experience (Office David). He fired once, the police said.
None of the officers had been involved in any previous shootings, the police said.
Page 2 of 3

Criminal Law Bernard E. Harcourt Spring 2019
Another uniformed officer from the Strategic Response Group (Officer Edward) and a sergeant
from the 71st Precinct (Officer Frank) were also at the scene, though neither fired their weapon.
Police officials maintain it hardly mattered which officers answered the call or what training they
had. Any officers facing what appeared to be a gun aimed at them would have little choice but to
fire, these officials said. Security camera videos from nearby businesses showed Mr. Vassell just
moments before his death, startling people on the street and jabbing the pipe into one man’s chest.
“Saheed came from a good family and they have no right to shoot him down the way they did,
because Saheed is no gunman,” Mr. Vassell’s mother, Lorna Vassell, said.
[In the original exam, I had included two photos here. I have removed them after
determining that they are no longer appropriate and do not change the contents of
this exam.]
Page 3 of 3