Bernard E. Harcourt
Post-Modern Meditations
on Punishment: On the
Limits of Reason and the
Virtues of Randomization
(A Polemic and Manifesto
for the Twenty-First
Century)
Enlightenment is man’s emergence from his self-incurred
immaturity. Immaturity is the inability to use one’s own
understanding without the guidance of another.
—Immanuel Kant, “An Answer to the Question:
‘What is Enlightenment?’” (1784)
in an essay bearing the same title, michel foucault read kant’s
text against the backdrop of his critique of reason, published just three
years earlier. It is precisely at the moment that we assert ourselves as
mature beings, Foucault observed, that it is most important to recog-
nize the limits of reason. “It is precisely at this moment that the critique
is necessary, since its role is that of defining the conditions under
which the use of reason is legitimate in order to determine what can be
known, what must be done, and what may be hoped” (Foucault, 1997:
social research Vol 74 : No 2 : Summer 2007 307
SRSummer07.indb 307 7/16/07 2:13:27PM

308). Foucault warned us, with Kant, that reliance on reason beyond its
proper bounds would merely set the clock back: “Illegitimate uses of
reason are what give rise to dogmatism and heteronomy, along with
illusion” (308). The careful and critical use of reason, in contrast, is
what enlightens and leads forward, out of the shadows of illusion. But
it could only do so by relying on itself. The modern period would thus
embrace a strong conception of self-reliance—carefully bounded by
critique.
Foucault also saw in Kant’s essay a new philosophical attitude
consisting of genuine reflection on the “present”—a turning of the
more traditional, eternal gaze of the philosopher onto the contempo-
rary moment, and, with that, an associated task of theorizing knowl-
edge in relation to current times. Foucault dubbed this “the attitude
of modernity” and located it later in the writings of nineteenth- and
twentieth-century authors, starting foremost with Charles Baudelaire.
“By ‘attitude,’” Foucault wrote, “I mean a mode of relating to contem-
porary reality; a voluntary choice made by certain people; in the end,
a way of thinking and feeling; a way, too, of acting and behaving that
at one and the same time marks a relation of belonging and presents
itself as a task” (Foucault, 1997: 309). This attitude brought together
philosophical inquiry and critical thought focused on contemporary
historical actuality. Philosophical training and reflection would now
apply themselves to the contemporary moment—most notably, the
French Revolution—and concentrate on the task of reasoning through
the present. Foucault saw in Kant the origin of a modern attitude that
would run through Hegel, Nietzsche, Marx, Durkheim, Rusche, and
Kirchheimer.
In another essay bearing the same title, Jürgen Habermas adds:
“Surprisingly, in the last sentence of his lecture Foucault includes
himself in this tradition” (Habermas, 1994: 150).
Once again, the attitude of modernity triumphed over the critique
of reason. In these pages, I argue that the two strands that Foucault
identified in Kant’s essay—the crucial moment of critical reason and
the modern attitude—collided throughout the nineteenth and twenti-
308 social research
SRSummer07.indb 308 7/16/07 2:13:28PM

eth century, and that the modern attitude repeatedly prevailed. Even
when the moderns were engaged in the most critical of enterprises, the
attitude gained the upper hand and offered new ways of conceptual-
izing and making sense of the present, consistently beyond the limits of
critical reason. Never daunted by those warnings about illusions, never
chastened by the foolish excesses of earlier generations, modern think-
ers continued to theorize contemporary historical actuality beyond
reason’s bounds.
I propose that we finally abandon the misguided attitude of
modernity. It will mean, no doubt, leaving much to chance and random-
ization. This is all for the better. Let me explain.
1.
The moderns posed three questions of punishment. The first, born of
the Enlightenment itself, sought to identify and define a rational basis
for punishing. As men freed themselves from the shackles of religious
faith, this first question took shape: If theologians can no longer ground
political and legal right, then on what foundation does the sovereign’s
right to punish rest? On what basis does the state have a right to punish
its citizens?
Naturally, the question was not entirely innocent—no good ques-
tions ever are. It was animated by a desire to locate the righteous limits
of the sovereign’s punitive power at a time that was marked—at least
in the eyes of many of the first modern men of reason—by excessive
punishments. The right to punish, it turns out, would serve to limit
punishment.
“Here, then, is the foundation of the sovereign’s right to punish
crimes,” a young, 25-year-old Cesare Beccaria would declare in 1764:
“the necessity of defending the repository of the public well-being from
the usurpations of individuals” (Beccaria, 1995: 10). The origin of the
right, Beccaria explained, derived from the sovereign’s duty to promote
“the greatest happiness shared among the greater number” (Beccaria,
1995: 7). Through his disciple, Jeremy Bentham, Beccaria’s writings
would translate into more conventional theories of utilitarianism and
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 309
SRSummer07.indb 309 7/16/07 2:13:28PM

deterrence and, later, economic models of social welfare maximization.
Other early moderns would derive the right to punish elsewhere—in
the autonomy or dignity of the moral agent, in the interests of enlight-
ened self-development, in the harm principle, and in those other tradi-
tional expressions of legal right.
This first line of inquiry endures well into the present. In the
Anglo-Saxon tradition, the answers draw heavily on a functional analy-
sis of the criminal sanction. In the classic debate over the legal enforce-
ment of morality, for instance, all the major contributors—from H. L.
A. Hart (1963: 14) and Patrick Devlin (1965: 2-3), to Ernest Nagel (1968:
138-39), Norval Morris (Morris and Hawkins, 1970: 4), Joel Feinberg
(1987, 1984) and others—use as the starting point for their analysis the
statement of function articulated in the Wolfenden Report of 1957: “the
function of the criminal law . . . is to preserve public order and decency,
to protect the citizen from what is offensive or injurious, and to provide
sufficient safeguards against exploitation and corruption of others.”
The liberal theorists tend to narrow the function to preserving order,
and draw more heavily on John Stuart Mill’s earlier pronouncements
in On Liberty, while legal moralists broaden the scope of the functions
to include, centrally, the promotion of morality as a principal function
of the criminal law. “The criminal law as we know it is based upon
moral principle,” Devlin argued. “In a number of crimes its function is
simply to enforce a moral principle and nothing else” (Devlin, 1965: 7).
On both sides of the debate, though, the sovereign’s “right to punish”
derived precisely from identifying the proper functions of the criminal
sanction.
Although this first discourse continues today, it did not take long
for men of knowledge—as Nietzsche described himself—to spot the
error in this line of inquiry. The right to punish, after all, was precisely
what defined sovereignty and, as such, could hardly serve to constrain
sovereign power. The first question had gotten things backwards:
the “right to punish” was what the sovereign achieved by persuad-
ing its members that it could best promote the legitimate goals of
punishment. To seek the origin of the right to punish by analyzing
310 social research
SRSummer07.indb 310 7/16/07 2:13:29PM

the purposes or utilities of punishment would lead nowhere. “The
‘purpose of law,’” Nietzsche declared, “is absolutely the last thing to
employ in the history of the origin of law: . . . whatever exists, having
somehow come into being, is again and again reinterpreted to new
ends, taken over, transformed, and redirected by some power superior
to it” (Nietzsche, 1967: 77).
It was fruitless to look for the right to punish in its purposes,
utilities, or functions—whether from a utilitarian or deontological
perspective. “[P]urposes and utilities are only signs that a will to power
has become master of something less powerful and imposed upon it
the character of a function,” Nietzsche emphasized (1967: 77). The
proper question to ask of the “right to punish,” then, was not “on
what ground,” “of what origin,” or “from where” but rather: “How
does the sovereign’s act of punishing get perceived as legitimate?” Or
better yet, “Under what conditions does the sovereign’s exercise of
that power of punishing not trigger sufficient resistance to undermine
sovereignty itself?” That question, however, did not call for philosoph-
ical debate over rights, deontological argument about autonomy, or
econometric analyses of deterrence. It called for historical, sociologi-
cal, political, and genealogical research about acts of resistance, social
movements, transformative moments, ideology, and social cohesion.
It called for a genealogy of morals, law, and power—in sum, a geneal-
ogy of punishment.
With the birth of the social sciences in the late nineteenth
century, this critical impulse gave rise to a second line of inquiry. More
skeptical, more critical, the questions probed and excavated deeper
processes and forces: If the rational discourse over the right to punish
is mere pretext and serves only to hide power formations, then what
is it exactly that punishment practices do for us? What is the true func-
tion of punishment? What is it that we do when we punish? From
Emile Durkheim to Antonio Gramsci and the later Frankfurt School,
Michel Foucault, and fin-de-siècle trends in penology, twentieth-century
moderns struggled over social organization, economic production,
political legitimacy, governance, and the construction of the self—
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 311
SRSummer07.indb 311 7/16/07 2:13:29PM

turning punishment practices upside down, dissecting not only their
repressive functions but more important their role in constructing the
contemporary subject and modern society.
At the apex of this second line of inquiry, Michel Foucault would
articulate and enumerate, in his magisterial book, Surveiller et punir:
Naissance de la prison, the central tasks and rules of engagement. First and
foremost, “Do not concentrate the study of the punitive mechanisms
on their ‘repressive’ effects alone. . . . [R]egard punishment as a complex
social function” (1979: 23; 1975: 28). Foucault explicitly acknowledged
that this second project built on the work of Emile Durkheim, citing
him alone on that same page (1975: 28 n.1), and owed much to the
Frankfurt School. In the immediate passage following his enumeration,
Foucault emphasized that “the great book of Rusche et Kirchheimer,
Punishment and Social Structures, offers a number of essential reference
points” (1975: 29):
We must first rid ourselves of the illusion that penality is
above all (if not exclusively) a means of reducing crime. . . .
We must analyse rather the “concrete systems of punish-
ment,” study them as social phenomena that cannot be
accounted for by the juridical structure of society alone. . . ;
we must situate them in their field of operation, in which
the punishment of crime is not the sole element; we must
show that punitive measures are not simply “negative”
mechanisms that make it possible to repress, to prevent, to
exclude, to eliminate; but that they are linked to a whole
series of positive and useful effects which it is their task to
support (Foucault, 1979: 24; 1975: 29-30).
All of these reference points originated with the Frankfurt
School, and the key task that emerged from the second line of inquiry
was to unearth the deeper forces and relations of power that, through
the means of punitive practices, shape us as contemporary subjects.
To explore, in effect, “How a specific mode of subjugation could give
312 social research
SRSummer07.indb 312 7/16/07 2:13:30PM

birth to man as an object of knowledge for a discourse with scientific
status” (Foucault, 1975: 28-29). To discover and trace the deeper forces
that shape our punitive practices and, through them, our knowledge of
ourselves.
However, a series of further critiques—critiques of metanar-
ratives, functionalism, and scientific objectivity—would chasten this
line of inquiry and nudge it around the cultural turn, helping shape a
third discourse on punishment. This line of inquiry would focus not on
what punishment is doing for us, but on what punishment tells us about
ourselves: What do our punishment practices tell us about our cultural
values? What is the social meaning of our institutions of punishment?
Less metatheoretical, less critical-theoretic, this final set of questions
would build on, while simultaneously trying to avoid, the searing
critique of the construction of knowledge. The questions were intended
to be less normative. A description at most. A compelling interpreta-
tion. Something to make sense of our world and ourselves. Something
to ground, perhaps later, an evaluation of those punishment practices.
The difference was subtle, but important. The second set of
questions—especially as they evolved over the course of the twentieth
century—had become increasingly focused on the constructed nature
of knowledge, what has come to be known as the “power/knowledge”
critique: How, exactly, do we come to believe what we hold as true?
How is it, for instance, that we come to believe a progress narrative
of punishment? What institutions and practices shape us to believe in
the idea of the “delinquent”—or, for that matter, in the idea that we
could possibly “rehabilitate” or “correct” that “delinquent”? How have
our own disciplinary practices contributed to shaping our beliefs? By
the late twentieth century, this second set of questions had begun to
revolve entirely around the formation of knowledge and to constitute
an acid test for all knowledge claims regarding punishment.
In contrast, the third set of questions—the product, as I mentioned,
of a critique of metanarratives—tried assiduously to avoid the power/
knowledge critique. It cut a more humble profile. It sought only to reflect
on what our punishment practices tell us about ourselves, our values,
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 313
SRSummer07.indb 313 7/16/07 2:13:30PM

our society—as a mere preliminary to a better understanding of punish-
ment, to make possible, later, a better evaluation of our practices and
institutions. David Garland’s book, Punishment and Modern Society (1990),
though ostensibly a pedagogic treatment of the four leading voices in
the sociology of punishment, reflects well this third line of inquiry. “The
social meaning of punishment is badly understood,” Garland contends.
What is needed is “a descriptive prolegomenon which sets out the social
foundations of punishment, its characteristic modern forms, and its
social significance” (Garland, 1990: 9). The social meaning of punish-
ment “needs to be explored if we are to discover ways of punishing
which better accord with our social ideals” (Garland, 1990: 1).
This third line of inquiry represents, in Garland’s words, “a
deliberate attempt to shift the sociology of punishment away from its
recent tendency—engendered by Foucault and the Marxists—to view
the penal system more or less exclusively as an apparatus of power and
control” (1990: 1-2). The task is to develop “a pluralistic, multidimen-
sional approach,” “a rounded, completed image; a recomposition of
the fragmentary views developed by more narrowly focused studies”
(Garland, 1990: 280). To explore “multiple causality, multiple effects,
and multiple meaning” (Garland, 1990: 280). Garland explains:
Values, conceptions, sensibilities, and social meanings—
culture, in short—do not exist in the form of a natural
atmosphere which envelopes social action and makes it
meaningful. Rather, they are actively created and recreated
by our social practices and institutions—and punishment
plays its part in this generative and regenerative process
(Garland, 1990: 251).
In this sense, the third line of inquiry calls for richly textured, thick
descriptions of our punishment practices intended to expose their social
meaning and their role in shaping the fabric of society—all this to serve
as a preparatory to normative analysis, to provide “a proper descriptive
basis for normative judgments about penal policy” (Garland, 1990: 10).
314 social research
SRSummer07.indb 314 7/16/07 2:13:30PM

It is not entirely clear, though, how the third and final line of
inquiry could escape the power/knowledge critique. If Foucault’s disci-
plinary hypotheses were themselves susceptible, surely an interpreta-
tion of the “social meaning” of punishment practices and institutions
would also be vulnerable. Any interpretation would tell us more about
the interpreter and her belief systems than about the meaning of the
practice itself. Surely the semiotic enterprise would reveal more about
the modes of reasoning, beliefs, and ethical choices held by the indi-
vidual interpreter than about the social meaning of the punishment
practices themselves.
The closing paragraphs of Garland’s book are revealing in this
respect. Modern societies, Garland writes, should expect less from
punishment and “might be encouraged to treat it instead as a form of
social policy which should, where possible, be minimized” (Garland,
1990: 292). The goal should be to socialize and integrate young citi-
zens, not punish them: “a work of social justice and moral education
rather than penal policy. And to the extent that punishment is deemed
unavoidable, it should be viewed as a morally expressive undertaking
rather than a purely instrumental one” (Garland, 1990: 292). These, I
take it, are significant normative commitments that, in all likelihood,
bleed into and color the cultural critic’s interpretation of the social
meaning of punishment practices.
As dusk fell on the twentieth century, modern writings on punish-
ment continued to reflect more on the authors than on the punish-
ments. Somehow, despite the reformulation of the questions, the texts
still told us more about the interpreter’s beliefs, intuitions, and ethi-
cal choices than they did about the practices of punishment and their
social meaning.
2.
What do we do now—now that we have seen what lies around the
cultural bend and realize, painfully, that the same critiques apply with
equal force to any interpretation of cultural meaning that we could
possibly slap on our contemporary punishment practices? Should we
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 315
SRSummer07.indb 315 7/16/07 2:13:31PM

continue to labor on this final set of questions, return to an earlier set,
or, as all our predecessors did, craft a new line of inquiry? What ques-
tion shall we—children of the twenty-first century—pose of our punish-
ment practices and institutions?
The answer, paradoxically, is that it does not matter. The formula-
tion of the questions themselves never really mattered, except perhaps
to distinguish the analytic philosopher from the critical theorist, the
positivist from the cultural critic—minor differences that reflected
nothing more than taste, desire, personal aptitude, upbringing, and
training. Yes, new questions were formulated and new discourses
emerged, but the same problem always plagued those modern text.
In all the modern texts, there always came this moment when
the empirical facts ran out or the deductions of principle reached their
limit—or both—and yet the reasoning continued. There was always this
moment, ironically, when the moderns—those paragons of reason—
took a leap of faith. It is no accident that it was always there, at that
precise moment, that we learned the most—that we could read from
the text and decipher a vision of just punishment that was never
entirely rational, never purely empirical, and never fully determined
by the theoretical premises of the author. In each and every case, the
modern text let slip a leap of faith—a choice about how to resolve a gap,
an ambiguity, an indeterminacy in an argument of principle or fact.
The inevitable space between theoretical or empirical premises
and the final judgment derives, in the end, from that imperceptible
fissure in the human sciences between the not falsified, the not yet falsi-
fied, the apparently unfalsifiable, the verified but only under certain
questionable assumptions, and truth. In the empirical domain—no
less than in philosophical discourse, legal analysis, and public policy
debates—proof never followed mathematical deduction, but rested
instead on assertions—whether empirical or logical—that may well
have been true, but for which other entirely reasonable hypotheses
could have been substituted. The key issue was always which hypothesis
to believe from among the many possible hypotheses, all of which were
consistent with the data; which subprinciple to uphold from among all
316 social research
SRSummer07.indb 316 7/16/07 2:13:31PM

the possible subprinciples that were theoretically coherent with the
guiding principle. What the moderns chose to believe, ultimately, told
us more about them than it did about the world around them. It was
always the answers that moderns gave to the questions—regardless of
the question itself—that revealed the most about them and their intu-
itions about just punishment.
Ironically, this gap is precisely what made possible the moment
of enlightenment at the very heart of critical theory—what Raymond
Geuss refers to as that reflective opening that “gives agents a kind of
knowledge inherently productive of enlightenment and emancipation”
(Geuss, 1981: 2). Once we lifted the veil from our eyes and realized fully
that our rational belief in certain theories or premises were no better
than religious faith—that we had taken a leap of faith to arrive at our
conclusion—it then became possible to trace the genealogy of how we
took that leap. It became possible to explore how we came to believe
what we did believe and at what price. That is precisely what the great
critical thinkers of the nineteenth and twentieth century did along the
three principal dimensions of radical thought—power (from Nietzsche
through Foucault to Agamben), economic production (from Marx
through the Frankfurt School to Althusser), and desire (from Freud
through Lacan to Zizek). Not surprisingly, identifying the gap is what
also gave birth to the American Legal Realist movement in the early
twentieth century and the Critical Legal Studies movement at midcen-
tury. It also made possible deconstruction at the end of the century—
perhaps the fullest instantiation of the insight.
In this respect, Jacques Derrida—no hero of mine, I assure you,
far too ambiguous and playful for my taste—was entirely right when
he wrote that the foundation of law itself rests on a leap of faith—what
he refers to as “a performative force, in other words always an interpre-
tive force with an appeal to faith” (Derrida, 1994: 32). Legal authority
traces to this act of auto-authorization, itself never subject to a legal
evaluation of right or wrong—not simply, though certainly, because the
legal framework itself postdates the founding moment, but also and
more important, because the judgment that a punishment is just must
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 317
SRSummer07.indb 317 7/16/07 2:13:31PM

always overcome the gap between theoretical premises and final judg-
ment. The act of reaching the legal conclusion—the just punishment,
the sentence, the execution—represents “a stroke of force, a violent
performative act, and thus an interpretation that is in itself neither just
nor unjust” (Derrida, 1994: 32-33). And it is precisely in this sense that
Derrida concludes, paradoxically, that the structure of the law is what
opens the door to the very possibility of deconstruction itself. Thus, his
playful hypothesis that justice makes possible deconstruction (Derrida,
1994: 36). Though addressing law and justice, Derrida’s point applies
equally well to the other disciplines that form the field of crime and
punishment, such as sociology, politics, economics, and public policy.
I said “ironically” earlier because it is precisely the moment of
critical perception and enlightenment that simultaneously undermines
the claims of the radical critical theorists—though not necessarily those
of the deconstructionists.
3.
What do these gaps, ambiguities, and indeterminacies look like? What
does it mean, exactly, that the moderns inevitably took a leap of faith?
“The empirical facts ran out, the deductions of principle reached their
limit, and yet the reasoning continued.” What does that reasoning sound
like? Let me stop for a moment here and give some illustrations. Let me
demonstrate some of the gaps and ambiguities.
Deterrence of Juvenile Offenders
First, let’s examine a claim of deterrence. The trouble with most
research on deterrence is that it is extremely difficult to divorce the
effects of deterrence from those of incapacitation—from the fact that
increased law enforcement will also result in more imprisonment
and thus greater incapacitation of criminal offenders. The National
Academy of Sciences appointed a blue-ribbon panel of experts to
examine the problem of measuring deterrence in 1978—led by Alfred
Blumstein, Jacqueline Cohen, and Daniel Nagin—but the results were
disappointing: “Because the potential sources of error in the estimates
318 social research
SRSummer07.indb 318 7/16/07 2:13:32PM

of the deterrent effect of these sanctions are so basic and the results
sufficiently divergent, no sound, empirically based conclusions can
be drawn about the existence of the effect, and certainly not about its
magnitude” (Blumstein, Cohen, and Nagin, 1978: 42; see also Nagin,
1978: 95, 135; Spelman, 2000: 97). Little progress has been made since
then. As Steven Levitt suggested in 1998, “few of the empirical studies
[regarding deterrence of adults] have any power to distinguish deter-
rence from incapacitation and therefore provide only an indirect test of
the economic model of crime” (Levitt, 1998: 1158 n.2).
Levitt nevertheless contends that juveniles and young adults are
responsive to increases in punishment. In order to demonstrate this,
Levitt takes a state-level dataset of criminal offending rates and clas-
sifies states into three categories: first, states that have a more severe
adult than juvenile criminal justice system; second, states that have
similar levels of severity for their adult and juvenile criminal justice
systems; and third, states that have a more lenient adult than juvenile
criminal justice system. Levitt then compares the relative offending
rates of young adults as they turn from juveniles to adults—as they
reach majority age and become subject to the adult criminal justice
system.
Levitt finds that juveniles who have turned adult in the first
category of states—those with relatively more severe adult systems—
offend less in their first year of majority than they did in the previ-
ous year, whereas those juveniles in states with relatively more lenient
adult systems offend more than they did the previous year (Levitt, 1998:
1175). Levitt concludes from this that deterrence, rather than simply
incapacitation, is at work: “Sharp drops in crime at the age of majority
suggest that deterrence (and not merely incapacitation) plays an impor-
tant role” (Levitt, 1998: 1156).
Why, exactly, do the data confirm the deterrence hypothesis? The
answer, Levitt suggests, is that “if deterrence is at work, then one would
expect an abrupt change in behavior associated with passage to adult
status. If, on the other hand, incapacitation is the primary channel,
then one would expect longer delays in the transition from the juve-
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 319
SRSummer07.indb 319 7/16/07 2:13:32PM

nile equilibrium to the adult equilibrium due to lags in the timing of
arrest and sentencing. . . . It seems likely that large immediate changes
in behavior associated with the age of majority are likely to primarily
reflect deterrence” (Levitt, 1998: 1172). The logic of the argument, then,
rests on the assumption that deterrence works more speedily than inca-
pacitation at the transitional period around majority.
The trouble with this logic, though, is that there is no metric
to test the speed of either mechanism alone, nor is there any metric
to compare the speed of the two competing theories (Harcourt, 2005:
219-226). There is no way, a priori, to determine how fast either effect
would take—whether it is a month, two months, three months, six
months, nine months, twelve months, eighteen months, two years,
or more. Levitt’s model uses an annual measure of crime. Yet the inca-
pacitation time lag—if there is one—may very well be shorter than
that. In fact, if true incapacitation theory is correct—the idea that
about 6 percent of young adults are responsible for about 50 percent
of their cohort’s criminal activity—one would expect that strict
enforcement would have an immediate and sharp incapacitative
effect precisely at the moment of the release of delinquent youths
turning to majority.
Here, then, is the gap: there is no measure, no metric, no standard
against which we could declare that an effect on crime—deterrence or
incapacitation—is abrupt or delayed. Nor is there any way to determine
how the two effects would compare. We do not have a measure for the
incapacitation effect, and a separate one for the deterrence effect. We
just have one number, and have to guess whether it seems relatively
immediate or relatively delayed. Since we do not know how long the
incapacitation effect takes, there is no way of knowing from annual
crime data whether the effect looks more immediate or more delayed—
whether it is incapacitation or deterrence.
Why is it that Steven Levitt is prepared to skip over this gap and
confirm the deterrence hypothesis? It does not really matter. I would
tend to emphasize taste, desire, training, and professional advance-
ment; but there may be other explanations. What does matter is that
320 social research
SRSummer07.indb 320 7/16/07 2:13:32PM

there is a gap and a leap of faith—of faith in rationality—that we can
identify. Here it is a gap of the not yet falsified type. A theory that
is consistent with the data, but does not exclude other competing
hypotheses. It would be wrong to base public policy on these empiri-
cal findings.
Racial Profiling
A number of economists contend that the use of racial profiling can
improve the efficiency of policing by increasing the number of success-
ful searches (Knowles, Persico, and Todd, 2001; Hernández-Murillo
and Knowles, 2003). Assuming that people respond rationally to the
increased cost of offending—assuming rational action theory—target-
ing more police resources at a higher-offending population will reduce
their rate of offending (given the greater likelihood of being detected
and punished). If we assume, in addition, that minorities have a higher
offending rate than whites, then the optimal level of profiling occurs
when the offending rate of minorities declines to the same level as the
offending rate of whites. At that point, the police will maximize the
number of successful police interventions and have no legitimate inter-
est in profiling minorities to any greater extent. The economists verify
these conclusions with accurate mathematical equations and economic
models.
Even under these assumptions, however, racial profiling may
increase the overall societal rate of offending (Harcourt, 2007a: 111-144).
It all depends on the relative responsiveness of the two groups—the
profiled minorities and the nonprofiled whites—to policing. If minori-
ties are less responsive to policing then whites, then their decrease in
offending will be outweighed, in absolute numbers, by the more elastic
responsiveness of whites—i.e. by the increased offending of whites in
response to the fact that they are being policed less. This is true despite
the fact that the overall number of successful police interventions
increases—despite the fact that the police are detecting and punishing
more crime. I demonstrate this with accurate mathematical equations
and economic models in Against Prediction (2007a: 132-136).
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 321
SRSummer07.indb 321 7/16/07 2:13:33PM

The economists had essentially assumed in their model of racial
profiling that minorities are as responsive to policing as whites, if not
more. If they had not made that crucial assumption, then their own
models would demonstrate that racial profiling may increase the amount
of crime in society—which is definitely not an efficient outcome. Their
claims are nonfalsifiable but only under dubious assumptions. They are
mathematically verified, but only if we assume something about the
relative elasticity of the two groups that we have no ground to assume.
(In fact, if minorities have a higher offending rate than whites, it is far
more likely that the cause of that difference, perhaps lower employ-
ment opportunities, would lower their responsiveness to policing in
comparison to whites).
This, I take it, is a gap within their own model: even assuming
deterrence (which itself is, for many, a leap), there is a gap over which
these economists took another leap of faith. Why? Again, it does not
matter. I would speculate that it is because they desire a clean, parsimo-
nious, mathematical model that affirms rationality. Maybe that is why
they became economists. But again, why they took a leap of faith does
not really matter. What matters is that they took it and that we can
identify it.
Order Maintenance
For a third illustration, let me turn to a modern policing practice. In the
early 1990s, several major US cities began implementing order-mainte-
nance strategies—most notably New York City, in 1994, where Mayor
Rudolph Giuliani and his first police commissioner, William Bratton,
put in force the “quality-of-life initiative.” The order-maintenance
strategies rested on the “broken windows” theory: the idea that minor
neighborhood disorder like graffiti and loitering, if left unattended, will
cause serious criminal activity (Wilson and Kelling, 1982: 31; Harcourt,
2001: 23-27; Harcourt and Ludwig, 2006: 278-287).
During the 1990s, several proponents of order-maintenance
declared that the broken windows theory had been empirically verified
(Kelling and Coles, 1996: 24). They rested this assertion on the findings
322 social research
SRSummer07.indb 322 7/16/07 2:13:33PM

of a 1990 study titled Disorder and Decline. Subsequent research discov-
ered several gaping flaws in the study that undermine confidence in
the findings (Harcourt, 2001: 59-78). Even putting those gaps aside, the
1990 study used a static dataset to test a dynamic hypothesis: the data
consisted of disorder and robbery victimization at one point in time,
whereas the broken windows theory posited a developmental sequence
over time. The statistical analysis could not—and as a result, did not —
falsify the broken windows hypothesis. As Ralph Taylor succinctly
observes, the 1990 study was simply off the mark “because these data
are cross-sectional, and the thesis is longitudinal” (Taylor, 2006: 1626).
The gap was between the not-yet-falsified-because-not-really-tested and
truth. Again, it was inappropriate at the time to form public policy on
its basis.
Today, the social scientific support for the broken windows
theory rests principally on a 2001 study coauthored by George
Kelling and William Sousa. In their study, Kelling and Sousa focus
on the 75 police precincts in New York City over the period 1989
to 1998. They statistically compare the relationship between violent
crime and broken-windows policing, as well as three other indepen-
dent variables—unemployment, demographics, and crack cocaine
consumption—simulating comparison groups by treating the city
as 75 separate and comparable entities. Looking at the change over
time, they find that the measure of broken-windows policing is signif-
icantly related to the drops in precinct violent crime over the 10-year
period—in contrast to demographics, unemployment, and drug use
patterns, which are not.
The trouble with the Kelling and Sousa study is that they do not
control for what statisticians call “mean reversion.” An examination of
their data reveals just that: those precincts that experienced the largest
drop in crime in the 1990s were the ones that experienced the largest
increases in crime during the city’s crack epidemic of the mid- to late
1980s. In other words, it may well be true that the precincts that received
the greatest dose of broken windows policing in the 1990s experienced
the largest declines in crime. But those precincts were precisely the
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 323
SRSummer07.indb 323 7/16/07 2:13:33PM

ones that were hit hardest by the crack epidemic that fueled homicide
rates in New York City from the mid-1980s through the early 1990s.
Everywhere that crime skyrocketed as a result of the crack epidemic,
crime declined sharply once the epidemic ebbed—which, it turns out,
was also true across the country.
In a recent study with Jens Ludwig, we demonstrate that the
declines in crime observed in New York City in the 1990s are exactly
what would have been predicted from the rise and fall of the crack
epidemic, even if New York had not embarked on its broken windows
policing strategy (Harcourt and Ludwig, 2006: 315). Jens Ludwig and I
call this Newton’s Law of Crime: what goes up, must come down, and
what goes up the most, tends to come down the most. What it repre-
sents, in effect, is a competing hypothesis that more fully explains the
relationship between crime and policing.
There’s a third gap—or fourth or fifth, I’ve lost track frankly.
Kelling and Sousa infer the truth of the broken windows theory—and
advocate a public policy of broken windows policing—on the basis of a
not-falsified hypothesis that coincidentally fails to test for a competing
explanation. But even if they had tested for mean reversion, we would
still be left with a nonfalsified hypothesis: the broken windows theory
has not been disproved by Jens Ludwig and my study of the New York
City data, we have merely offered a different (though in our mind better)
explanation of the crime trends.1 But who is to say which is right? It is,
as Ludwig and I suggest, a Scotch verdict: not proven. That’s a gap.
Why are Kelling and Sousa willing to take a leap of faith and
advocate policies based on the broken windows theory—a theory that
is at best not falsified? It does not matter. I think I know why, but of
course I may be wrong: George Kelling, the coauthor of the original
Broken Windows article, has a lot invested in its truth, especially now
that he is running a consulting business, the Hanover Justice Group,
that markets broken-windows policing methods to city mayors and
councils. But again, it really does not matter. What matters here is
that we have identified another gap and a corresponding leap of
faith.
324 social research
SRSummer07.indb 324 7/16/07 2:13:33PM

The Death Penalty
Modern writings on capital punishment also illustrate radical indeter-
minacy—those gaps and ambiguities that allow moderns to express,
more than anything, their moral intuitions about just punishment. Take,
for example, modern rational choice literature on the death penalty.
Beccaria, the first true rational choice theorist, did not believe that the
sovereign had the right to sentence to death. Capital punishment, accord-
ing to Beccaria, fell within the domain of war and thus was governed by
rules of necessity and utility. Beccaria did not believe, however, that the
death penalty served either interest. It was not necessary because long-
drawn-out punishments, such as penal servitude or slavery for life, were
more effective and fear-inducing than the fleeting shock of death. It was
also not useful because capital punishment had a brutalizing effect on
society (Beccaria, 1995: 67). Jeremy Bentham—the very spokesman for the
theory of marginal deterrence in the modern era—agreed entirely: “the
more attention one gives to the punishment of death the more he will
be inclined to adopt the opinion of Beccaria—that it ought to be disused.
This subject is so ably discussed in his book that to treat it after him is a
work that may well be dispensed with” (quoted in Hart, 1982: 41).
Fast forward to the present, Christmas Day 2005 (and note the
irony of the timing). Here’s Gary Becker, one of the world’s leading
rational choice theorists and Nobel prize economist, writing on his
blog: “My belief in [the death penalty’s] deterrent effect is partly based
on these limited quantitative studies, but also because I believe that
most people have a powerful fear of death. David Hume said in discuss-
ing suicide that ‘no man ever threw away life, while it was worth living.
For such is our natural horror of death. . .’. Schopenhauer added also
in discussing suicide ‘. . . as soon as the terrors of life reach a point
at which they outweigh the terrors of death, a man will put an end
to his life. But the terrors of death offer considerable resistance. . . .’”
(Becker-Posner blog, December 25, 2005). Richard Posner adds, also on
Christmas Day: “I do not consider revenge an impermissible ground for
capital punishment. Revenge has very deep roots in the human psyche”
(Becker-Posner blog, December 25, 2005).
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 325
SRSummer07.indb 325 7/16/07 2:13:33PM

It would almost be funny, if it were not so sad, to watch these
moderns twist and turn and contort themselves to justify their own
ethical intuitions about killing other people. The only issue for a
rational choice theorist is whether the death penalty actually deters
homicides, net of any other effect. Becarria chose to believe that the
brutalizing effect outweighed the deterrent effect. Becker chose to
believe that people fear death. The empirical literature is all over the
lot (see Donohue and Wolfers, 2005). Yet Becker and Posner decide to
believe those economists who find a deterrent effect. It is remarkable to
watch—though disheartening for those who once believed in the criti-
cal project of reason.
This is not to suggest that the rational choice theorists alone
exhibit raw choice. Listen to Hegel: “Beccaria’s endeavor to have capital
punishment abolished has had beneficial effects. Even if neither Joseph
II nor the French ever succeeded in entirely abolishing it, still we have
begun to see which crimes deserve the death penalty and which do not.
Capital punishment has in consequence become rarer, as in fact should
be the case with this most extreme punishment” (Hegel, 1981: 247 [empha-
sis added]). These are telling words. What they tell us, though, is not
the right way to formulate the inquiry, nor the correct answer to the
proper question, but something more fundamental about the personal
convictions of the author—and how it is, exactly, that authors bridge
the inherent indeterminacy of their own principles.
4.
These gaps and ambiguities will bury the modern period—or at least,
they should. Even the sharpest of critics, the most radical thinkers have
never been able to escape the overpowering urge to build some new
construct, a new edifice, some bridge to get to the other side of knowl-
edge. Neither the followers of Nietzsche, Durkheim, or Marx, nor the
cultural critics were able to resist the lure of reconstruction, always
cobbling together the “best evidence” to soften their landing. Not even
Michel Foucault—that wisest of moderns—could resist displacing our
faith in rehabilitation with a genealogical story—one that required just
326 social research
SRSummer07.indb 326 7/16/07 2:13:34PM

as great a leap of faith. Tragically, this is as true of the cultural critics as
it was of the two earlier inquiries.
Many have argued over the ages—and still do—that we should
simply continue to live with our structure of knowledge and adjust
our expectations of truth: that the not-yet-falsified simply is the best
model—which is, obviously, hard to dispute—and that we should
continue to deploy reason to select the most robust empirical infer-
ences and the most coherent deductions of principle. But the idea that
we could distinguish between different hypotheses consistent with the
data or principles based on what “makes the most sense,” “sounds the
most reasonable,” or “seems the most coherent,” is simply fantastic.
Those types of judgment are so culturally determined and so highly
influenced by our particular time and place, it is inconceivable that any
rational being today could possibly continue to make those statements
at this late stage of modernity—at least, with a straight face.
No more. It is too embarrassing to watch as one generation after
another of moderns, under the banner of reason, hop, jump, and skip
over the gaps of knowledge. One would have thought that phrenology
would have been sufficient to stop us in our tracks, but, no, instead we
got biological determinist theories of social behavior applied to male
rape, moral poverty theories of delinquency applied to super-predator
black males, rational action theories applied to suicide bombers—
and the list goes on and on of theories that require so many caveats
and exceptions that even a child would question our modern claim to
rationality.
We can no longer leap over the not yet falsified. It is no better
than turning the clock back and resurrecting faith in divine provi-
dence. Foucauldian geneaology does not solve the problem: tracing the
formation of belief represents nothing more than seducing us to believe
another explanation for which there is hardly stronger evidence. It
too requires a leap of faith. The cultural turn also solves nothing. The
idea that we could interpret the social meaning of a contemporary
punishment practice or institution—let alone a practice that occurred
in a completely different historical and cultural context—is complete
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 327
SRSummer07.indb 327 7/16/07 2:13:34PM

fantasy. The fact that the cultural interpretation is persuasive to us tells
us a lot more about what we find convincing—how we categorize, what
kind of evidence we find persuasive, what disciplines we defer to—than
it does about the “social meaning” of the practice itself. And even when
we do come to a rich description that makes sense of the world around
us, even when we achieve that formidable task of symbolic interpreta-
tion, we are no closer to drawing normative conclusions. We are located
precisely at the gap, forced to take a leap. The symbolic interpretation
tells us nothing about how the practice came about, how to transform
or change it, or how to modify its social meaning. Social meaning offers
no purchase on action.
5.
Where does this leave us? The answer must be randomization. Where our
social scientific theories run out, where our principles run dry, we should
leave the decision making to chance. We should no longer take that leap
of faith, but turn instead to the coin toss, the roll of the dice, the lottery
draw—in sum, to randomization and chance. And we should do so, I
almost hesitate to say, throughout the field of crime and punishment.
In the realm of searches, surveillance, and detection, law
enforcement agencies should turn either to completeness or to
random sampling. The Internal Revenue Service could audit tax
returns at random using a social security number lottery system. The
Transportation Security Administration could search every passen-
ger at the airport, or randomly, select a certain percent based on a
computer-generated algorithm using last names. The Occupational
Safety and Health Administration could investigate compliance
by employers randomly selecting on employer tax identification
number. In these and other prophylactic law enforcement investiga-
tions, the agency could very easily replace profiling—which rests on
uncertain assumptions about responsiveness and rational action—by
randomization.
In choosing law enforcement priorities, government agencies
should begin allocating resources by chance. The local district attor-
328 social research
SRSummer07.indb 328 7/16/07 2:13:34PM

ney’s office, as well as the federal prosecutor’s office, could select
annual enforcement targets (as between, for instance, public corrup-
tion, insider trading, drug enforcement, or violent crimes) by lottery.
State highway policing authorities could distribute patrol cars through
a randomized mapping system using heavily trafficked roads and inter-
state highways. The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms could
choose between equal-impact initiatives on the basis of an annual
lottery draw.
And yes, even in the area of sentencing and corrections, courts and
prison administrators should start thinking about relying more heavily
on chance. Judges could impose sentences, following conviction, based
on a draw from within a legislatively prescribed sentencing range; the
range could easily be determined, for instance, by felony classifications.
The department of corrections could assign prisoners to facilities on a
random basis within designated escape-risk or security-level categories.
Prisoners in need of drug, alcohol, or mental health treatment could be
assigned to comparable programs based on a lottery draw.
This is not as far-fetched as it may seem. It does, naturally, assume
a sentencing scheme with specified ranges for different degrees of
felony. The same kind of randomization, though, could be introduced
at the legislative process to decide on actual ranges or to set mandatory
sentences (if fixed sentences are preferred to ranges). So, for instance,
legislators, having no scientific or principled way to distinguish
between 6 or 12 months of imprisonment for an aggravated assault,
could turn to chance. Randomization would allow those legislators to
pick a mandatory sentence from within those bounds.
The common gesture running through all this is to question and,
ultimately, to reject social engineering through criminal punishment.
The desire to stop and refuse to take leaps of faith represents noth-
ing more, in practice, than stopping to engineer persons and social rela-
tions through the criminal sanction. The central impulse is precisely to
resist shaping people by means of punishment—and thereby to wipe
the crime and punishment field clean of speculative social science and
indeterminate principle.
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 329
SRSummer07.indb 329 7/16/07 2:13:34PM

Critical reason reveals the limit of our reasoning abilities. It
brings us to the gap where our predecessors always took their leap of
faith. It sheds light on those theoretical constructs that the moderns
used to bridge the gaps of knowledge. It should now also allow us to
clear the field of these fabrications. It should free us to use the only
unbiased device to decide our fate: randomization, lotteries, dice, and
chance. And the point is not to roll the dice as between different theo-
ries all of which require a leap of faith, but instead to use critical reason
to take those theories off the table. To eliminate them—and thereby to
stop social engineering.
6.
How far exactly shall we go with this? Once we have begun to roll the
dice, how will we know when to stop? If we use a lottery within sentenc-
ing ranges, why not then draw all sentences from the same urn? Why
not determine guilt by the toss of a coin? Why not even decide whom
to accuse by drawing lots? This is, after all, the whole point of Jorge Luis
Borges’ brilliant short story, The Lottery of Babylon (1998). Once you go
down the path of chance, the road may well lead to hell. Once we have
tasted the sweat nectar of chance, where will we find the right place to
stop?
The Degree of Skepticism
The central claim is not that we can know nothing. No. We have some
basic intuitive knowledge that no one can dispute. As an empirical
matter, we know that if we execute someone, we are not going to
be able to rehabilitate them. As a matter of principle, we know that
murdering an innocent person is worse than stealing her wallet. We
know that raping someone is worse than spraying graffiti. We know
that punishing an entirely innocent person is wrong. And we can
use these minimal ingredients of certainty to set limits to the use of
chance. So, for instance, we do not draw punishments for murder and
pickpocketing—or for rape and vandalism—from the same urn. We do
not decide who to accuse by drawing lots. These elementary forms of
330 social research
SRSummer07.indb 330 7/16/07 2:13:34PM

knowledge allow us to rest our punishment practices minimally on very
basic notions of proportionality. For instance, the convicted murderer
and the person exceeding a speed limit are not to be treated the same.
We impose proportionality constraints on the use of chance. Perhaps
we create a category for homicide, another for serious bodily or psycho-
logical injury, and another for property damage. There are some natu-
ral limits to the use of randomization.
We only turn to chance when our social science and principles
run out. The easy cases are where our social science findings rest on
bad evidence, weak data, or faulty models, where there is no scientific
evidence at all, or where there are competing and equally plausible
hypotheses that are all similarly nonfalsified—in other words, when we
do not have reliable social science findings to rely on. This, I take it, can
hardly be contested. No one wants to affirmatively and intentionally
punish another human being on the basis of bad science or no science
at all.
What about the harder case where a reliable social scientific
study exists that falsifies a null hypothesis? Here, I would argue that
we need to draw distinctions between types of social scientific theory
and save only those that involve social physics. By social physics I mean
those claims that are necessarily true as a result of the physical nature
of our mortal existence. Theories that depend on the intermediation of
human consciousness and decision making should be set aside, left to
deal with later when we have more leisure time or, perhaps, when we
have made breakthroughs in those new consciousness studies. For the
time being, though, we should focus on social physics only.
By way of illustration, consider four theories dear to the field of
crime and punishment: rational choice theory, the broken-windows
theory, legitimacy theory, and incapacitation theory. The first three
operate through the intermediary of human consciousness. In each case,
the theories depend on actors believing certain things and conforming
their behavior accordingly. The first assumes that individuals pursue
their self-interest or maximize their utility, and that, accordingly, when
the cost of offending goes up, they will offend less. It is a theory that
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 331
SRSummer07.indb 331 7/16/07 2:13:34PM

requires us to accept the idea that individuals—whether knowingly
or unconsciously—conform their behavior to calculated expectations
of success or failure. The second and third theories—broken-windows
and legitimacy theories—also depend on people taking cues from their
social or physical environment—a disorderly neighborhood in one
case, a discourteous or insolent police officer in another—and adapting
their behavior accordingly. All three of these theories require a defined
process of the human intellect and a decision about behavior. They
require the intermediation of human consciousness. They are neither
true, nor false, just not yet falsified properly, nor clearly falsifiable in
the near future.
In contrast, the fourth theory involves social physics. If we physi-
cally detain an individual and isolate her from the free world, she will
not commit statutory offenses on the outside. This is a matter of social
physics, not modern social science. Similarly, transportation made it
physically impossible for a convict to offend in the original jurisdiction.
These types of theories alone are respectable hypotheses for the twen-
ty-first century. To be sure, it narrows the range of acceptable empirical
and principled claims. But that is all for the better.
My intention is not to prove a social physics hypotheses, but to
illustrate a point: critical reason may not necessarily eliminate all social
science theories related to crime and punishment. There may still be
room for some empirical findings that avoid the intermediation of
human consciousness. It is important to note, though, that even those
rare claims of social physics will not resolve the policy choices. The fact
that incapacitation or transportation makes it physically impossible for
the convict to offend (at least, in the original jurisdiction) does not tell
us whether that effect will be outweighed by other consciousness-inter-
mediating theories, such as a brutalizing effect on the convict or detri-
mental consequences on his family and community. It also does not
tell us how much incapacitation we should have. It takes us to another
empirical and theoretical gap that simply cannot be bridged. The triage
and elimination of claims that rest on the intermediation of conscious-
ness will leave us most often without any guidance, without any theory
332 social research
SRSummer07.indb 332 7/16/07 2:13:35PM

at all. There will be no “best evidence” to fill the void. How then shall
we organize our political and social environment? Yes, you know the
answer by now: through randomization.
Ultimately, the degree of uncertainty in the punishment field is
not complete, but radical. The model of nonfalsification alone is not
adequate to sort social science theories apart. We need, in addition, a
mechanism that distinguishes between social science hypotheses that
intermediate though consciousness and those that do not. The first are
far too susceptible to ideology. Only the second can be a valid basis for
decision making. I say “ideological” in the sense that social scientific
theories that intermediate through consciousness are shaped by histor-
ical, social, and familial contexts that change over time and that are
affected by the very punitive practices that we implement. In this area,
there is a feedback mechanism—what Ian Hacking refers to as a “loop-
ing effect” (Hacking, 2006: 2). The practices and categories we deploy
shape us as subjects and change the way we respond to those very prac-
tices. As a result, these theories will necessarily be filled with ideologi-
cal commitments, biases, and prejudices. They need to be eliminated
from the field of crime and punishment.
The Domain of Uncertainty
Does this extend to the natural sciences—or at least to the hard sciences
in contrast to the human sciences? Does it apply to fields where the
manipulations do not transform the objects of study or the underlying
processes? In biology, for instance, there may be placebo and mental
effects on health that intermediate through consciousness. But is it
different in physics and chemistry? Even within the human sciences,
there seem to be pockets of more reliable social scientific knowledge. Is
the setting of fiscal policy or interest rates, for instance, more “certain”
than setting the price of crime? Could it be that there is somehow a
continuum in terms of the intermediation of conscience? Might it
have something to do with the rational element in the decision-mak-
ing process? In other words, is consumer spending related more to
economic rationality than committing crime?
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 333
SRSummer07.indb 333 7/16/07 2:13:35PM

These questions have been a source of formidable debates for
centuries. There are, naturally, important differences between the
human and hard sciences, not the least of which is the very possibility
and use of experimental designs in the natural sciences. Experiments
and control groups afford different insights into correlation. But these
issues are far too significant to address in a short essay—and they are
far too distracting. Distracting, because they paralyze us and prevent
us from doing what is right in the field of crime and punishment. Let us
leave those questions aside—to be answered some other day—and limit
ourselves here to the intentional infliction of pain as a form of punish-
ment. The same reasoning may well apply elsewhere, but that is not
our concern. Time is of the essence. Our brothers and sisters are being
punished. Right now, we can simply limit these claims of critical reason
to the carceral zone.
Why Turn to Randomization?
Yes, of course, there are other alternatives. At the point of making that
punishment decision, there are other options. We could simply stick
with what we have done in the past. Do what we did before, use the
same punishments as our mothers and fathers. We could heed the
status quo. The problem is, their judgments were precisely the product
of years and years of uncritical leaps of faith. We will have learned noth-
ing from the exercise of critical reason. Alternatively, we could turn to
the democratic process and allow the legislature to decide. But in the
end, their vote will reflect nothing more than prejudice, ideology, bias,
and, again, leaps of faith. We could decide simply to impose our tastes
and aesthetic preferences; but that seems obnoxious and irrational.
No, we must turn instead to randomization because we have no
other choice. We must turn to the lottery because it is the only way to
act within the bounds of critical reason. We must turn to the dice by
default. Of course, randomization may have some positive values. It
may remind us that our knowledge claims are limited. It may point
out the frightening role of ideology in our punishment practices. It
may help gather information. By using a form of random sampling, we
334 social research
SRSummer07.indb 334 7/16/07 2:13:35PM

may in fact learn a lot about the world of deviance that surrounds us.
Randomization may offer more transparency in our policy making. And
in fact, it may be more efficient than the alternative. But none of these
are the reason we turn to randomization. We turn instead because there
is no alternative that satisfies critical reason.
7.
Randomization is by no means foreign to the law—and not just in
François Rabelais’ vivid imagination (Rabelais, Tiers livre III: 39, 1999). A
number of states today statutorily prescribe a coin toss to resolve elec-
tion ties (Choper, 2001: 340 n.22). Louisiana law expressly states that
“In case of a tie, the secretary of state shall invite the candidates to his
office and shall determine the winner by the flip of a coin” (La. Rev. Stat.
46: 1410(C)(3) (2005)). In New Mexico, it is a poker hand that resolves a
tie (Reuters, 2000). A number of courts also partition disputed land by
lot (Zitter, 1999). Randomness also surfaces across a number of policing
strategies, including sobriety checkpoints and the random selection of
airline passengers for further screening at airports. It plays a large role
in the detection of crime. Our society embraces a “detection lottery”
(Duff, 1990: 26-27). Even fixed sentencing schemes have a significant
element of chance. A lot turns on the luck of the draw regarding which
judge—lenient or stern—presides over the sentencing (Harel and Segal,
1999: 292).
Efficiency and Deterrence
Nevertheless, a call for more randomization will undoubtedly meet with
great resistance. Many will instinctively protest that the use of chance
is far less efficient than profiling or targeting higher offenders—that it
is wasteful to expend law enforcement resources on low-risk offenders.
There is no point conducting extra airport security checks on elderly
grandmothers in wheelchairs and families with infants—or “Girl Scouts
and grannies,” as one recent commentator writes (Sperry, 2005). As I
demonstrate elsewhere with equations and graphs, however, profiling
on the basis of group-offending rates may in fact be counterproduc-
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 335
SRSummer07.indb 335 7/16/07 2:13:35PM

tive and may actually cause more crime even under very conservative
assumptions regarding the comparative elasticities of the different
populations (Harcourt, Against Prediction, 2007a, 129-132; 2007b). We
have no good theoretical reason to believe that targeted enforcement
would be efficient in decreasing crime or would increase, rather than
decrease, overall social welfare.
More sophisticated economists may respond that targeting
enforcement on groups that are more responsive, at the margin, would
maximize the return of any law enforcement investment (Margoliath,
2007). But here we face an empirical void. What we would need is reli-
able empirical evidence concerning both the comparative offending
rates and the comparative elasticities of the targeted and non-targeted
populations. I derive the exact equation for this in Against Prediction
(Harcourt, 2007a: 133). That evidence, however, does not exist. The
problem is not the reliability of the evidence, it is that it simply does
not exist.2 If there ever was a place to avoid taking leaps of faith, surely
it would be here, where there is no empirical data whatsoever.
The conventional wisdom among law-and-economists is that
increasing the probability of detection serves as a greater deterrent to
crime than increasing the amount of the sanction because of the high
discount rate imputed to criminals (Polinsky and Shavell, 1999: 12).
Assuming this is true, the decision to embrace randomization in sentenc-
ing should have no effect on deterrence. Using a sentencing lottery to
determine the length of incarceration from within a sentencing guide-
line range, rather than using a grid that profiles on prior criminal history,
gun use, or other factors, would not change the certainty of the expected
sentence and need not change the amount of the expected sentence.
Some behavioral law-and-economists had suggested that the
certainty of a criminal sentence—the fact that the size of a criminal
sanction is fixed and known ahead of time—may deter criminals more
effectively than uncertain sentences and, on those grounds, had argued
against sentencing lotteries (Harel and Segal, 1999: 280). However, more
recent studies involving actual experimental research suggest that
uncertainty regarding a sanction may be more effective at deterring
336 social research
SRSummer07.indb 336 7/16/07 2:13:35PM

deviant behavior. Experiments by Alon Harel, Tom Baker and Tamar
Kugler reveal that a sentencing lottery may in fact be more effective
at deterring deviant behavior than fixed sentences (Baker, Harel, and
Kugler, 2003). Other psychological experiments have similarly shown
individuals to be averse to ambiguity (Harel and Segal, 1999: 291).
Just Punishment and Moral Luck
Randomization in sentencing will likely meet much greater resistance,
not just because of efficiency concerns but also because of consider-
ations of just punishment and desert. In a 1987 Tanner Lecture, Jon
Elster reviewed the arguments for randomization and discussed a
number of legal areas where lotteries might make sense. Yet he refused
to see any room for a lottery in the criminal law. “I do not think there
are any arguments for incorporating lotteries in present-day criminal
law,” Elster concluded (Elster, 1987: 157). Most legal scholars agree—or
at least suggest that we, as a community, would tend to agree. “We
insist upon deliberate, self-conscious decision making,” Judith Resnik
suggests. “The coin flip offend[s] this society’s commitment to ratio-
nality. Whether or not a judge’s mental processes, when pronounc-
ing a sentence of twenty or thirty days, actually amount to anything
more than a mental coin flip, the community wishes judicial rulings
to appear to be the product of contemplative, deliberate, cognitive
processes” (Resnik, 1984: 610-611).
A large body of philosophical and legal literature has grown
around the issue of luck in criminal sentencing, much of it tied to the
larger debate over what Bernard Williams and Thomas Nagel coined
“moral luck” (Williams, 1981: 20-39; Nagel, 1979: 24-38). Most of the
commentators oppose the use of chance (Kadish, 1994: 680; Lewis, 1989:
58; Kessler, 1994: 2237; Duff 1990; Von Hirsch 1976: 72-73). Yet surpris-
ingly, as a legal matter, the role of luck has been universally embraced
in this country and in the West. Most jurisdictions in the United States
impose a lesser sentence or half the punishment for attempts; beyond
our borders, reduced punishment for attempts has achieved “near
universal acceptance in Western law” (Kadish, 1994: 679).
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 337
SRSummer07.indb 337 7/16/07 2:13:35PM

What accounts for this almost universal academic rejection of
chance in criminal sentencing? The reason, I would suggest, is that
we desperately want to believe that there is a rational alternative. We
cling to the idea that there is a better way, a more rational way, a more
morally acceptable way. As Elster explains, “Since human beings are
meaning-seeking animals, they are uncomfortable with the idea that
events are merely sound and fury, signifying nothing. Human beings
are also reason-seeking animals. They want to have reasons for what
they do, and they create reasons when none exist. Moreover, they want
the reasons to be clear and decisive, so as to make the decision easy
rather than close” (Elster, 1987: 174-75).
In discussing penal lotteries, R. A. Duff observes that lotteries in
general are justified only when “there is no other practicable or morally
acceptable way of distributing the benefit or burden in question” (Duff,
1990: 26). Lotteries are justified as a default mechanism when there is
no other morally justifiable way: “What justifies such lotteries . . . is the
fact that it is either impossible to eliminate them, or possible to reduce
or eliminate them only at an unacceptably high cost” (Duff, 1990: 27).
Duff has it right. What justifies lotteries, morally, is the lack of
an alternative. Where he has it wrong, though—and where everyone
seems to have it wrong—is in believing that there is a rational alterna-
tive. The fact is, we have hunches. We take leaps of faith. But we do not
have good evidence or determined principles that resolve the sentenc-
ing ambiguities. Sentencing lotteries make sense, in the end, precisely
because we have no better choice.
CONCLUSION
The end of modernity is within our reach. The final triumph of ratio-
nality is near. Reason has finally achieved that exalted state of self-
consciousness that will allow it to identify its own extremity and stop
there: no longer to rely on blind faith to bridge the inevitable gaps,
ambiguities, and indeterminacies of human knowledge; no longer to
fill that space beyond the nonfalsified hypothesis; ready to relinquish
that realm to chance, the coin toss, randomization—the arbitrary.
338 social research
SRSummer07.indb 338 7/16/07 2:13:36PM

This represents the end of punishment as a transformative
practice—as a practice intended to change mortals, to correct delin-
quents, to treat the deviant, to deter the super-predator. We will have
sanitized punishment: no longer the field of social engineering—but
also no longer about moral education, nor about social intervention.
Punishment will be unplugged and defused.
Iris Marion Young urged me this past summer, in her subtle yet
penetrating way, to use this essay as an opportunity to explore what a
world without punishment would look like. I think I have seen it now.
It is not a world without anything that could be described as punish-
ment. The person convicted of murder or embezzlement may still be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment. But it is a world in which we
have ceased to punish in furtherance of hunches and unfounded theo-
ries—in which punishment is chastened by critical reason and random-
ization.
It may now be possible to trace how reason matured through the
different questions that moderns posed of punishment—from early
enlightenment debates over the right to punish, to critical theoretic
and positivist social scientific discourse over the true functions of
punishment, to cultural criticism and later poststructuralist ethics. I
know that I have passed through many of these stages and still struggle
daily.3 Until very recently, I still believed that we should accept the inev-
itable leaps of faith in human knowledge and make them transparent.
That we should “dirty our hands” by setting out fully the ethical choices
we make when we investigate and advocate public policy outcomes
(Harcourt, 2005). My work, like that of many other poststructuralists—
Michel Foucault especially at the end of his life—had taken a turn to
ethics and to the cultivation of the self. It seemed that there was no
other option but to recognize human frailty and proceed openly and
honestly.
No more. No more leaps of faith. When we are at the precipice
of reason, faced with competing hypotheses, indeterminate principles,
or questionable assumptions, we must stop. Stop rationalizing which
hypothesis makes more sense. Stop marshalling better reasons for
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 339
SRSummer07.indb 339 7/16/07 2:13:36PM

one derivation of principle over another. Stop legitimizing the ques-
tioned assumption. Turn instead to chance. Resolve the indeterminacy
by drawing straws, tossing a coin, throwing dice, running a computer
algorithm. We need, in the end, to be mature and let chance take over
where reason ends.
NOTES
* I would like to extend a special and warm thanks to Arien Mack for
organizing such a stimulating conference and volume on punish-
ment. I am deeply grateful to Ian Hacking, Martha Nussbaum,
Pasquale Pasquino, Elizabeth Scott, Michel Troper, and Iris Young for
conversations and comments, for encouragement, but most impor-
tantly for resistance. I also owe a great debt for rich comments, reac-
tions, and still more resistance, to Olivier Cayla, Chloe Cockburn,
Andrew Dilts, John Donohue, Elizabeth Emens, Jeffrey Fagan, David
Garland, Janet Haley, Philip Hamburger, Alon Harel, George Kateb,
Tracey Meares, Thomas Miles, John Pfaff, Andrzej Rapaczynski,
Adam Samaha, Jonathan Simon, Lior Strahilevitz, Bruce Western,
and Tim Wu. I dedicate this essay to my dear friend and colleague
Iris Young.
1. I would suggest that the second half of the study, which focuses on
the MTO program, does in fact falsify the broken-windows hypoth-
esis (Harcourt and Ludwig, 2006: 300-314). But I leave that battle to
another day.
2. There may be a single exception. Avner Bar-Ilan and Bruce Sacerdote
have a working paper from 2001 that explores the comparative
responsiveness to an increase in the fine for running a red light along
several dimensions (finding that the elasticity of red light running
with respect to the fine “is larger for younger drivers and drivers
with older cars,” equivalent for drivers “convicted of violent offenses
or property offenses,” and smallest, within Israel, for “members of
ethnic minority groups”). A handful of other papers come close,
but do not address the key issue of comparative elasticities. So, for
instance, Paul Heaton’s 2006 working paper on the effect of eliminat-
340 social research
SRSummer07.indb 340 7/16/07 2:13:36PM

ing racial-profiling policies in New Jersey on the offending of minori-
ties, “Understanding the Effects of Anti-profiling Policies,” does not
address how the elasticity of black offenders compares to that of
whites.
3. My largest ongoing research project explores the relationship between
mental hospitalization, imprisonment, and crime (Harcourt, 2007c).
I justify the project as an investigation into social physics, but am
constantly struggling to restrict my claims within the bounds of criti-
cal reason.
REFERENCES
Baker, Tom, Alon Harel, and Tamar Kugler. “The Virtues of Uncertainty
in Law: An Experimental Approach.” Iowa Law Review 89 (2004):
443-494.
Bar-Ilan, Avner, and Bruce Sacerdote. “The Response to Fines and
Probability of Detection in a Series of Experiments.” National
Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. 8638 (December
2001).
Beccaria, Cesare. On Crimes and Punishments and Other Writings. Ed. Richard
Bellamy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Becker-Posner blog <http: //www.becker-posner-blog.com>.
Blumstein, Alfred, Jacqueline Cohen, and Daniel Nagin. “Report of
the Panel on Research on Deterrent and Incapacitative Effects.”
Deterrence and Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects of Criminal Sanctions
on Crime Rates. Eds. Alfred Blumstein et al. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy of Sciences, 1978.
Borges, Jorge Luis. 1998. “The Lottery in Babylon.” Collected Fictions. Trans.
Andrew Hurley. New York: Penguin Putnam: 101-106.
Choper, Jesse H. “Why the Supreme Court Should Not Have Decided the
Presidential Election of 2000.” Constitutional Commentary 18 (2001).
Derrida, Jacques. Force de loi: Le “Fondement mystique de l’autorité.” Paris:
Éditions Galilée, 1994.
Devlin, Patrick. The Enforcement of Morals. London: Oxford University Press,
1965.
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 341
SRSummer07.indb 341 7/16/07 2:13:36PM

Donohue, John, and Justin Wolfers. “Uses and Abuses of Empirical
Evidence in the Death Penalty Debate.” Stanford Law Review 58
(2005): 791-846.
Duff, R. A. “Auctions, Lotteries, and the Punishment of Attempts.” Law
and Philosophy 9:1 (February 1990): 1-37.
Elster, Jon. “Taming Chance: Randomization in Individual and Social
Decisions.” The Tanner Lectures on Human Values. Delivered at
Brasenose College, Oxford University, May 6-7, 1987.
Feinberg, Joel. The Moral Limits of the Criminal Law: Offense to Others. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1985.
———. The Moral Limits of the Criminal Law: Harm to Others. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1987.
Foucault, Michel. Surveiller et punir: Naissance de la prison. Paris: Editions
Gallimard, 1975.
———. Discipline and Punish. Trans. A. Sheridan. New York: Vintage Books,
1979.
———. “What is Enlightenment?” Michel Foucault: Ethics: Subjectivity and
Truth. Ed. Paul Rabinow, Ed. New York: The New Press, 1997:
303-319.
Garland, David. Punishment and Modern Society. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1990.
———. The Culture of Control. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Geuss, Raymond. The Idea of A Critical Theory: Habermas and the Frankfurt
School. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Habermas, Jürgen. “Taking Aim at the Heart of the Present: On Foucault’s
Lecture on Kant’s What is Enlightenment?” Critique and Power: Recasting
the Foucault/Habermas Debate. Ed. Michael Kelly. Cambridge: MIT
Press, 1994: 149-154.
Hacking, Ian. The Taming of Chance. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1990.
———. “Kinds of People: Moving Targets.” The Tenth British Academy Lecture.
British Academy, London, April 11, 2006 <http: //www.britac.ac.uk/
pubs/src/britacad06/index.html>.
342 social research
SRSummer07.indb 342 7/16/07 2:13:36PM

Harcourt, Bernard E. Illusion of Order: The False Promise of Broken Windows
Policing. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001.
———. Language of the Gun: Youth, Crime, and Public Policy. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2005.
———. Against Prediction: Profiling, Policing, and Punishing in an Actuarial Age.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007a.
———. “Muslim Profiles Post 9/11: Is Racial Profiling an Effective
Counterterrorist Measure and Does It Violate the Right to be Free
from Discrimination?” Security and Human Rights. Eds. Benjamin
Goold and Liora Lazarus. Oxford: Hart Publishing, 2007b.
———. “From the Asylum to the Prison: Rethinking the Incarceration
Revolution; Part II: State Level Analysis.” University of Chicago Law
and Economics. Olin Working Paper No. 335 (March 2007c).
Harcourt, Bernard E., and Jens Ludwig. 2006. “Broken Windows: New
Evidence from New York City and a Five-City Social Experiment.”
The University of Chicago Law Review 73:1 (Winter 2006): 271-316.
Harel, Alon, and Uzi Segal. “Criminal Law and Behavioral Law and
Economics: Observations on the Neglected Role of Uncertainty in
Deterring Crime.” American Law and Economics Review 1:1/2 (1999):
276-312.
Hart, H. L. A. Law, Liberty and Morality. Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1963.
———. “Bentham and Beccaria” Essays on Bentham: Jurisprudence and
Political Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1982.
Heaton, Paul. “Understanding the Effects of Anti-Profiling Policies.”
Working paper, March 2006 <http: //home.uchicago.edu/~psheaton/
workingpapers/racialprofiling.pdf>.
Hegel, G. W. F. Philosophy of Right. Trans. T. M. Knox. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1981.
Hernández-Murillo, Rubén, and John Knowles. “Racial Profiling or
Racist Policing?: Testing in Aggregated Data.” Working paper,
April 18, 2003 <http: //www.econ.upenn.edu/~jknowles/Research/
HKRacProf_2003c.pdf>.
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 343
SRSummer07.indb 343 7/16/07 2:13:37PM

Kadish, Sanford H. “The Criminal Law and the Luck of the Draw.” Journal
of Criminal Law and Criminology 84:4 (Winter-Spring 1994): 679-702.
Kant, Immanuel. “An Answer to the Question: ‘What is Enlightenment?’”
Kant: Political Writings. Ed. Hans Reiss. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1970: 54-60.
Kelling, George, and Catherine M. Coles. Fixing Broken Windows: Restoring
Order and Reducing Crime in Our Communities. New York: Free Press,
1996.
Kelling, George L., and William H. Sousa, Jr. “Do Police Matter? An
Analysis of the Impact of New York City’s Police Reforms.”
Manhattan Institute Center for Civic Innovation, Civic Report No.
22 (December 2001).
Kessler, Kimberly D. “The Role of Luck in Criminal Law.” University of
Pennsylvania Law Review 142:6 (June 1994): 2183-2237.
Knowles, John, Nicola Persico, and Petra Todd. “Racial Bias in Motor
Vehicle Searches: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Political Economy
109 (2001).
Levitt, Steven. “Juvenile Crime and Punishment.” Journal of Political Economy
106:6 (December 1998): 1156-1185.
Lewis, David. “The Punishment that Leaves Something to Chance.”
Philosophy and Public Affairs 18:1 (Winter 1989): 53-67.
Margoliath, Yoram. “In Defense of Prediction.” Law and Social Inquiry
(forthcoming 2007).
Morris, Norval, and Gordon J. Hawkins. The Honest Politician’s Guide to Crime
Control. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1970.
Nagel, Ernest. “The Enforcement of Morals.” The Humanist 28:3 (1968):
20-27.
Nagel, Thomas. “Moral Luck.” Mortal Questions. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1979
Nagin, Daniel. General Deterrence: A Review of the Empirical Evidence. Deterrence
and Incapacitation: Estimating the Effects of Criminal Sanctions on Crime
Rates. Eds. Alfred Blumstein et al. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy of Sciences, 1978.
344 social research
SRSummer07.indb 344 7/16/07 2:13:37PM

Nietzsche, Friedrich. On the Genealogy of Morals. Trans. Walter Kaufmann.
New York: Random House, 1967.
Polinsky, Mitchell, and Steven Shavell. “On the Disutility and Discounting
of Imprisonment and the Theory of Deterrence.” Journal of Legal
Studies 28 (1999): 1-16.
Rabelais, François. Le Tiers livre des faits et dits heroïques du bon Pantagruel. Les
Œuvres romanesques. Traduites en français moderne par Françoise
Joukovsky. Paris: Honoré Champion Éditeur, 1999.
Resnik, Judith. “Precluding Appeals.” Cornell Law Review 70 (1984-1985):
603-624.
Reuters. “Election 2000. The Presidency High Stakes: If Vote Is Tied in
New Mexico, Poker Hand Could Settle It.” Newsday, November 15,
2000: A05.
Rusche, Georg, and Otto Kirchheimer. Punishment and Social Structure. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1968.
Spelman, William. “The Limited Importance of Prison Expansion.” The
Crime Drop in America. Eds. Alfred Blumstein and Joel Wallman. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Sperry, Paul. “When the Profile Fits the Crime.” The New York Times, July, 28
2005 <http: //www.nytimes.com/2005/07/28/opinion/28sperry.html>.
Taylor, Ralph B. Book Review of Illusion of Order. American Journal of Sociology
111:5 (2006): 1625-1628.
Tyler, Tom R. Why People Obey the Law. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1990.
———. “Trust and Democratic Governance.” Trust and Governance. Eds.
Valerie Braithwaite and Margaret Levi. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1998.
Von Hirsch, Andrew. Doing Justice. New York: Hill and Wang, 1976.
Wacquant, Loic. Les Prisons de la Misère. Paris: Raisons d’Agir, 1999.
Williams, Bernard. Moral Luck. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1981.
Wilson, James Q., and George L. Kelling. “Broken Windows.” The Atlantic
Monthly (March 1982): 29-38.
Post-Modern Meditations on Punishment 345
SRSummer07.indb 345 7/16/07 2:13:37PM

Winch, Peter. The Idea of A Social Science and Its Relation to Philosophy. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1958.
Zitter, Jay M. “Judicial Partition of Land by Lot or Chance.” American Law
Reports 4th 32 (Updated March 1999 annotation): 909.
346 social research
SRSummer07.indb 346 7/16/07 2:13:37PM