© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
COOPERATION
A Political, Economic, and
Social Theory
bernard e. harcourt
Columbia University Press
New York
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 3 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Columbia University Press
Publishers Since 1893
New York Chichester, West Sussex
cup.columbia.edu
Copyright © 2023 Bernard E. Harcourt
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
{to come}
Columbia University Press books are printed on permanent
and durable acid-free paper.
Printed in the United States of America
Add cover/jacket credit information
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 4 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Contents
Getting Started vii
1 The Urgency of Coöperism 1
Stuck in a Rut 1
The Crux of the Problem 9
Another Path: Cooperation 12
Toward a Political, Economic, and Social Theory and Practice of Coöperism 22
A Word on Language and a Road Map 26
2 The Ubiquity of Cooperation 31
The Global Reach of Cooperation 34
Cooperation in Conventional Economic Domains 39
The Resilience and Productivity of Cooperation 51
3 The Simplicity of Cooperation 54
The Basic Building Blocks 55
The Corporate Finance of Cooperation 60
The Crucial Difference of Cooperation 68
Incentivizing Cooperation 70
Toward Coöperism 72
4 The Political Theory of Coöperism 73
The Three Traditional Justifications 74
Grounding a Political Theory of Coöperism 92
(1) Concentrated and Compounded 94
(2) Deliberate and Chosen 98
(3) Open and Inclusive 105
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 5 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
vi Contents
5 The Economic Theory of Coöperism 106
The Whiggish History of Capitalism’s Triumph 107
The Misleading Label Capitalism 109
The Problem with the Label Communism 121
Getting Beyond the Cold War 125
Coöperism Economics 128
A Final Thought on Growth 132
6 The Social Theory of Coöperism 135
A Social Theory of Crime and Punishment 137
The Implications for the Notion of Harm 151
Some Models for the Paradigm of Coöperism 157
The End of the Punishment Paradigm 161
7 A Defense of Coöperism 163
On Capital Markets 164
On the Return on Capital 167
On Historical Criticisms from the Left 172
On the Challenge of Utopianism 179
On the Reformist Alternative 181
8 Cooperation Democracy 186
The Paradox of Democratic Theory 188
The Relationship to Abolition Democracy 190
Toward Cooperation Democracy 197
The Age of Coöperism 198
Acknowledgments 203
Notes 205
Bibliography 257
Index 279
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 6 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
chapter 6
The Social Theory of Coöperism
I
n a series of lectures pronounced at the Collège de France in 1973 titled
The Punitive Society, the French philosopher Michel Foucault painted a
haunting picture of Western society. He delivered his portrait at a time
of heightened repression in France in the aftermath of the May 1968 revolution.
It was the exact moment that racialized mass incarceration would skyrocket on
the other side of the Atlantic, where Foucault had just visited Attica Prison. In
the United States, imprisonment began climbing exponentially starting in 1973,
rising to more than 2.3 million incarcerated people by 2008. A full 1 percent of
the adult population in the United States was behind bars. One out of every
thirty-one adults, or 7.3 million people, were under criminal supervision, includ-
ing parole and probation. The situation was far worse for persons of color. One
in nine African American men between the ages of twenty and thirty-four—more
than 10 percent—were behind bars by 2008.1
Like inequality in society, the public policies that created this travesty were
chosen and deliberate. There were no natural laws of detention or evolutionary
principles at play.2 It was all constructed and enforced by legislators, sentenc-
ing judges, prosecutors, and corrections officials. The human-made exponential
curve shown in figure 6.1 hides the devastating toll on human lives.
What Foucault showed, in those lectures on The Punitive Society and two years
later in his book Discipline and Punish, is that some modern Western societies are gov-
erned by a punishment paradigm. Punishment is not so much a response to crime as
it is the mechanism through which these societies create and maintain their social
order. Governments impose punishment with the stated intention of combating
criminality, but in reality the punishments serve more to shape and structure social
hierarchies—in the United States, a social and racial order. Foucault’s lectures on
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 135 05/12/22 10:12 AM

136 The Social Theory of Coöperism
2,500,000
2,000,000
1,500,000
1,000,000
500,000
0
1925 1935 1945 1955 1965 1975 1985 1995 2005 2015
6.1 Populations of federal prisons, state prisons, and local jails (1925–2015)
Source: Prison Policy Initiative.
The data used for this figure were obtained from the Prison Policy Initiative’s “State prisons, local jails
and federal prisons, incarceration rates and counts, 1925–2020” data set, which can be found on the Prison
Policy Initiative’s Data Toolbox page. “Data Toolbox,” Prison Policy Initiative, accessed September 4,
2022, https://www.prisonpolicy.org/data/. Local jails’ population data were available for the years 1940,
1950, 1960, 1970, 1978, 1980, and every year 1983 and after. For this figure, local jails’ populations for the
years prior to 1940 were estimated to be equal to the jail population of 1940. In the years following 1940
for which no data are available, the mean of the closest available data points before and after the year in
question was used.
elpoep
fo
rebmuN
© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Year
Local jails Federal prisons State prisons
the punitive society were prescient of what was to come. They were also deeply
insightful in exposing the punishment paradigm in modern society.
In many liberal democracies, individuals are left to fend for themselves, with
relatively little direction or support, until the moment they do something that
is perceived to be wrong, and then they are punished, often severely. That is cer-
tainly the case in the United States. In America, we don’t spend too much on
public education or skills training. We don’t have very good public-health or
mental-health systems, or accessible drug-treatment programs. Pretty much
everything is privatized—the better schools, the fancy treatment facilities, the
counseling. The main public institutions for mental health are now county jails.
America’s largest mental hospital, in fact, is the Cook County Jail.3 We let people
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 136 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 137
figure things out for themselves, pay for it on their own, get in debt with student
loans; basically, we leave them alone and let them find their way. But the minute
they are accused of wrongdoing, then we go after them with everything we’ve got.
We’ll spend all the money in the world to punish. In New York City, we’ll lock
someone up pretrial, before they have even been found guilty of a crime, at a cost
of $556,539 per person per year.4 We’ll spend more than half a million dollars per
person to punish them if we think they’ve gotten out of line, or fit the profile.
But we won’t spend a dime on them until that time. If you don’t believe me, let
me take you to a public drug-treatment facility off the Van Wyck Expressway in
Queens and show you what I mean. To be honest, matters are even worse because
the people we punish in America are disproportionately poor and of color.
There is a punishment paradigm that dominates in many liberal democracies
and serves to create a particular social order of racial, class, and gender hierarchy.
Many of us have been searching for an alternative to this punishment paradigm
for years. Many have debated and discussed an education paradigm, or a justice-
and-education paradigm, restorative justice programs, and now a transformative
justice paradigm, all of which are promising. But these alternatives, I believe, fit
better as part of a cooperation paradigm.
In addition to a political and economic theory, coöperism represents a social
theory that can replace the punishment paradigm with a cooperation paradigm,
creating a more just social order based on equal citizenship, equity, and respect
and care for others and for the environment. Coöperism allows us to transcend
the punishment paradigm of the punitive society and achieve a new society based
on cooperation. It seeks to put in place the mechanisms of mutual support that
will allow people to thrive. It cares about people from the start, rather than
investing in them only through prison construction and guard labor. We need to
replace today’s punishment paradigm with coöperism.
A SOCIAL THEORY OF CRIME AND PUNISHMENT
The timing could not be more propitious. Today, there is a swelling movement
in the United States and around the world arguing for the abolition of punitive
practices and institutions, including the police, jails and prisons, child protective
services, immigration detention, and border policing—in effect, for the abolition
of the punitive society. The new abolitionists (“new” in relation to the earlier
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 137 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
138 The Social Theory of Coöperism
movement for the abolition of chattel slavery) have fueled national debates over
whether to reform or abolish the central institutions of the criminal legal pro-
cess. In the United States especially, their writings are flourishing and reaching
increasingly large audiences. Mariame Kaba’s collection of essays, We Do This ’Til
We Free Us, published in March 2021, appeared on the New York Times paperback
nonfiction bestseller list. Dorothy Roberts wrote the foreword to the Harvard Law
Review’s esteemed annual constitutional law survey for 2019 under the title “Abo-
lition Constitutionalism.” Ruth Wilson Gilmore’s work has been profiled in the
pages of the New York Times Magazine. Derecka Purnell’s book Becoming Abolition-
ists has been received to acclaim, as has a new book by Angela Davis, Gina Dent,
Erica Meiners, and Beth Richie, Abolition. Feminism. Now. And a wave of abolition-
ist writings are being published in scholarly journals and news outlets by thought
leaders and organizers, including Amna Akbar, Che Gossett, Alexis Hoag, Allegra
McLeod, Barbara Ransby, Andrea Ritchie, Dylan Rodriguez, Omavi Shukur,
Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor, and Harsha Walia, nourishing a national debate over
abolition.5 These writings along with abolitionist organizing have, in Akbar’s
words, “catapulted abolition into the mainstream and, in the process, unsettled
the intellectual foundations of . . . reform discourse.”6 Not just in the United
States but globally, they have sparked a worldwide movement for Black lives and
for abolition.7 They have also significantly affected public opinion. At the height
of the George Floyd protests in July 2020, a Gallup poll found that 33 percent of
respondents between the ages of eighteen and thirty-four, and almost a quarter
of all nonwhite Americans, supported the idea of abolishing police departments.8
Many people are skeptical, though. Many, including many progressive think-
ers, doubt we will ever get beyond the punishment paradigm. Most progressives
consider the emerging debate over abolition to be a nuisance or, worse, something
that is driving a wedge among progressives. Many argue that the movement for
abolition of the police is counterproductive to the shared goals of reformers and
abolitionists. Former president Barack Obama expressed this sentiment in his cri-
tique of the idea of “defunding” the police. “You lost a big audience the minute you
say it, which makes it a lot less likely that you’re actually going to get the changes
you want done,” President Obama said on a political talk show in December
2020. “The key is deciding, do you want to actually get something done, or do you
want to feel good among the people you already agree with?”9 Many progressives
agree with this sentiment. They fear that the new movements for abolition will
only backfire and push the country in a more conservative direction, away from
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 138 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 139
productive social reforms. Meanwhile, on the far right, Marjorie Taylor Greene
has embraced the “defund” language, selling T-shirts that say “Defund the FBI”;
but many Republicans also view that as a counterproductive strategy.10 Some rad-
ical thinkers also resist the calls for abolition, viewing them as a form of iden-
titarianism. Slavoj Žižek questions the prospects of intersectional-identitarian
movements, arguing that they fail to appreciate the centrality of class struggle.11
For Žižek, class, rather than gender, sexuality, race, or ethnicity, represents the
only true form of pure antagonism; class struggle alone, he argues, aims to abolish
a dominating class completely, whereas race or gender struggles seek “forms of
reconciliation.”12 Class, for Žižek, represents the principal contradiction that tra-
verses all particular contradictions (i.e., the localized and situated conflicts over
race or gender); on this view, the focus needs to remain on class struggle.
But far from a nuisance or distraction as many progressives and conservatives
suggest, and far from a subsidiary or subordinate phenomenon as some Marxists
might suggest, the new movements to abolish prisons and police build on a long
history of critical thought that challenges the punishment paradigm and, as a
result, is an extremely promising development. They have also been a galvanizing
force, along with the movement for Black lives, which has helped bring about the
largest and most diverse protest in American history. They are a powerful force
for social change, perhaps the force with the greatest political momentum today,
sparking “a global movement for racial and economic equality.”13
The new abolitionist movements force us to address a central challenge to
contemporary liberalism: whether the institutions, practices, and agents of law
enforcement (the punishment paradigm) function to redress the harms associ-
ated with illegal behavior or, instead, serve primarily to impose a social and racial
order on society. This question goes to the heart of whether the punishment par-
adigm is a response to crime and to deviations of law or constitutes a mode of
governing that produces racial, ethnic, gender, and other hierarchies. In its most
concrete form, this poses the question whether there is a legitimate relationship
between “crime and punishment” or whether punishment does its own work,
independent of crime.
The challenge takes aim at a central premise of contemporary legal and polit-
ical liberalism: that law and legal rights are neutral devices that serve merely
as hedges to allow each individual to pursue their own vision of the good life
without imposing their values on others.14 It proposes instead that the punitive
paradigm serves primarily to impose racial, gender, and other forms of perverse
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 139 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
140 The Social Theory of Coöperism
hierarchies on society. The law does not simply redress the claimed injury caused
when an individual crosses a legal hedge; rather, it contributes to entrenching
forms of discrimination and oppression against persons of color and other mar-
ginalized groups. It reproduces racial, caste, and class structures.15
This challenge is at the very core of the new movements for abolition. So,
for instance, when contemporary abolitionist scholars and practitioners such
as Amna Akbar, Brandon Hasbrouk, Mariame Kaba, Derecka Purnell, and Alex
Vitale demonstrate how contemporary American policing practices trace back
to slave patrols and are continuous, historically, with the enforcement of chattel
slavery and fugitive slave laws;16 or when abolitionist historians and legal scholars
like Dennis Childs or Dorothy Roberts trace racialized mass incarceration to its
antecedents in the convict-leasing practices and plantation prisons that arose
during Reconstruction, or demonstrate that the modern death penalty and legal
executions grow out of practices of Southern lynching at the turn of the twenti-
eth century;17 or, more generally, when abolitionist thinkers and activists, from
Angela Davis to Ruth Wilson Gilmore, argue that there are historical links from
slavery to Jim Crow, the urban ghetto, resistance to the civil rights movement,
and our racialized punitive society today18—all of these thinkers show that the
criminal law and its enforcement are instruments of social ordering predomi-
nantly deployed to keep African Americans and other persons of color in a con-
dition of second-class citizenship.
Critical social theorists had posed this challenge for more than a century,
but to little avail. Like a tree falling in a forest unheard, no one paid attention.
Most liberal thinkers, including many progressive thinkers, were able to dodge
the challenge by taking reasonable-sounding positions that essentially swept the
issue under the rug. “Of course the law shapes society,” they responded, “but it
must be enforced to address the harms of violent crime, and there are ways to
make it less racially discriminatory.” In this way, even progressives were able to
avoid the heart of the challenge. Meanwhile, Marxist thinkers paid relatively lit-
tle attention to law and legal structures, believing that they were superstructural
and obviously instrumentalized in furtherance of class oppression. To make mat-
ters worse, many of the critical theorists who actually challenged legal liberalism,
such as W. E. B. Du Bois and members of the Frankfurt School, were either inten-
tionally marginalized for political reasons or had to tone down their critique in
order to assimilate into liberal institutions of higher education.19
Only now, as a result of the newfound debate over abolition, are people begin-
ning to take seriously, or at least debate, the challenge to the punishment paradigm.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 140 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 141
Addressing the challenge carefully and honestly will help us identify an alternative
paradigm of cooperation that properly reflects our interdependence, not only as
humans, but also with life on Earth. Coöperism offers a new paradigm for society.
To be clear, the critique of the punishment paradigm is a deep challenge to
the neutrality of the law. It is a fundamental attack on the idea that, in a liberal
democracy, it is proper to leave people alone but then punish them when they
violate the law, and that the enforcement of law is not itself political but simply
maintains society. This is the idea that, in a liberal democracy, in contrast to
autocracies, we value freedom and individual autonomy and are governed by the
rule of law, not of men. With the punishment paradigm, this translates into the
idea that there is a necessary link between crime and punishment: illegal activity
is what triggers punishment, and punishment is limited to preventing or remedy-
ing crime. The legitimacy of that relationship founds the liberal state. It grounds
the philosophical, literary, and juridical discourse of “crime and punishment,”
from Hobbes and Locke, through Cesare Beccaria and Dostoyevsky, to John Stu-
art Mill and John Rawls. A foundational premise of liberal democracy is that
that there should be as much freedom as possible, limited and enforced by the
criminal law; that there should be freedom except where there is force or fraud;
and that people should only be punished for committing illegal acts that harm
others. This is the central foundational premise of Western liberal democracy,
and it rests firmly on the conceptual pillars of legal neutrality and the rule of law.
But for more than a century now, critical thinkers have documented, histori-
cally and theoretically, how the enforcement of criminal law serves instead, and
primarily, as a political device deployed by coalitions in power to reproduce and
entrench social and racial hierarchies. Rather than maintaining a neutral frame-
work intended to benefit all citizens, the law and its enforcement shape the
racial, sexual, and class order in society. Punishment is not merely a response to
crime; it is a principal tool, weapon, tactic, or technique deployed to reproduce
racial and social hierarchies. This critique of liberal democracy went unheard for
decades. The challenge to the punishment paradigm has finally propelled this
critical insight into mainstream debate.
W. E .B. Du Bois, Black Reconstruction in America (1935)
W. E. B. Du Bois was at the fountainhead of this critical tradition. In his path-
breaking book Black Reconstruction in America: 1860–1880, published in 1935, Du
Bois demonstrated that the enforcement of penal law was used as one of the main
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 141 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
142 The Social Theory of Coöperism
devices to re-enslave freed Black women and men after Emancipation. Through the
implementation of Black Codes in the former Confederate states, which imposed
severe punishments and labor restrictions on African American men and women,
new punitive practices of convict leasing and plantation prisons emerged that gave
birth to new forms of slavery. “The whole criminal system,” Du Bois wrote, “came
to be used as a method of keeping Negroes at work and intimidating them.”20
The enforcement of the criminal law practically replaced property law as the
principal stratagem to perpetuate white supremacy. The penal law served not to
redress instances of criminal harm but rather to enforce a racial hierarchy that
had been unsettled during Reconstruction. It served to impose the social order
of white supremacy. Du Bois made this explicit: “In no part of the modern world
has there been so open and conscious a traffic in crime for deliberate social deg-
radation and private profit as in the South since slavery,” Du Bois emphasized.
“Since 1876 Negroes have been arrested on the slightest provocation and given
long sentences or fines which they were compelled to work out. The resulting
peonage of criminals extended into every Southern state and led to the most
revolting situations.”21 In tandem, the enforcement of penal law was widely used
to disenfranchise Black men and women of their civil and political rights.22
Du Bois traced the continuity from chattel slavery to criminal punishment in
the 1930s, well before modern mass incarceration of African Americans. And he
exposed as well the deeper economic logic motivating that continuity: “The hor-
rid system of convict leasing gave to the state a profit in crime, not to mention the
vast profits which came to the private contractors,” Du Bois showed.23 Through
new punishment practices, the criminal law served to transform American slav-
ery into a new system of peonage that, in many cases, exceeded the horrors of the
antebellum period.
In many respects, Du Bois was far ahead of more orthodox Marxist analy-
ses, which in their more classical formulations often resorted, in a somewhat
reactionary way, to notions of the “criminal element” or what they called the
lumpenproletariat. Du Bois’s engagement with critical thought—which, as Cedric
Robinson shows in Black Marxism, represented a critique, an advance, and an
alternative—was especially productive for students of crime and punishment.24
Rusche and Kirchheimer, Punishment and Social Structure (1939)
Writing at about the same time, a group of critical thinkers, members of the
Frankfurt School then in exile at Columbia University, also set out to challenge
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 142 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 143
the link between crime and punishment. In their pioneering book Punishment and
Social Structure, published in 1939, Georg Rusche and Otto Kirchheimer reviewed
the history of Western punishment practices since the seventeenth century and
demonstrated their inextricable interconnection with the labor needs of those in
power. Rusche and Kirchheimer documented how punishment practices served
primarily to bolster economic regimes: modes of punishment are shaped, pre-
dominantly, by the need for labor.
Rusche and Kirchheimer unearthed evidence, for instance, showing how pun-
ishments such as transportation and the galleys served primarily to uphold the
ancien régime. The evidence was hidden in plain view, in letters and official cor-
respondence between the monarchy and the judges and prosecutors. “Since His
Majesty urgently needs more men to strengthen His rowing crews,” the King’s
administrators wrote to the public prosecutor of Paris by letter dated Febru-
ary 21, 1676, “He wishes you to take the necessary steps in His name in order
to have the criminals judged quickly.” In response to such a request, the public
prosecutor at Bordeaux wrote back: “You will be gratified to learn that this Court
has twenty prisoners who will be chained together this morning and sent off.”25
Rusche and Kirchheimer went on to meticulously trace how imprisonment and
prison labor were used, after the Industrial Revolution, to help negotiate the
fluctuating supply and demand for workers. They demonstrated how the prison
became the chief form of punishment when industrial changes eliminated the
need for houses of corrections and how transportation was later used to deal with
excess labor and the needs of the new colonies.26 Thorsten Sellin summarized
their overarching argument: “Fundamentally, then, the aim of all punishment is
the protection of those social values which the dominant social group of a state
regard as good for ‘society.’ ”27
Rusche and Kirchheimer explicitly took aim at the purported relationship
between crime and punishment. Their aim, they wrote, was to “strip” the “ideo-
logical veils and juristic appearance and to describe it in its real relationships.”
They declared:
The bond, transparent or not, that is supposed to exist between crime and
punishment prevents any insight into the independent significance of the
history of penal systems. It must be broken. Punishment is neither a simple
consequence of crime, nor the reverse side of crime, nor a mere means which
is determined by the end to be achieved. Punishment must be understood as
a social phenomenon freed from both its juristic concept and its social ends.28
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 143 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
144 The Social Theory of Coöperism
Rusche and Kirchheimer focused primarily on the relationship between punish-
ment practices and the supply of labor. Their work spawned a wealth of scientific
studies testing whether and how punishments are shaped by systems of economic
production, which became known in the literature as the Rusche-Kirchheimer
hypothesis.29 The crux of their hypothesis targeted the supposed link between
crime and punishment.
Angela Davis, “Political Prisoners, Prisons, and Black Liberation” (1971)
It is that link between crime and punishment that Angela Davis explicitly set out
to “pull apart,” beginning even before her fugitivity in 1971. In her brilliant book
Are Prisons Obsolete?, Davis underscored the need to “do the ideological work of
pulling apart the conceptual link between crime and punishment.” If we did that,
Davis wrote, “we would recognize that ‘punishment’ does not follow from ‘crime’
in the neat and logical sequence offered by discourses that insist on the justice
of imprisonment, but rather punishment—primarily through imprisonment
(and sometimes death)—is linked to the agendas of politicians, the profit drive
of corporations, and media representations of crime.”30 Punishment has its own
logic and functions separate from crime reduction, Davis argued. Punishment
constructs our social and racial hierarchy.
Angela Davis’s theoretical intervention—pulling apart the purported link
between crime and punishment—was nourished by her own lived experience as
a fugitive from the law and a political prisoner, as well as by the experiences of
other members of the Black Panther and Black liberation movements, of the Sole-
dad Brothers, and of other political prisoners. In 1971, incarcerated in the Marin
County Jail, Davis documented the political nature of criminal law enforcement
in America. In her May 1971 letter from jail, she wrote: “The prison is a key com-
ponent of the state’s coercive apparatus. . . . The prison has actually operated as
an instrument of class domination, a means of prohibiting the have-nots from
encroaching upon the haves.”31
Davis emphasized how the enforcement of the criminal law was used as a tool
of repression and a form of counterrevolution, specifically identifying the “sys-
tem of ‘preventive fascism,’ as Marcuse has termed it, in which the role of the
judicial and penal systems loom large.” Davis portrayed policing as social order-
ing, the courts as an enabler, the prison as the main tool or device, and the prison
“frame-up” as the final act of elimination. She noted the increasing awareness of
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 144 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 145
this among Black and Latinx prisoners themselves: “Prisoners—especially blacks,
Chicanos and Puerto Ricans—are increasingly advancing the proposition that
they are political prisoners. They contend that they are political prisoners in the
sense that they are largely the victims of an oppressive politico-economic order,
swiftly becoming conscious of the causes underlying their victimization.”32
The writings and speeches of George Jackson, Eldridge Cleaver, Bobby Seale,
and other movement leaders at the time confirmed the political nature of law
enforcement. Jackson was clear that the definitions of crimes were tied directly
to maintaining an economic order and property relations, and that criminal
law enforcement was intended to repress any form of resistance to racial and
economic hierarchies.33 Jackson combined, in his critique, the racial and the eco-
nomic dimensions: the enforcement of the criminal law and the “chief repressive
institutions,” such as the police and prison, served to impose a racial capitalist
order that both subjugated persons of color and quashed political resistance.34
Frantz Fanon had developed a similar thesis regarding the role of policing as a
political weapon to control populations living under colonial rule. In the French
colonies, Fanon noted, and others agreed, the police and prisons served “as the
linchpin” of French imperialism.35 Angela Davis, writing from her cell in Marin
County jail, highlighted the parallel: “Fanon’s analysis of the role of colonial police
is an appropriate description of the function of the police in America’s ghettos.”36
Meanwhile, James Baldwin compared Davis’s plight—detained, chained, isolated
in jail—to that of “the Jewish housewife in the boxcar headed to Dachau, or as any
one of our ancestors, chained together in the name of Jesus, headed for a Christian
land.”37 Baldwin situated the prison and the enforcement of criminal law in the
register of politics and warfare. He referred to the women and men in prison as
“the numberless prisoners in our concentration camps—for that is what they are.”38
Michel Foucault, Penal Theories and Institutions (1972) and
The Punitive Society (1973)
At about the same time, across the Atlantic, Catharine von Bülow, Daniel Defert,
Michel Foucault, Jean Genet, and others were challenging the neutrality of
punishment.
“The death of George Jackson is not a prison accident. It is a political assassina-
tion.”39 Thus opens the tract Intolerance Inquiry: The Assassination of George Jackson, by
members of the Prison Information Group, published November 10, 1971, concerning
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 145 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
146 The Social Theory of Coöperism
the shooting death of George Jackson at San Quentin on August 21, 1971. In an essay
titled “The Masked Assassination,” Bülow, Defert, and Foucault treat punishment as
political warfare—not the consequence of crime, but rather a form of civil war. They
too deconstruct the purported relationship between crime and punishment:
What is happening in the prisons is war, a war having other fronts in the black
ghettos, the army, and the courts. . . . Today, the imprisoned revolutionary
militants and the common law prisoners, who became revolutionaries specifi-
cally during their detention, paved the way for the war front to extend inside
prisons. . . . At this stage, the ruling power is left with one resort: assassination.40
Writing of Jackson’s plight—serving more than ten years in prison before being
gunned down by a prison guard—Bülow, Defert, and Foucault denounced the
penal system as warfare: “Ten years in prison for seventy dollars is a political
experience—an experience of hostage, of a concentration camp, of class warfare,
an experience of the colonized.” With reference to Jackson’s brother, Jonathan
Jackson, they wrote: “This same justice system, with its white judges and its white
jurors, consigned hundreds of thousands of African Americans to the blood-
thirsty guards of concentration camps.”41
In his lectures on Penal Theories and Institutions a few months later, Foucault
developed what he called a political theory of criminal law.42 Beginning in January
1972, Foucault minutely demonstrated over the course of seven lectures how
Cardinal Richelieu and his emissary, Chancellor Séguier, repressed the Nu-pieds
(barefoot) rebellion in Normandy in 1639 through a strategic interlacing of the
penal sanction and military force.
“Penality is political from top to bottom,” Foucault declared on March 1,
1972.43 His political theory of criminal law had several elements, the first and
most important of which called for a rigid deconstruction of the assumed relation
between crime and punishment. Criminal law enforcement, Foucault argued, is
not a consequence of criminality. It is not a reaction to delinquency or crime,
which are themselves fabricated by criminal law enforcement during a process of
social struggle. The enforcement of criminal law is instead a response and reac-
tion to that political struggle. As he explained in his lecture of January 26, 1972,
“all the major phases of the evolution of the penal system, of the repressive sys-
tem, are ways of responding to forms of popular struggles.”44 Crime had to be
understood as a threat, as an attack on the state’s power. “Crime is always, in at
least one of its dimensions,” he said, “an attack on the public power, a struggle
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 146 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 147
against it, the provisional suspension of its laws.”45 Thus, criminal law enforce-
ment could only be properly understood within the framework of social struggle
as a weapon, tactic, or strategy in relations of power being waged within society.46
This led Foucault to his concept of the “punitive society,” the topic of his lectures
the following year, 1973.47
Two years later, Foucault published his famous book on the birth of the
prison, Discipline and Punish (1975), which built on this theoretical foundation,
as well as on his own militant encounters with prison.48 Of greatest importance
here, Foucault’s stated aim was to eradicate the purported relationship between
crime and punishment in order to expose all the work that disciplinary practices
achieve in modern society:
We must first rid ourselves of the illusion that punishment is above all (if not
exclusively) a means of reducing crime and that, in this role, according to the
social forms, the political systems or beliefs, it may be severe or lenient, tend
toward expiation or instead toward obtaining reparation, applied in pursuit
of individuals or for the attribution of collective responsibility.49
In other words, Foucault argued, we must sever the supposed link between crime
and punishment, stop distracting ourselves with theories of just punishment, and
focus instead on what economic and social forms punishments achieve in society.
In this, Foucault explicitly built on Rusche and Kirschheimer. He emphasized
that their work—in his words, their “grand livre”—provided a number of “essential
reference points.”50 First and foremost was the need to break the link between
crime and punishment.
In the 1970s, these arguments were taking root in many countries, including
Scandinavia and northern Europe, and especially in Latin America. In 1974, the
Norwegian sociologist Thomas Mathiesen published a groundbreaking work of
critical criminology, The Politics of Abolition. Mathiesen explored Scandinavian
penal reforms and called for the abolition of prisons. His work became influen-
tial in countries such as the Netherlands and Argentina.51
Dorothy Roberts, Ruth Wilson Gilmore, and the 2000s
Since the turn of the twenty-first century, abolitionist scholars have built on
these foundations to highlight the political nature of law enforcement and to
deconstruct the supposed relation between crime and punishment.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 147 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
148 The Social Theory of Coöperism
Dorothy Roberts, in one of the earliest law review articles offering an aboli-
tionist framework, in 2007, begins from this premise: what we call the “criminal
justice system” is not about redressing crime, but about imposing a racial order.52
“The U.S criminal justice system has always functioned, in coordination with
other institutions and social policy, to subordinate black people and maintain
the racial caste system.” Roberts argues that every aspect of criminal law is tied
up with imposing a racial order: it is “engrained in the very construction of the
system and implicated in its every aspect—how crimes are defined, how suspects
are identified, how charging decisions are made, how trials are conducted, and
how punishments are imposed.”53
Roberts traces the history of the key institutions of the criminal law back to
the enslavement and control of African Americans: “The pillars of the U.S. crim-
inal justice system—mass imprisonment, capital punishment, and police terror—
can all be traced to the enslavement of Africans.” More generally, and in direct
conversation with the work of Rusche and Kirschheimer, Roberts notes, “Penal
institutions have historically been key components of social policy aimed at gov-
erning marginal social groups.”54 Roberts traces the death penalty back to the
lethal punishment of enslaved Africans, the Black Codes during and after slavery,
the lynching of freed Black persons after Emancipation, and the racialized use of
public executions.55 Roberts ties coercive interrogation in this country back to
the lynching era as well.56 In sum, Roberts writes,
I argue that these immoral practices [mass incarceration, capital punishment,
and police terror] have flourished in the United States in order to impose a
racist order. Understanding their racial origins and function helps to explain
their endurance and the need to abolish them.57
In her 2007 book Golden Gulag: Prisons, Surplus, Crisis, and Opposition in Global-
izing California, Ruth Wilson Gilmore documented the political economy of the
California prison-industrial complex (PIC), demonstrating how political and eco-
nomic forces, surplus finance capital, and labor issues, rather than crime, were what
brought about the massive prison expansion.58 Michelle Alexander, in her 2010
book The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Colorblindness, demonstrated
how mass incarceration functions as a form of racial segregation and oppression
similar to post-Reconstruction Jim Crow laws.59 The very title of Alexander’s book
deconstructs the crime-and-punishment nexus and demonstrates the political
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 148 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 149
dimensions of punishment practices: mass incarceration is not the product of
criminality but a new form of the old social regime of Jim Crow. The same is true
of Jonathan Simon’s Governing Through Crime (2007)—again, the very title expresses
the deconstruction of crime and punishment—and Katherine Beckett’s Making
Crime Pay (1997).
Loïc Wacquant’s 2000 study of what he called the “structural and functional
homologies” among the “four peculiar institutions”—slavery, Jim Crow, urban
ghettoization, and racialized mass incarceration—made the point as well.60 Pun-
ishment is just the last of these peculiar institutions that impose racial hierar-
chy. Wacquant is explicit about the need to sever the connection between crime
and punishment. To understand Black hypercarceration, he writes, “we first
need to break out of the narrow ‘crime and punishment’ paradigm and examine
the broader role of the penal system as an instrument for managing dispossessed and
dishonored groups.” In a footnote, Wacquant traces this explicitly back to Rusche
and Kirchheimer: “In this, I follow Georg Rusche: ‘Punishment must be under-
stood as a social phenomenon freed from both its juristic concept and its social
ends,’ that is, its official mission of crime control, so that it may be replaced in
the complete system of strategies, including social policies, aimed at regulating
the poor.”61
Similarly, in their work on capital punishment, Carol Steiker and Jordan
Steiker demonstrate how the intricate Eighth Amendment jurisprudence sur-
rounding the death penalty is best understood not as addressing questions of
crime and deterrence but instead as serving to legitimize the death penalty. It
makes little sense to evaluate the criminal law within the conventional frame-
work, because the legal enforcement serves other purposes. As they cunningly
remark, “You can’t know that a thing is not being done well until you know what
it is that is being done.”62
Contemporary New and Feminist Abolitionism
The more recent abolitionist writings build on this intellectual tradition but push
it further. Spurred by the documentation of police killings and the movements
for Black lives, these writings further deconstruct the crime and punishment
nexus.63 They offer a more radical vision of abolition that seeks not only to break
the link between crime and punishment and get rid of the PIC institutions and
practices but, further, to undo the world that makes those possible.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 149 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
150 The Social Theory of Coöperism
For Mariame Kaba, breaking the link between crime and punishment is a fun-
damental starting point. “What work do prisons and policing actually do?” Kaba asks.
“Most people assume that incarceration helps to reduce violence and crime,” she
writes, but “facts and history tell a different story.” Kaba pulls apart the crime
and punishment nexus:
Increasing rates of incarceration have a minimal impact on crimes rates.
Research and common sense suggest that economic precarity is correlated
with higher crime rates. Moreover, crime and harm are not synonymous. All
that is criminalized isn’t harmful, and all harm isn’t necessarily criminalized.
For example, wage theft by employers isn’t generally criminalized, but it is
definitely harmful.64
In the debate over policing, the new abolitionists demonstrate that the police
function is tied to maintaining the racial order, not to combating crime. “Policing
is among the vestiges of slavery, colonialism, and genocide,” Derecka Purnell writes,
“tailored in America to suppress slave revolts, catch runaways, and repress labor
organizing.”65 Contemporary policing practices, Purnell and others argue, trace
back to slave patrols in the South and to the control of freed persons and labor in
the North; they emphasize the legacy of police violence against African American
and Latinx communities.66 Brandon Hasbrouck shows how modern policing
reflects the badges and incidents of slavery, originally intended to be abolished by
the Thirteenth Amendment.67 Chenjerai Kumanyika argues that policing evolved
as a form of labor control: the control of enslaved persons in the South, and of
labor in the North, such that the “institution of policing is very much connected
to the enactment of violence against strikers and union-breaking.”68 In the debate
over prisons, Dorothy Roberts emphasizes that racialized mass incarceration is
the legacy of slavery and serves to maintain a racial, gender, and class hierarchy.69
In the debate over the death penalty, the new abolitionists connect the modern
history of executions back to the history of lynching in the South.70 In Slaves of the
State, Dennis Childs documents how slavery was transformed into institutions of
punishment: “the convict lease camp, the chain-gang camp, the county farm, the
peonage camp, the prison plantation, and the ‘modern’ penitentiary.” This is the
continuity of “neoslavery from the chain gang to the prison-industrial complex.”71
In her extraordinary historical research on convict leasing, chain gangs, and
the Milledgeville State Prison Farm in Georgia during the late nineteenth and
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 150 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 151
early twentieth centuries, Sarah Haley meticulously unveils the ideological con-
struction of our punitive society by focusing on the forms of punishment meted
out to Black women at the turn of the twentieth century in the state of Georgia.72
Haley shows us the ideological groundwork that founds our contemporary
understanding and prejudices regarding the human condition. She writes that
she is trying to explain “the necessity of violence against black women’s bodies
in the maintenance of white supremacy as an ideological, economic and political
order during a period of rapid historical transition.” Haley’s work exposes the
depth of the hegemonic structures of belief that entrench ideologies of antiblack-
ness and heteropatriarchy. Her work not only underscores the urgency of aboli-
tionist feminism but also highlights how difficult the task is, given the long-term
pervasive ideological constructs that have produced contemporary society. Her
research amplifies the interlocking systems of state and interpersonal violence
by exposing the ideological construction, gendered and racialized, of our present
reality. Haley offers a “history of ideology” and shows in minute detail, through
the archives of punishment, how those punitive forms contributed to “the con-
struction of racially determined and defined gendered subject positions during
the long historical era in which segregation took hold.”73
Almost one hundred years ago, W. E. B. Du Bois referred to punitive practices
postbellum as “a new form of servitude.”74 Few listened. But today the challenges
to the punishment paradigm are finally reaching larger and larger audiences, and
establishing what for so many decades was marginalized and ignored: that the
enforcement of criminal law is not so much a response to harmful activity as it is
an instrument for social and racial ordering, and that rather than redressing the
individual and social harms associated with crime, the enforcement of law in the
United States serves to perpetuate racial subordination.
THE IMPLICATIONS FOR THE NOTION OF HARM
Many progressive thinkers today still manage to sidestep these challenges to the
punishment paradigm. For the most part, they do so by taking what appears to
be a reasonable middle ground: the truth must lie somewhere in between, as it
always does. The penal law surely enforces a social order, but it also addresses
harms associated with crimes. Law enforcement tries to remedy the individual
and collective harms of criminality and, in the process, inevitably imposes a
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 151 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
152 The Social Theory of Coöperism
particular vision of society that affects gender, racial, class, and other relations.
So, for instance, the elimination of the marital rape exception, challenges to
stand-your-own-ground laws, changes to heat-of-passion defenses, and the elim-
ination of the homosexual advance defense all address the harms of crime while
simultaneously shaping racial, gender, and other relations of power in society. It
is not an “either-or,” many progressives respond, but a “both-and.”
According to this view, it is possible to bracket the broader political issues,
recognize and try to address racism and sexism, even systemic racism, but stay
focused on the enforcement of law to address social harms. Progressive reform-
ers thus continue to offer ways to fix the law and propose new ways to address
the harms of society without creating racist outcomes. Violent crime and dis-
order cause individual and systemic harms that need to be addressed, the argu-
ment goes; through careful, reformed practice, progressive actors can get back to
enforcing law as a just response to harm. It’s better not to get too political, on
this view, because there will never be universal agreement about social ordering
and anyway it is best to leave that to democratic politics. In the meantime, pro-
gressive thinkers can find better ways to address social harms. This may mean
incremental reform measures or more ambitious reform, such as a turn to restor-
ative justice or other more holistic approaches, to address the harm caused by
crime and deviance from the law.
But far from being more reasonable, this progressive reform position is entirely
unstable, because the existing social and racial order shapes the very conceptions
of harms and violence that lie at the heart of law enforcement. In other words,
the perception of harm and violence associated with illegality is determined by
race, gender, class, and other relations of power in society. It is not possible to
talk about social harms in a vacuum. Those “harms” are themselves artifacts of the
present social condition and racial hierarchies.
This is not just a chicken-and-egg problem. One cannot simply respond, “Well,
all these problems are co-constitutive, so we might as well just start somewhere.”
They are not equally co-constitutive. To be sure, there is feedback. The fact, for
instance, that we sentence to death and execute more Black men convicted of
white-victim homicides fuels a perception of Black criminality that then rein-
forces racial subjugation in this country; and the tragic effects of “Black crimi-
nality” are well documented.75 Still, it is not the case that the penal law is wholly,
or primarily, or even equally responsible for systemic racism in American soci-
ety, a society that was based on slavery and the genocide of indigenous peoples.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 152 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 153
No, there is some directionality: a systematically racist society uses the penal
law as one tool among others to maintain, perpetuate, and augment racial dom-
ination. What this means is that we have to be far more nuanced about how
the social order shapes and uses penal law as a tool of domination.76 Returning
to racial disparities in capital punishment, the fact that the death penalty is
enforced more in homicide cases involving white victims reflects the fact that
white life is valued more than the lives of persons of color. It reveals that the
harm of white-victim homicides is perceived, at least by most of the principals in
the criminal legal ordeal, as greater than the harm of Black-victim homicides.77
Relations of racial power in American society shape those racialized conceptions
of value and harms. In other words, social forces shape perceived harms.
I have written at length elsewhere about the malleability of harm (The Collapse
of the Harm Principle) and the limits of the liberal understanding of harm and
violence (several chapters in Critique and Praxis).78 Others as well have discussed
the constructed nature of the conception of violence in criminal law.79 Suffice it
to say here that the notions of harm and violence are inextricably linked to the
social context within which they are situated. There are no universals here, and
any attempt to reduce these concepts to their core or their reasonable meaning
is nothing more than an imposition of a minority position on the whole; it is an
imperialist project. We cannot start from a universal or common core to harm;
we have to start from the social context.
Many people believe, instinctively, that there are universal harms that traverse
human history, such as murder, rape, and theft. They argue that these harms have
been prohibited throughout history, from the earliest tablets and commandments
to Napoleonic and modern penal codes. “Thou shalt not kill” represents a univer-
sal maxim, many would argue. But that is far too simplistic. What matters are not
the broad abstract categories of, say, murder or rape, but the way in which those
prohibitions are interpreted and shaped by the social order. The different ways
that rape was defined—how the harm of rape was defined—utterly transforms the
prohibition: at common law, rape was limited to violent stranger rape where a
woman physically resisted to her utmost; marital rape was not considered rape;
nonconsent was not considered rape. It was a very different harm, shaped by
patriarchal norms, than what we consider to be rape today. The fact that patri-
cide was one of the most egregious offenses under the Napoleonic Code, or the
changing definitions of justified police killings of civilians, give homicide and
its associated harms very different meanings. To speak of murder as a universal
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 153 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
154 The Social Theory of Coöperism
harm but ignore the social and historical ways in which it is defined and prose-
cuted is to miss the most important dimension.
We need to pay far more attention to the ways in which social and racial forces
shape the harms that the law aims to address. When we do, it becomes clear
that for the vast majority of contemporary law enforcement, the perceived harms
associated with illegal behavior (drugs, disorderly conduct, resisting arrest, pros-
titution, theft, quality-of-life offenses, even justifiable homicide) are shaped, or
rather distorted, by the existing social and racial hierarchy, not just race, but
gender, sexuality, class, poverty, patriarchy, and more. We tend to enforce street
crime, public crimes, and crimes of poverty because, given the way our society is
racially structured, we view them as more harmful than white-collar crimes, even
if white-collar crimes may far outweigh the former in terms of true social costs.
We do that because we are enforcing a social and racial order. Most of what we
police and enforce, we do because we perceive the harm to be greatest, but that
harm perception is shaped by the existing social order.80
It is a Sisyphean task to discuss harms divorced from the social and racial
ordering. Something is perceived as harmful, calling for law enforcement, only
within the normative framework of a social hierarchy. Theft of private prop-
erty is only perceived as harmful in a social order that rests on private property;
prostitution only causes cognizable harm where the moral order privileges non-
commercial consensual sexual relations. These are truisms, but they have crucial
implications that we constantly sweep under the rug: the normative social and
racial order determines our conceptions of harm for purposes of law enforce-
ment, meaning that we simply cannot bracket the social ordering.81
Given that social forces shape perceptions of harm, it makes no sense to say
“Let’s just hold off on the politics, deal with that separately, but keep enforcing
the law in an even-handed way to prevent harms,” because the very notion of
harm at the heart of law enforcement, the very measure of “an even-handed way,”
is inflected by the normative structure of the existing social and racial order.
Once we take seriously the challenge to the punishment paradigm and real-
ize that our present notions of harm and violence are inextricably linked to the
current social and racial order, the question becomes what the world would look
like if it were not disfigured by racial, gender, class, and other forms of injustice.
Pragmatic thinkers will resist this invitation as overly utopian.82 Rather than
imagine a just social order, the pragmatist will respond that we should extract
racism, even systemic racism, from current practices and institutions and enforce
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 154 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 155
the law on a race-neutral basis. This might be accomplished by means of a positiv-
ist legal approach, just enforcing the penal code in a neutral way, or by addressing
social harms holding race constant. That, however, is impossible because society
without social and racial hierarchy would be an entirely different society and, as
a result, the harms would be different.
That is what coöperism reveals: it shows the potential of cooperation and
participatory democracy across all aspects of our lives. What would a world of
cooperation, without systemic racism, look like? It would be an entirely different
world, one in which everyone treats all others with equal dignity, true respect, and
humanity, where everyone regards others as truly equals, as their own, as people
to care about. What makes it possible for us all to allow the inequality that sur-
rounds us, as well as the racial, gender and sexuality hierarchies and other forms
of domination along lines of poverty and class, is not just evil intent, although
there is plenty of that, but a disregard for the lives of others, for the humanity of
others. What makes it possible to tolerate walking by a homeless person lying on
the ground, bundled up in winter, is that they are not our child, our brother, our
loved one, our friend; they are not our equal; they do not command the respect or
dignity we would afford someone we know. We turn our eyes away because they
are not of us, not our own, not fully human, because we are not working or eating
or sharing cooperatively with them.
Just imagine, for a moment, what coöperism would look like: a world where
people cooperate in all dimensions of consumption, work, housing, aid, and sup-
port, regardless of race or ethnicity as well as gender, sexuality, poverty, or class.
This would be a world without racial segregation and deep inequality in housing
and education, where there would not be elite white suburban public schools and
struggling Black urban public schools, where access to good health care would
not be different in the South Bronx than on the Upper East Side, where the parks
on the South Side of Chicago would look like Millennium Park in the Loop,
where there would not be hollowed out Black neighborhoods or “million dollar
blocks,”83 where urban public housing would not be predominantly for people
of color, where our courts would not be filled almost exclusively with Black and
Latinx defendants, where young Mexican and Asian men would not be relegated
to driving e-bikes into the wee hours of the morning in subfreezing tempera-
tures delivering Uber Eats to wealthy white college students and families, where
young Mexican women would have other options than cleaning the homes of
wealthy mostly white families for cash or manning the grocery checkout, where
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 155 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
156 The Social Theory of Coöperism
young Black men would be more likely to be employed than incarcerated,
where Pakistanis and Haitians would not be driving cabs but sitting on corpo-
rate boards, where all the most menial jobs in society would not be relegated to
women and minorities. This would not be the same world that we live in today
merely stripped of race and ethnicity. It would not be a society like ours today
except that the color of our skins would be randomly distributed across occupa-
tions, neighborhoods, classrooms, and professions.
Coöperism would entail a different society from the punitive society we live
in today. In that different society, what would harm consist of? Harm also would
be completely different. Our values would be different, and so would our concep-
tions of harm. Harm might mean not helping the person who is struggling and
homeless. It might mean not finding work for the young man who is panhandling
in front of the grocery store. It might mean not providing an apprenticeship to
someone without work. It might mean not volunteering at a child-care center in
order to help working mothers. Just imagine how different our notions of harm
would be in a world that truly addressed relations of race and power. It is, in fact,
practically unimaginable what society would value. Our values and conceptions
of harm would be completely different.
The task, then, must be to inquire what coöperism would look like and how
that would affect our conception of harm. We need to address questions in
reverse order.84 It is essential to start in the right place and ask the right question:
What would cooperation look like? And what would harm amount to in coöper-
ism. As Mariame Kaba writes in We Do This ’Til We Free Us, the proper inquiry
must begin “not with the question ‘What do we have now, and how can we make
it better?’ Instead, let’s ask, ‘What can we imagine for ourselves and the world?’ If
we do that, then boundless possibilities of a more just world awaits us.”85
Coöperism, by contrast to other progressive efforts, contains the only seeds
of a just transformation of society. Reformist achievements, such as the passage
and survival of Obamacare, tend to be compromised policies that satisfy few and
achieve little.86 It is important to recognize this and to work toward a coöperist
future. Instead of impeding the efforts, we need to work with and toward aboli-
tion and a new society based on cooperation.
As for the critiques from the left, they are simply outdated. It does not make
sense to think of class as the principal contradiction and other social, racial, gen-
der, and sexuality conflicts as the particular contradiction, as Žižek proposes. If
anything, it makes more sense to conceptualize the movement for Black lives as
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 156 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 157
the contemporary instantiation of class struggle. As Barbara Ransby argues in
her essay “The Class Politics of Black Lives Matter,” the movements for Black
lives embrace demands for economic justice, rest on a conception of racial capi-
talism, and seek to uplift the lives of the most marginalized populations.87 They
represent the current embodiment of what would formerly have been called
“class struggle,” even if they do not center the working class and especially not the
white working class. Žižek may refer to class struggle as the only form of “pure”
antagonism, or the principal antagonism, but today it is the challenge to the pun-
ishment paradigm that represents the radical form of contradiction.
In the end, the effort to imagine coöperism is an exercise in what Harsha
Walia refers to, in the context of borders and migration, as an exercise in “world-
making.”88 In arguing for a world without borders between nations, Walia draws
on the Arendtian notion of worldmaking as a process of “homemaking”; she
closes her discussion with a passage from Toni Morrison’s essay “Home” from the
collection The House That Race Built:
In this new space one can imagine safety without walls, can iterate difference
that is prized but unprivileged, and can conceive of a third, if you will pardon
the expression, world ‘already made for me, both snug and wide open, with a
doorway never needing to be closed.’ Home.89
In an interview from 1976, Foucault said that “there can be no reform of the
prison without the search for a new society.” He added that, when trying to imag-
ine what punishment would look like in that new society, one should not ask
what form of punishment would be “more gentle, acceptable, or efficient,” but
instead raise a more fundamental and difficult question: “Can one in effect con-
ceptualize a society in which power has no need for illegalities?”90 That is the
proper place to start.
SOME MODELS FOR THE PARADIGM OF COÖPERISM
A new paradigm of a society based on cooperation is emerging, one that may lead
us beyond the punitive society we now live in. This vision fundamentally changes
the questions we ask. It reformulates the problems we must address. And it rep-
resents the most promising path forward to address our current crises.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 157 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
158 The Social Theory of Coöperism
One source of skepticism regarding cooperation is whether it would be pos-
sible to imagine a society without punishment. Is it possible to imagine a large-
scale society that does not punish as ours does? What role would there be for the
enforcement of law in a world that is not marked by racial and ethnic hierarchy,
by gender domination, by class conflict? What would be considered harmful and
call for enforcement? What role would there be for punishment to address those
new harms?
There are no easy responses because so much of what we identify today as
criminal activity is itself the product of systemic racism and sexism. Domestic
violence is mostly gender violence that would not exist if there were more coop-
eration and systemic sexism did not traverse our society. Much of the street polic-
ing of drugs and minor disorder are the product of poverty and racism that, again,
would not be the case if a cooperation paradigm governed. Even white-collar
crimes—cornering markets, insider trading, consumer fraud—would not exist if
we had a society based on cooperation, collaboration, and mutual respect.
In other words, the conceptions of harms would be entirely different in a
cooperative society that was not riven with racism and sexism; so would the defi-
nitions of crimes and our conception of how to address norm violations. We
would be living in a world of cooperation, respect, and dignity, of treating others
as one would want to be treated oneself. Under those circumstances, we would
not treat norm deviation by caging people in disgusting environments where they
are more likely to get raped than educated. Even restorative justice would have
to be reimagined because the notions of harm underlying restorative approaches
would change so much.
In fact, we would need to build beyond restorative justice, or reimagine it,
because it remains today too wedded to the existing understandings of harm
shaped by our current society. At present, restorative justice takes those concep-
tions of harm as its starting point and seeks to include all the parties who have
been affected by a crime, including the persons who claim to have been harmed,
those who allegedly committed the harm, and often their respective families and
communities, in a process of collective resolution that allows all parties to be
heard, to be understood, and to participate in the formulation of a redress of
the harm.91 In practice, restorative justice often involves conferencing methods
that bring the parties together to discuss and find ways forward. Restorative
justice, of course, comes in many variations and can also serve as an umbrella
term to cover other innovative developments, such as therapeutic jurisprudence
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 158 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 159
or positive criminology.92 But most of these practices assume current definitions
of crime and of harm. They have not yet been reimagined for a society without
racism and sexism.
Restorative justice tends to be a form of alternative dispute resolution within
the existing criminal legal ordeal.93 It remains nested within the traditional
framework of crime and punishment; it displaces punishment to a substantial
degree but is consistent with punishment as an alternative. John Braithwaite, a
proponent of restorative justice, recognizes this: “Basically, we should try restor-
ative justice, perhaps again and again; when restorative justice fails, try deter-
rence, and when deterrence fails, try incapacitation.”94 In this sense, restorative
justice is best understood as a form of punishment that traces back to a form
of compensation as punishment.95 It is an effort at compensation and making
whole, but it assumes current ideas of harm. This approach is too limited to the
crime-and-punishment model.
Instead, we might look for guidance in the new experiments in transformative
justice. Mariame Kaba discusses transformative justice principles at length in her
2021 book, and she and others, such as Allegra McLeod, detail some of its prac-
tices and experiments.96 Kaba describes the ambition of transformative justice as
the effort to address violence and harm in such a way as not to increase violence
or harm (terms that we would need to reexamine in a just world). “It’s asking us
to respond in ways that don’t rely on the state or social services,” Kaba explains.
“Transformative justice is militantly against the dichotomies between victims
and perpetrators, because the world is more complex than that.”97
One such experiment involved the response to an allegation of sexual assault
where both the person victimized and the person accused were members of the
Chicago organization Black Youth Project 100 (BYP100). In that case, the orga-
nization deliberately did not turn to the police or criminal law enforcement and
instead created a process of its own to address the allegation, convening what
it called a “community accountability process,” or what McLeod calls “a trans-
formative justice process to come to terms with the harm done.”98 It began with
about fifteen months’ worth of work, each party working with a separate sup-
port team, and then led to a convening.99 The process brought together both
parties, along with transformative justice facilitators, in an effort to address the
harm alleged without implicating law enforcement. McLeod refers to this, citing
Harsha Walia, as an effort “to realize critical commitments at a local scale as a
politics of prefiguration in which participants seek through their own choices
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 159 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
160 The Social Theory of Coöperism
and relationships to prefigure the sort of world in which they wish to live.”100 The
organization produced, in addition, new ways of dealing with future incidents,
including creating a Healing and Safety Council that would convene whenever
there was an allegation of misconduct. According to McLeod, “the Council is
composed of two squads, one focused on prevention and one on intervention,
and both collaborate to respond to harm in the organization’s chapters and to
foster a culture of ‘healing praxis.’ ” They also created a manual, Stay Woke Stay
Whole: Black Activist Manual, to help prevent and address future harms.101
Kaba and McLeod elsewhere detail other alternative efforts at achieving
justice outside the criminal law framework in response to police brutality and
torture.102 In Chicago, in the wake of serial torture by the infamous police com-
mander Jon Burge, local activists put in place efforts to document and memori-
alize the incidents, to bear witness to history. They created testimonial evidence
and records of what happened, sharing these with international organizations
dedicated to human rights, including the Inter-American Commission for
Human Rights and the United Nations Committee Against Torture. Activists
created the Chicago Torture Justice Memorials (CTJM) project to memorialize
the police torture. They also sought reparations through legislation and the cre-
ation of institutions to “offer rehabilitative support and treatment, community
education, and vocational assistance.”103 McLeod describes other initiatives in
Chicago, New York, and elsewhere to take over traditional police spaces (like
the neighborhood adjacent to the Chicago Police Department’s infamous Homan
Square headquarters) and replace them with the kinds of institutions and prac-
tices associated with abolition democracy, such as public educational workshops
and clothing and meal programs.104
There are numerous ongoing experiments with transformative justice, ranging
from the narrow area of intimate-partner violence to broader violence-interrup-
tion programs.105 A collective of organizers and critical thinkers, including Alisa
Bierria, Hyejin Shim, Mariame Kaba, and Stacy Suh, have developed a model called
“Survived and Punished” that seeks to protect survivors of domestic and sexual vio-
lence from the criminal law and includes a mutual-aid manual that treats “Survivor
Defense as Abolitionist Praxis.”106 This forms part of a broader effort to acknowl-
edge harm and victimization and the needs of survivors without deflecting the
call for abolition.107 A number of violence-interruption programs have been devel-
oped as well in cities around the country. The model, originally conceived on the
basis of a public-health paradigm, has evolved through community engagement.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 160 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Social Theory of Coöperism 161
Violence-interrupter programs now locate their interventions within the broader
context of community mobilization, public education campaigns, and the provi-
sion of services such as GED programs, counseling, and health treatment.108 These
and other programs seek forms of reconciliation and repair.109
THE END OF THE PUNISHMENT PARADIGM
Challenging the link between crime and punishment pushes us to realize the
larger implications of a world of mutual respect and cooperation, one that would
fundamentally change the way we think about harm, victimization, crime, and
how to address deviations from the norms. An ethic of care and cooperation
would displace the punitive paradigm. It would render obsolete the notion of
enforcing the criminal law. Instead of punishment, there would be a panoply of
measures of care, well-being, education, and support to help individuals work
through problems. These measures would take us beyond punishment practices.
In a society based on coöperism, when someone deviates from the norm, oth-
ers would likely interpret that as a call for care and assistance. In the same way
a partner or parent tries to understand what their loved one is going through
and what their needs are, people in a cooperative society would try to under-
stand what brought about the norm violation and how best to address the needs.
They would try to help the person understand their actions and what they need
to do in order to try to achieve their goals. When our loved ones lash out, we
often rightly say that they may be calling out for attention. I believe that is how
we would treat people when they engage in norm-violating behavior under con-
ditions of cooperation and equity, as if they were essentially asking for help,
knowingly or unwittingly. People would intervene to help the individual under-
stand their situation better, work with the individual to identify the problems
that led them to act that way, and work to address those problems. We would be
committed to working with people to put their lives back on track. Naturally,
we would do the same with the persons affected by those actions. We would try
to help everyone heal. This pushes hard on the definition of crime. We know
that legal definitions of violence and violent crime are themselves a function of
political choices.110 But to push this one step further, we may need to get rid of
the conception of crime entirely: the concept of crime may be the wrong way to
understand norm deviation in a cooperative, egalitarian, respectful society.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 161 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
162 The Social Theory of Coöperism
What becomes clear from all this is that it takes an incredible investment in
and commitment to mutual care, support, enrichment, and cooperation to enact
a society of coöperism. We would all need to dedicate parts of our days, every
day, to serving and helping others. It would be like participating in a cooperative,
where we each have to give part of our time and energy each day to taking care
of others and serving others. In a caring and cooperative society, we would need
to invest in one another, care for one another, and treat one another with equal
humanity and dignity. This would certainly call for what Seyla Benhabib refers to
as a foundational social transformation. Those have occurred. With Hobbes and
modern political theory, Benhabib reminds us, “A momentous transformation in
the Western philosophical tradition took place when ‘the good life’ was no longer
viewed as the life of doing ‘just and noble deeds,’ as it was for Aristotle, or as the
life of Christian virtue and devotion, as it was for St. Augustine, but rather, when
the good life became defined as the life of individual satisfaction and consump-
tion.”111 Benhabib is referring to the way modern science and political theory
gave rise to a new, more individualistic way of thinking. A new view of science
allowed moderns to reduce human experience to fear of death and then justify
an authoritarian political regime. In a similar way, the life of care, mutuality, and
cooperation would require a foundational change in political vision and action,
in our very way of being.
In many societies today, people have embraced a logic of punishment, a form
of individualism in which the principal role of government is to punish. Coöper-
ism would displace that with a logic of cooperation. It aims to transcend our
punitive society and to put in its place a social order marked by cooperative
arrangements throughout every aspect of our lives, including education, training,
work, apprenticeship, housing, food, health, finance, leisure, aid, and support.
Coöperism can displace the punishment paradigm and replace it with a cooper-
ation paradigm.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 162 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
chapter 8
Cooperation Democracy
M
ore democracies are failing today and veering into autocracy than
at any point in the past century. According to the Varieties of
Democracy Institute at the University of Gothenburg in Sweden,
the number of liberal democracies in the world is steadily declining. It now stands
at thirty-four nations representing about 13 percent of the global population,
the lowest level in over a quarter century, down from forty-two countries at its
peak in 2012. The number of closed autocracies has increased from twenty-five to
thirty since 2011, now representing 26 percent of the world’s population. Coun-
tries with electoral autocracies represent 44 percent of the world’s population, or
about 3.4 billion people. In addition, toxic polarization is rising around the globe.
Toxic polarization—defined as declining respect for counterarguments, opposi-
tion, and pluralism—got more severe in thirty-two countries in 2021, compared
to only five countries in 2011.1
We are experiencing a democratic crisis around the world. In the United States,
the situation is critical. When Donald Trump was elected in 2016, many Demo-
crats believed that the Russians had helped get him elected and questioned the
legitimacy of his mandate. Four years later, when Joe Biden was elected, Trump,
his advisers, and a mass of his supporters challenged the peaceful transition of
the presidency. The January 6th insurrection was an armed and violent uprising
intended to keep Trump in power despite his electoral loss. On the right, many
Republicans continue to believe Trump’s unfounded claims of a stolen election.
There is growing anxiety about the fragility of American democracy. The New
York Times carried an extensive and probing series of opinion pieces following
January 6th, including essays by former President Jimmy Carter (“I Fear for Our
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 186 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cooperation Democracy 187
Democracy”), my colleague and friend Jedediah Britton-Purdy (“The Republican
Party Is Succeeding Because We Are Not a True Democracy”), well-known polit-
ical essayists Rebecca Solnit and Francis Fukuyama, and other thinkers across
the political spectrum, decrying the threat to democracy.2 The editorial board
of the Times ran its own opinion piece under the title “Every Day Is Jan. 6 Now,”
arguing that the country faces an ongoing daily threat to its democratic institu-
tions: “the Republic faces an existential threat from a movement that is openly
contemptuous of democracy and has shown that it is willing to use violence to
achieve its ends,” the board wrote. “No self-governing society can survive such a
threat by denying that it exists.”3 Many argued for the urgency of strengthening
existing democratic institutions. “The sooner we do,” the New York Times editorial
board concluded, “the sooner we might hope to salvage a democracy that is in
grave danger.”4
Some of the rhetoric was overblown, and some of it is misleading. The United
States is not a 250-year-old democracy at the brink of failure. It is a young
and fledgling democracy that just barely withstood a stress test in 2021. The
United States was founded as a republic, to be exact a representative aristocracy,
not a democracy. It was not a democracy during the antebellum period when
Black people were enslaved and Indigenous peoples were displaced and killed. It
was not a democracy before women acquired national suffrage in 1920 or prior
to the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that sought to lift Jim Crow restrictions on
Black voters. For most of its history, the United States has been a representative
republic with limited franchise, not a democracy. And still today, with voter sup-
pression, political gerrymandering, unlimited corporate spending on elections,
low (55–62 percent) voter turnout in the most important national presidential
elections, the United States is a young, limping democracy at best. The problem
is not just the counter-majoritarian dimensions of American democratic institu-
tions, such as the Electoral College and the U.S. Senate, which are not democrat-
ically representative and undermine fair and equal democratic representation;
there are many ongoing challenges to full and fair elections and one-person-one-
vote principles in the United States.
But even if we set all that aside, there remains a problem with all the discourse
about the threats to democracy, a problem that is reflected in the recent global
findings by the Varieties of Democracy Institute, namely that we often focus too
much on the form of democracy and not sufficiently on the quality of democracy.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 187 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
188 Cooperation Democracy
Electoral democracy is not something to be valued in and of itself. Democratic
elections are not a be-all and end-all, especially if they lead to authoritarian forms
of governing. There must be certain substantive limits to the notion of democracy,
above and beyond the procedural definitions.
THE PARADOX OF DEMOCRATIC THEORY
This raises a central paradox in democratic theory regarding the relationship
between the procedural and substantive dimensions of democracies. Democracy
is generally defined along procedural lines. It is a political decision-making process
that privileges the general public, rather than an elite aristocratic group or a single
autocrat. General definitions of democracy are heavily weighted toward the pro-
cedural dimension. For a political system to be considered minimally democratic
(what some call an electoral democracy), there needs to be at a minimum fair
and open elections with universal suffrage and some freedom of expression and
assembly. In defining liberal democracy, most people add to fair and open elec-
tions a respect for individual rights, functioning courts, the rule of law, and some
constraints on the executive.5 But the root and core of all definitions of democracy
is fair elections open to all citizens. The form that a democracy can take may vary,
from representational democracy to direct democracy, but throughout all defini-
tions of democracy, there is a strong procedural element. We identify a democracy
when we believe that the people have a say in political decisions or that all citizens
participate in the decision-making process through fair and open elections.
This creates a tension between form and substance: the trouble is that even when
there are fair and open elections, and other guarantees such as a free press, the out-
comes of democratic decision making are not always worthy. Democratic processes
can produce discrimination against minorities, despite counter-majoritarian safe-
guards. In the United States, for instance, the racially discriminatory and expo-
nential increase in incarceration discussed in chapter 6, resulting in one in nine, or
more than 10 percent, of African-American men between the ages of twenty and
thirty-four being caged behind bars, occurred through a democratic process involv-
ing democratically elected Democratic and Republican administrations. None of
the safeguards prevents the possibility that a democracy may reach terrible deci-
sions.6 They can sometimes lead to very nondemocratic outcomes. In fact, they
can even result in the election of authoritarian leaders. Even high-participation
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 188 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cooperation Democracy 189
democracy may not prevent dreadful outcomes.7 At those moments, the tension
between form and substance is at its most acute. Most defenders of democracy will
defend democracy up to a point, but not where the outcomes are unacceptable.
That’s when substantive checks on democratic decision making become necessary.
This is where the notion of coöperist democracy, or “cooperation democracy”
to make it easier on the tongue, is so powerful and helpful. The point is, not all
democracies are worth fighting for, only those that are imbued with coöperism.
Cooperation democracy can define substantive limits to democratic theory along
the lines of coöperism, understood as the practices and institutions that promote
the core values and principles of cooperation and extend them throughout every
aspect of our lives.
Anyone invested in politics is not going to settle for a democracy that func-
tions formally but legitimately goes off the rails. We do not want a democracy
that merely functions; we want a democracy that functions well. The difficulty
is how to identify a substantive check that does not simply impose outcomes
nondemocratically—in other words, how to place substantive limits on a democ-
racy that do not end up being undemocratic. Cooperation democracy does that by
extending the practice of genuine participatory democracy and one-person-one-
vote principles throughout every aspect of our lives, including work, consumption,
production, and mutual support. Cooperation democracy is not undemocratic.
To the contrary, it enshrines as its first core value and principle full participatory
democracy across the board. In other words, it is a substantive limit to democratic
theory that has at its heart a principle of democracy.
Cooperation democracy injects a substantive democratic limiting principle
right into the center of democratic theory. It privileges only those democratic
regimes that promote concentrated forms of cooperation: those that place all cit-
izens on an equal footing, that give everyone a full participatory role in all aspects
of their lives, that promote the values and principles of self-determination, sol-
idarity, sustainability, and mutualism at the heart of coöperism. What coopera-
tion democracy offers, then, is a vision of democracy that is fully democratic both
procedurally and substantively, tying the notion of democratic decision making
to institutions and practices that truly make possible one-person-one-vote, equal
citizenship, solidarity, and sustainability. The ambition is to put all the people,
including those who have traditionally been disadvantaged, in a position such
that they can and do fully exercise their democratic rights. Cooperation democ-
racy, I would argue, is a truly democratic ideal worth fighting for.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 189 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
190 Cooperation Democracy
THE RELATIONSHIP TO ABOLITION DEMOCRACY
There are precursors to the notion of cooperation democracy. In the early twen-
tieth century, you will recall, the Cooperative League of the United States of
America spoke of creating a “Cooperative Commonwealth.”8 Recall also that
James Peter Warbasse, discussed in chapter 5, titled his 1923 manifesto Co-operative
Democracy.9 There have been many proposals to anchor democracy in cooperation.
Perhaps one of the most relevant here is W. E. B. Du Bois’s notion of “abolition
democracy,” at least as it is interpreted by Angela Davis, Eduardo Mendieta, and
others. Let me focus on this last concept.
The term abolition democracy is a complicated one in Du Bois’s writings, because
he uses it in several different ways. I will use it here to speak specifically about a
notion of democracy that is “abolitionist,” in the sense that it seeks to get rid of
practices and institutions like slavery and its afterlife, including convict leasing,
plantation prisons, and racialized mass incarceration, that undermine the equal
humanity of all citizens. It seeks to put in place instead institutions that could
found a society based on equality and democratic participation. As Robin D.
G. Kelley notes, there were other precursors to the idea of abolition democracy,
including T. Thomas Fortune’s book Black and White: Land, Labor, and Politics in
the South, in which he specifically called on the South to “spend less money on
penitentiaries and more money on schools.” But for reasons that Kelley and Seth
Moglen detail, including Fortune’s complex alliance with Booker T. Washington,
the focus has remained on Du Bois, who coined the term abolition democracy.10
W. E. B. Du Bois on Abolition Democracy
In Black Reconstruction in America, Du Bois argued that the reconstructive work
necessary to achieve the ambition of a racially just society, begun with Emanci-
pation, was abandoned when Reconstruction was brutally aborted in 1877. As a
result, the abolition of slavery was accomplished only in the narrow sense that
chattel slavery was ended, but the true ambition, the creation of a racially just
society, was never realized. It required the construction of new institutions, new
practices, and new social relations that would have afforded freed Black persons
the economic, political, and social capital to live as equal members of society.
That ambition, as Du Bois documents in Black Reconstruction, was thwarted by
White resistance and terror during the decade following the end of the Civil War
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 190 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cooperation Democracy 191
and ultimately abandoned with the political compromise of 1876–77, which
resulted in the negotiated election of President Rutherford B. Hayes and the
withdrawal of federal troops from the South. It was thwarted by a reign of White
terrorism, accentuated in, but not limited to, the South. After the Civil War, as
Du Bois wrote, the South “looked backward toward slavery,” with the passage of
Black Codes and the rise of the Klan.11 Mississippi, for instance, “simply reenacted
her slave code and made it operative so far as punishments were concerned.”12 The
period after the war was truly a reign of terror: the formerly enslaved were held
back by brute force, terrorized, killed, and dispossessed. As Du Bois observed,
“war may go on more secretly, more spasmodically, and yet as truly as before the
peace. This was the case in the South after Lee’s surrender.”13
In the more aspirational passages of the book, Du Bois offered a vision of what
a racially just society might look like and of the work necessary to achieve a just
society. He placed this under the name abolition democracy: “Abolition-democracy
demands for Negroes physical freedom, civil rights, economic opportunity and
education and the right to vote, as a matter of sheer human justice and right.”14
It required establishing new institutions in society that would pave the way for
equality. For Du Bois, it meant public education, jobs, and equal civil and politi-
cal rights. These are the more visionary passages of Du Bois’s book. In these aspi-
rational passages, abolition democracy is described as an enlightened, righteous,
just ambition, “based on freedom, intelligence and power for all men.”15
In other passages, though, the notion of abolition democracy is tethered more
to a historical interest analysis. In those passages, it is portrayed as an economically
motivated, self-interested project of small capitalists and the labor movement,
united in faith in individualism, on the one hand, and on the other hand, Northern
industrialist capitalists who were opposed to slavery for profit motives and wanted
to enlist Black labor for purposes of industrialization.16 My colleague Derecka Pur-
nell does a brilliant job of distinguishing between these two historical conceptions
of abolition democracy in Du Bois’s writings in her book Becoming Abolitionists.17
There are, then, in Du Bois’s text several different battling conceptions of abo-
lition democracy: the first, a more forward looking and aspirational ideal;18 the
other two more historical, at times the product of an alliance between laborers
and small capitalists, at other times reflecting the interests of Northern industri-
alists, both of them far closer to Derrick Bell’s theory of interest convergence.19
These different conceptions of abolition democracy correspond, in effect, to an
ideal vision for the future, on the one hand, and to the historical reality of what
blocked it, on the other.20 As Du Bois documents, many in the North were torn
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 191 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
192 Cooperation Democracy
between them: “the one was abolition-democracy based on freedom, intelligence
and power for all men; the other was industry for private profit directed by an
autocracy determined at any price to amass wealth and power. The uncompre-
hending resistance of the South, and the pressure of black folk, made these two
thoughts uneasy and temporary allies.”21
The first, the ideal vision, was tied to the discourse of staunch abolitionists,
such as Senator Charles Sumner and his inspiring speeches in 1866 that, in
Du Bois’s words, “laid down a Magna Charta of democracy in America.”22 It
led to a moment of glory for the ideal of abolition democracy during Recon-
struction: “Here for the first time there was established between the white
and black of this country a contact on terms of essential social equality and
mutual respect . . . on the whole, the result was one of the most astonishing
successes in new and sudden human contacts.” This ideal offered the possibil-
ity of “endowed Negro education, legal civil rights, and eventually even votes
for Negroes to offset the Southern threat of economic attack.” It was tied to a
vision of federal government intervention through civil rather than military
means. “The abolition-democracy,” Du Bois explained, “advocated Federal con-
trol to guide and direct the rise of the Negro, but they desired this control to
be civil rather than military.”23
The second, the historical reality, was associated at times with a momentary
alliance of smaller capitalists and workers, aiming to bring Black persons into the
workforce and to protect against Southern backlash. “The abolition-democracy
was the liberal movement among both laborers and small capitalists,” Du Bois
explained, “who united in the American Assumption [the myth of individual-
ism and the self-made man], but saw the danger of slavery to both capital and
labor.” Along these lines, there was a historical potential, ultimately unrealized,
for labor to unite. As Du Bois suggested, this historical articulation of abolition
democracy “pushed towards the conception of a dictatorship of labor, although
few of its advocates wholly grasped the fact that this necessarily involved dicta-
torship by labor over capital and industry.”24 At other times, Du Bois describes
the historical discourse of abolition democracy as Northern industrialists oppos-
ing slavery with the ambition of tapping a new source of labor, Black workers, for
their own benefit up North.
It is possible to untangle these battling conceptions of abolition democracy,
as the philosopher Robert Gooding-Williams does, by distinguishing between
an ideal of abolition democracy, on the one hand, and the actual historical
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 192 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cooperation Democracy 193
movements for abolition democracy, on the other.25 This leaves us, then, with the
possibility of an ideal vision of abolition democracy different from its histori-
cal manifestations. Gooding-Williams reminds us of what ultimately emerged in
American history: rather than abolition democracy, the country veered toward
what Du Bois called democratic despotism and a new imperialism.26 Du Bois did
not sugarcoat the situation; he called it out in no uncertain terms.27 He wrote:
“[Northern industry] began in 1876 an exploitation which was built on much the
same sort of slavery which it helped to overthrow in 1863. It murdered democracy
in the United States so completely that the world does not recognize its corpse.”28
Angela Davis on Abolition Democracy
Angela Davis built on the first, ideal vision of abolition democracy in Du Bois’s
work and turned it into a broader ambition to abolish not just the direct legacies
of slavery but the punitive society more broadly. Her vision was tied to a trans-
formation of our political economy, one with more of a socialist ambition. There
are several steps to her argument.
To begin with, Davis and members of Critical Resistance tied the idea of abo-
lition democracy to the larger goal of abolishing what they called the “prison
industrial complex” (PIC), a term intended to highlight the way the prison
(standing in for the broader punitive state) was inextricably linked to industri-
alized advanced capitalism. As with slavery, simply reforming or even abolishing
the prison, Davis explained, would only result in new institutions of systemic
racism. Prison abolition had to be accompanied by “the creation of an array of
social institutions that would begin to solve the social problems that set people
on the track to prison.”29 As Davis argues in her book Are Prisons Obsolete?, these
new institutions would not replicate the prison, using similar practices and insti-
tutions, but replace it:
We would not be looking for prisonlike substitutes for the prison, such as
house arrest safeguarded by electronic surveillance bracelets. Rather, positing
decarceration as our overarching strategy, we would try to envision a contin-
uum of alternatives to imprisonment—demilitarization of schools, revitaliza-
tion of education at all levels, a health system that provides free physical and
mental care to all, and a justice system based on reparation and reconciliation
rather than retribution and vengeance.30
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 193 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
194 Cooperation Democracy
These alternatives include “job and living wage programs, alternatives to the dis-
established welfare program, community-based recreation, and many more.”31 As
Dorothy Roberts argues as well, in her 2007 article “Constructing a Criminal
Justice System Free of Racial Bias: An Abolitionist Framework”:
Abolishing these institutions [mass incarceration, capital punishment, and
police terror] should be accompanied by a redirection of criminal justice
spending to rebuild the neighborhoods that they have devastated. There should
be a massive infusion of resources to poor and low-income neighborhoods to
help residents build local institutions, support social networks, and create
social citizenship.32
Davis was always clear that her vision for a just society, like Du Bois’s, requires
economic and institutional transformation, not just abolition.33 It requires, in the
words of Ruth Wilson Gilmore, “campaigns that both create solid organizations and
foster robust coalitions among already existing organizations.”34 Derecka Purnell and
others continue to emphasize this today: the struggle for abolition is part of a larger
struggle for “self-determination, an end to capitalism, the return of Indigenous land,
the redistribution of land for newly freed Black people, and for autonomous regions
where communities could test their independence.”35 It also to address the crises of
ableism, transphobia, and sexual violence through an abolitionist paradigm.36
Many abolitionists, including Davis, Purnell, Gilmore, and others, are ori-
ented more toward socialist visions. Purnell writes, “For me and many of my
peers, our abolitionist fight and future is committed to decolonization, disability
justice, Earth justice, and socialism.”37 Davis explains:
I’m convinced that the ultimate eradication of racism is going to require us
to move toward a more socialist organization of our economies, of our other
institutions. I think we have a long way to go before we can begin to talk
about an economic system that is not based on exploitation and the super
exploitation of Black people, Latinx people, other racialized populations. But
I do think that we now have the conceptual means to engage in discussions—
popular discussions—about capitalism. Occupy, it was new language. The
notion of the prison industrial complex requires us to understand the global-
ization of capitalism. Anticapitalist consciousness helps us to understand the
predicament of immigrants, who are barred from the US by the wall that has
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 194 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cooperation Democracy 195
been created by the current occupant. These conditions have been created by
global capitalism. This is a period during which we need to begin a process of
popular education, which will allow people to understand the interconnec-
tions of racism, hetero-patriarchy, capitalism.38
The reason, for Davis, is clear: it is possible to abolish one specific form of
property (chattel slavery or prison labor), but without transforming property
relations writ large, racial oppression will be reestablished. If the relations of pro-
duction and exchange are not transformed, the same forms of racial exploitation
will take place.
New Abolitionism and an Ethic of Care
The swelling abolitionist movement, discussed in chapter 6, has taken the baton,
drawing in part on Du Bois’s and Davis’s discussion of abolition democracy, arguing
for the abolition of the police, prisons, juvenile detention facilities, immigration
detention, and border policing and proposing new forms of cooperation instead.39
It is the culmination of a long historical trajectory dating back to the first aboli-
tionist movements and including, more recently, liberation movements from the
1960s, prison revolts from the 1970s, and the founding in the late 1980s and 1990s
of Critical Resistance by Angela Davis, Rose Braz, Rachel Herzing, and others.40
This second wave of abolitionism targets not only the prison and police but, more
broadly, the social and economic structures that legitimize prisons and produce a
punitive society.41 Its ambition, in the words of Fred Moten and Stefano Harney, is
“not so much the abolition of prisons, but the abolition of a society that could have
prisons, that could have slavery, that could have the wage, and therefore not aboli-
tion as the elimination of anything but abolition as the founding of a new society.”42
In their book Abolition. Feminism. Now., Angela Davis, Gina Dent, Erica Meiners,
and Beth Richie emphasize how their vision is inextricably linked to antiracism
and anticapitalism and, in that sense, is tied to the longer arc of Black feminism
that goes back to the Combahee River Collective statement of 1977.43 They embrace
a robust conception of abolition that is not limited to the negative task of abolish-
ing certain institutions but also includes the positive task of reconstruction. At the
same time, they highlight the need to assure the safety of women and nonbinary,
queer, and transgender persons from violence and harm. Abolitionist feminism
underscores the dual tasks of ensuring the welfare and safety of women and others
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 195 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
196 Cooperation Democracy
harmed by patriarchy while, at the same time, not reverting to the punitive mecha-
nisms of the state. As they explain, the struggle to end violence against women took
on a carceral turn toward criminal law enforcement (mandatory arrest and no-drop
policies, for instance) during the latter part of the twentieth century. Abolitionist
feminist activism aims to end violence against women without recourse to the
police or prisons, to find a different paradigm than the criminal justice system as a
way to end violence against women. It embraces instead movements and organiza-
tions like INCITE! and others that oppose carceral feminism. This coming together
of antiviolence and anticarceral creates a unique form of activism that is inextri-
cably linked to a broader anticapitalist effort. This comes through, for instance,
in the authors’ criticism of Michelle Alexander and Ava DuVernay, in which they
emphasize that the problems of racialized mass incarceration cannot be solved “by
conventional and domestic civil rights activism” but will necessarily entail “disturb-
ing larger global frameworks of power such as capitalism and heteropatriarchy.”44
In its most robust expressions, the new abolitionist movement advocates for a
society based on an ethic of care, mutual aid, and cooperation. Many of the prac-
titioners place care at the core of their bold and audacious imaginations about
a world without race or class oppression. They are not alone. A growing body of
theory and practice of care has built on the foundations of the idea of an “ethic
of care” developed in the works of Carol Gilligan, Nel Noddings, and others in
the 1980s, in Joan Tronto’s pathbreaking book Caring Democracy, and in other
engagements with the politics of care, including The Care Manifesto of the Care
Collective.45 These ideals are tied to community building, social transformation,
solidarity, and love.46 Dean Spade speaks about “scaling up” mutual-aid work “to
a point where everyone has what they need.”47 Bryan Stevenson focuses attention
on the relationship among care, health, and well-being. In an interview on “How
America Can Heal,” Stevenson remarks: “We’re going to have to talk about end-
ing crime in a meaningful way and that’s not more police, and more prisons, and
more punishment. It is actually interventions rooted in care [and] a belief in what
can happen when people recover from the things that have burdened them.”48
Patrisse Cullors adds:
Abolition is about how we treat each other. It is about how we show up in
relationships. Abolition is about how we respond to harm caused and how
we respond when we cause harm. . . . We need to be committed to building a
culture that is rooted in care, dignity, and accountability.49
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 196 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cooperation Democracy 197
Cooperation is also at the heart of it, as Mariame Kaba suggests in We Do This ’Til
We Free Us:
People like me who want to abolish prisons and police, however, have a vision
of a different society, built on cooperation instead of individualism, on mutual
aid instead of self-preservation. What would the country look like if it had
billions of extra dollars to spend on housing, food and education for all? This
change in society wouldn’t happen immediately, but the protests show that
many people are ready to embrace a different vision of safety and justice.50
Somewhat like Du Bois’s ideal of abolition democracy, the new abolition-
ists articulate a robust vision that has, on my reading, a tripartite structure. It
includes, first, the negative task of abolishing the institutions of domination
and punishment; second, the positive task of creating new social institutions for
housing, jobs, food, health, and education; and third, the radical task of trans-
forming our political economy. The third task can take different forms depend-
ing on the author: social democratic, socialist, anarchist, left libertarian, or other.
For Derecka Purnell, it takes the form of “robust movements for socialism, decol-
onization, disability justice, and Earth justice” and an ideal of a socialist world
where “everyone would have a decent place to live, enough food to eat, clean
water to drink, clean air to breathe, medical attention when they need it, warm
clothes for the cold weather, a good education, and the ability to develop to their
fullest potential.”51 That is, indeed, an inspiring vision.
TOWARD COOPERATION DEMOCRACY
Cooperation democracy has a similar tripartite structure. In emphasizing par-
ticipatory democracy and the core values and principles of cooperation, it puts
the first emphasis on the third element: establishing an integrated theory and
practice of coöperism. It starts by combining and leveraging the most promising
forms of cooperatives, mutuals, nonprofits, mutual-aid projects, and other sup-
port networks, those that most embody the core values and principles of cooper-
ation and that, together, form an integrated political theory and practice. It then
builds on that integrated economic regime to develop even more institutions
that will displace the reality of tournament or state dirigisme. And, on the basis
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 197 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
198 Cooperation Democracy
of this political and economic framework, it makes possible the replacement of
the punishment paradigm with a social theory and practice of cooperation, a
cooperation paradigm. In a sense, it inverts the logic, but not the temporality, of
the tripartite structure.
With participatory democratic decision making as one of its core values and
principles, cooperation democracy provides a limiting principle for democratic
theory; in this way, it can save democratic theory. Cooperation democracy envisages
a society in which people work together to create better work environments and
training, education, and apprenticeships that make possible collaboration on an
equal footing, an equal say in the management of enterprises, and respect for the
working and living environment. Apprenticeships could form a key dimension,
drawing on the Swiss apprenticeship model that has proven so successful as inte-
grating younger people into the economy, but modifying it to promote the values
and principles of cooperation.52 Nonprofits and community organizations can help
create supportive living environments, greener spaces, and the values of solidarity
and caring for others; worker and consumer cooperatives can promote the fifth
core principle of cooperatives, education and training. Cooperation democracy
aims for a society in which everyone will achieve their full potential.
Coöperism places a limit on democracy. It has as its goal democratic participa-
tion throughout all aspects of our lives. In the end, there is no need to support any
form of majoritarian decision making. A majority vote, even with freedoms and
counter-majoritarian checks, does not guarantee favorable outcomes. It does not
ensure equity and nondiscrimination, and neither do the conventional counter-ma-
joritarian devices like courts, especially when those are subject to political appoint-
ment. What is urgently needed today is a limiting principle on democracy that is
substantive, not just procedural. That is what coöperism provides and makes pos-
sible. Cooperation democracy offers a new democratic theory worth fighting for.
THE AGE OF COÖPERISM
This is the dawning of an age of coöperism. A future of integrated cooperative
projects and mutual collaborations is on the horizon. They will augur a more sus-
tainable, equitable, democratic, and caring society that operates on the paradigm
of cooperation. There is no need to wait to realize this ambition. There is no need
to convince a majority of other people. No need to seize power, nor to dismantle
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 198 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cooperation Democracy 199
the state. Each of us can determine, or continue, to work together to concentrate,
leverage, and compound cooperation and watch coöperism grow like a snowball
rolling down a hill. The models of cooperation are at hand. The core values and
principles are crystal clear. We can do this together now.
Rather than conclude these reflections, which are intended instead to be an
opening, I will attempt in these final pages to recap as succinctly as possible the
ground covered in order to lay a clear foundation for the trajectory ahead.
Global climate change has created, for humans, a form of extreme interdepen-
dence that could never have been imagined before. Humans have become symbi-
otic, codependent to an unprecedented degree. This is the result of a long history
of unrestrained competition and extraction of wealth that took the form, in the
recent past, of imperialism, colonialism, slavery, apartheid, and exploitation—in
sum, unconscionable and unlimited grabs for resources. The effects on our natu-
ral and social environment are now causing crises that are rippling through lib-
eral democracies around the world. The dominant two responses are forms of
either individualism or statism, but both are blocked and have become dead ends.
Both require a supermajority to either shrink or empower the government. As
the endless tug-of-war stretches on, polarization is rising; threats to democracy
and the danger of civil strife are increasing. As the poles get further apart, there
is more paralysis and gridlock: liberal democratic governments are increasingly
unable to effectively pass or uphold their regulations, but their temporary man-
dates and interventions impede those who are trying to go it alone.
There is, however, another path that receives less attention because it does
not depend on electoral politics. It is more promising, and realistic, because it
draws on actually existing and successful practices—cooperatives, mutuals, credit
unions, nonprofits, mutual aid. It can move forward on its own because it does
not depend on widescale coordination, nor on the dismantling of the state. It is
the path of cooperation based on the long-standing values and principles of coop-
eratives: democratic participation, equity, solidarity, respect for others and the
environment. It operates on well-established principles of one-person-one-vote,
the equitable distribution of wealth, caring for the welfare of all stakeholders and
the Earth, sustainability, mutual aid and assistance, sharing, and being attentive
to communal well-being. It is the paradigm of people working together, cooper-
ating, and extending the ideal of participatory democracy to all the other areas
of their lives, from consumer cooperatives to credit unions, from worker cooper-
atives to insurance mutuals, from nonprofits to mutual aid.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 199 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
200 Cooperation Democracy
It turns out that these forms of cooperation surround us and that there is a
growing movement toward cooperation in countries around the world: consum-
ers who work together to coordinate consumption to support each other and
the environment; producers who combine their harvest or farmers who share
their equipment; workers who get together to form an owner-operated cooper-
ative and share in the equitable distribution of their labor; residents who come
together to comanage their living quarters and conditions; educators or lawyers
who get together to work for the public interest in nonprofits and community
organizations; citizens around the world who engage in mutual aid in times of
crises. These forms of cooperation are flourishing in all corners of the world
based on a unique logic, a logic of democratic participation and attention to the
well-being of others and the environment.
The theory of coöperism builds on this momentum. It seeks to extend these
forms of cooperation more widely, on the understanding that all forms of coop-
eration are beneficial but, even more, to concentrate and leverage the instances of
cooperation that are most true to the core values and principles. Not all instances
of cooperation are equally effective in addressing the global climate crisis and the
other crises humans face, including growing inequalities within societies and threats
to democracy. Some cooperative enterprises are not sufficiently attentive to worker
welfare and may oppose worker unionization. Some ESOPs, community groups,
and nonprofits retain hierarchical structures and management. Some retail coop-
eratives remain too focused on conventional profit motives. The ubiquity of coop-
erative enterprises demonstrates the real possibility of extending cooperation, but
some instantiations of cooperation could be privileged and reinforced over others.
Coöperism is, first, a political theory and practice grounded in deliberate
choice in the face of our newfound interdependence. Coöperism identifies and
then integrates, leverages, and compounds the most promising cooperative ini-
tiatives. It seeks to distill the power of cooperation, the power that is generated
by people working together, by the fact that the whole is greater than the sum
of the parts. That greater element is precisely what I have called coöpower. The
core idea of coöperism is to deploy and leverage that coöpower through forms
of combination: to combine cooperation so that, for instance, worker coopera-
tive distribute through consumer cooperatives; to leverage cooperation so that
members of a worker cooperative, for example, obtain the credit they need to
join the cooperative from a credit union, or get insurance from a mutual; to con-
centrate cooperation by doubling down on the core values and principles so that,
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 200 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cooperation Democracy 201
for instance, the respect for all stakeholders extends further to all suppliers in the
chain. Coöperism takes the most promising forms of cooperation and integrates
them into a coordinated framework that extends the political notion of dem-
ocratic participation to all aspects of life and promotes respect for the human
environment, care for human well-being, equity, and solidarity.
Coöperism forms, second, an economic theory and practice that can displace
existing economic regimes of dirigisme, what we conventionally call capitalism
and communism (both misnomers). Capitalist economies, we were led to believe,
were governed by the economic laws of capital: both the strongest proponents of
capitalism (the free market economists of the Chicago School) and its staunchest
opponents (Marxists and anarchists) held that capital had inherent traits that
produced good (or bad) outcomes—that capital, in effect, has a force of its own.
But capital does not exist as an autonomous thing. It is not alive. It is not gov-
erned by natural laws. It is purely a creature of the human-made laws surrounding
incorporation, taxation, corporate finance, bankruptcy, etc. It can be privileged
or disfavored. The term communism is equally misleading. The valiant idea of
living together in common and sharing means of production most often results
in a centralized state apparatus that tends toward authoritarianism. The model
may possibly work under certain conditions for a small commune, but it does not
scale up well to the level of a large economy. Instead, it too produces a form of
dirigisme. It is time to end our various experiments in dirigisme and embrace a
new economic regime of coöperism.
Coöperism provides, third, a social theory that would replace the punishment
paradigm with a paradigm of cooperation. It proposes an alternative to the puni-
tive society so pervasive in Western liberal democracies. Rather than leave people
to their own devices and then punish them severely when they are accused of
wrongdoing, coöperism begins by fostering education, job and skills training,
mental health, counseling, and therapy through a deep investment in the core
values of cooperation and a wide array of community nonprofit organizations,
cooperatives, and mutual-aid projects.
Coöperism is the most promising way to address our urgent crises today.
Worker cooperatives are focused on the working environment, not just prof-
itability. Harmful emissions and carbon footprints are not just an externality
for them, as they are for a distant shareholder of a publicly traded corporation
intent on maximizing profits. Those environmental consequences affect the liv-
ing and working environment for workers. Farmer cooperatives better utilize
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 201 05/12/22 10:12 AM

© COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS
202 Cooperation Democracy
farm equipment and machinery, resulting in less consumption and waste, and
a reduction of the carbon footprint of agriculture. Consumer cooperatives are
oriented to servicing the needs of their members, including their health, welfare,
and environment, and do not have as their goal, like many conventional stores,
increased sales or consumption. The values and principles of cooperation place
the environment at the heart of the enterprise.
By drawing on the core values of cooperation and mutualism, on the coöpower
generated by people working together, on the political, economic, and social the-
ory and practice of coöperism, a new world of cooperation democracy is within
our grasp. I have no doubt that when the modern history of humankind is writ-
ten in the next century or thereafter—assuming we make the right choices on
global climate change—it will be a story of the transformation from feudal coer-
cion to capitalist competition to cooperation democracy.
harc20954_1st_pp.indb 202 05/12/22 10:12 AM