V ~...,.., ....... ,..._ v
L
ULT
DISCIPLINE
i
&
fl
PUNISH
~'f~~
~-if'
.,
. The
.
BIRTH
)'
'j of the
~.
PRISON
\
,;•~!
,~, ~ ~.,• . I. . ii, , ' ,
··{FouLAu1:1 •~}
ls
GENIUS CALLE-D FoRTH
J :-.JTO THE L LOQUE NT
CLAf,ITY Or 11!5 PAs:;1c:1'S ...
H1.>B ..;.~1· BooK:
l
-W/a:hir.pur, PcJJ
Bcok 11/c,dd

11.1, '
\fiche! Foucault
DISCIPLINE A)ID PUNISH
' 'I
\[1clicl Fm;~ault was bor:1 in Pomers. France. m 19iti. He
lectured-~- umnrs<t1e, throu~hout tlw world; served as the
direcrnr at the 1•1,titut Fra:i,;ais ir. Hamburg, Germany. and
a1 :he Im11:u1e de Phil•)>Ophie at the facultt' de; Lettres in
1'.1e Lr.i,er,il\ ol Cl,crmom-r-~~~ac1ci. France; and wrote
fr~quenr!:, fur French new;paper> :md reYicws. At the
time of his death in 19S+. he hc:d a chair at France', most
prestigious 1n,m·J:ion. :he Cri;le~e de Fran~e.
' I

l\,fichel Foucault
DISCIPLINE AND PUNISH
The Birth of the Prison
Tro.n.,io.teJ fTom the Frenc/2
~.,,A lan Sheridan
~ DT\"151!1'," OF RAC'DO\.! l!Ol'SE, !SC. SEW YORK

Contents
List of Plates vn
Translator's Kote ,x
P.ART Q:-;E TORTVRE
1. The body of the condemned 3
2. The spectacle of the scaffold
P.ART TWO PL'NISHMENT
.\]i "I\!"'' re<e~,o 11nde· lnn•os1,,.·e. ,c,c:
Pan >,.mc"'"r Cop, r.?'., Loc:,en:,~n, P._~l shed 1. Generalized punishment 73
,n ,f,e l"n1teC S·.a,e, o, Rando~: Ho~s, he '-.n '.-cL
and in C,,.d., t-, Har>du:r, )Lu;t ,:,; Crnac, :...-~: ;d. 2. The gentle way in punishment
Tir,,r:e,, ~;:,~1nai\ F ,;,:•,hec .e l-,_·,.e
P.ART THREE DISCIPLl~"E
,.
ld11wc., Ca.:,r:i,,d Pare, C~p,,.~!-,
Docile bodies
h [~. ,ens Ga::.,~.a:C [c.gl•;h ;ror '"" ,o
.•re~,- J:h pu~ .. ,l.,d :c •.Cc" Llclla:r'. T!ie art of distrihucion..s '4'
h Pc:>2vr:Ll -.S, L:c
l-"" >, -oencoc. dit u· F.,C,icshcGC: -Pa :,\e:,-· T!ie control of acti-vity '49 ',,
T!ie organirariono f gerr.eses
,,,
L,bran· ct Ccngre;s Ca1ahjs:1n)< :r-h ~I :a,,, o Dots T!ie composition of forces
f,,ucaul:. \'tehel TTJ~,:01 ,,. -.1,_JCsc:::c, ,.
The means of correct training
e; ?Cr.cc H:1:11.p cfJ,·, \J
Pmcns , p .. " -, d1-c:1.lcr·,· H1erarcliicalo hsen,ation ,70
; P.,c.:sCrne·: ":e
ll\",'.,V,f(,,; ,,-,, ,Cs -s-:,,; Normaliz_ingju dgement '77
ISE'-.. (,-. --<e«-: T!ie examination , 84
3· Panopcicism
45&789C

PART FOL'R PRISO'.'\"
List of Plates
1. Complete and austere institutions
2. Illegalities and delinquency
3. The carceral
Notes
{between pages 169 and 170)
Bibliography
Medal commemorating Louis XIV's first military revue in 1668.
l Handwriting model.
3 Plan of the Panopticon by J. Bentham, 1843.
4 Plan for a penitentiary by N. Harou-Romain, 1840.
The Maison centrale at Rennes in 1877.
6 Interior of the penitentiary at Stateville, United States, twentieth
century.
7 Bedtime at the reformatory of Mettray.
8 Lecture on the evils of alcoholism in the auditorium of Fresnes
prison.
9 Steam machine for the 'celeriferous' correction of young boys and
girls.
10 L'ordwpidie ou f'art de priYenir et ,k corriger da~ !es uiJ~ts lu
dijformitis du corps (Onhopaedics or the art of preventing and correct
ing deformities of the body in children) by N. Andry, 1749.

Translator's Note
Any closer translation of the French title of this book, Surveiller et punir,
has proved unsatisfactory on various counts. To begin with, Foucault
uses the infinitive, which, as here, may have the effect of an 'impersonal
imperative'. Such a nuance is denied us in English. More seriously the verb
'surveiUer' has no adequate English equivalent. Our noun 'surveillance'
bas an altogether too restricted and technical use. Jeremy Bentham used
the term cinspect' - which Foucault translates as 'surveiller' - but the
range of connotations does not correspond. 'Supervise' is perhaps closest
of all, but again the word has different associations. 'Observe' is rather
too neutral, though Foucault is aware of the aggression involved in any
one-sided observation. In the end Foucault himself suggested Discipline
and Punish, which relates closely to the book's structure.
Another problem was posed by the French word 'supp/ice', which heads
the fust part of the book. For the sake of brevity I have entitled this
fust part 'Torture', but no single English word will cover the full range
of the French. Here 'supp/ice' refers specifically to the public torture and
execution of criminals that provided one of the most popular spectacles of
eighteenth-century France. By extension the word can also refer to any
prolonged torture, mental as well as physical. Depending on the context,
I have translated the word by 'torture', 'public execution' or 'scaffold'.
The author also refers to another form of torture, 'la question', the extrac
tion of confessions by interrogation and the systematic application of
pain. Here I have followed the accepted translation, 'judicial torture'.
References to other works are usually given not in footnotes but in an
abbreviated form in the text itself. These references, in brackets, consist
of the author's name and a page number; dates of publication are used to
distinguish more than one work by an author, and roman numerals refer
to volume numbers. Full references are to be found in the Bibliography.

PART ONE
Torture

The body of the condemned
1.
On 2 March 1757 Damiens the regicide was cohdemned 'to make
the amende !tonora/Jleb efore the main door of the Church of Paris',
where he was to be 'taken and conveyed in a cart, wearing nothing
but a shirt, holding a torch of burning wax weighing two pounds';
then, 'in the said cart, to the Place de Greve, where, on a scaffold
that will he erected there, the flesh will be torn from his breasts,
arms, thighs and calves with red-hot pincers, his right hand, holding
the knife with which he committed the said parricide, burnt with
sulphur, and, on those places where the flesh will be torn away,
poured molten lead, boiling oil, burning resin, wax and sulphur
melted together and then his body drawn and quartered by four
horses and his limbs and body consumed by fire, reduced to ashes
and his ashes thrown to the winds' (Pieces originales ... , 372-4).
'Finally, he was quartered,' recounts the Gazette d'Amsterdam of
1 April 1757. 'This last operation was very long, because the horses
used were not accustomed to drawing; consequently, instead of
four, six were needed; and when that did not suffice, they were
forced, in order to cut off the wretch's thighs, to sever the sinews
and hack at the joints ...
'It is said that, though he was always a great swearer, no blas
phemy escaped his lips; but the excessive pain made him utter
horrible cries, and he often repeated: "My God, have pity on me!
Jesus, help me!" The spectators were all edified by the solicitude
of the parish priest of St Paul's who despite his great age did not
spare himself in offering consolation to the patient.'
Bouton, an officer of the watch, left us his account: 'The sulphur
was lit, but the flamew as so poor that only the top skin of the hand
was burnt, and that only slightly. Then the executioner, his sleeves
rolled up, took the steel pincers, which had been especially made
3

Torture The body of the condemned
for the occasion, and which were about a foot and a half long, and their Lordships if they wished him to have the prisoner cut into
pulled first at the calf of the right leg, then at the thigh, and from pieces. Monsieur Le Breton, who had come down from the town,
there at the two fleshy parts of the right arm; then at the breasts. ordered that renewed efforts be made, and this was done; but the
Though a strong, sturdy fellow, this executioner found it so difficult horses gave up and one of those harnessed to the thighs fell to the
to tear away the pieces of flesh that he set about the same spot two or ground. The confessors returned and spoke to him again. He said
three times, twisting the pincers as he did so, and what he took away to them (I heard him): "Kiss me, gentlemen." The parish priest of
formed at each part a wound about the size of a six-pound crown St Paul's did not dare to, so Monsieur de Marsilly slipped under the
piece. rope holdiing the left arm and kissed him on the forehead. The
'After these tearings with the pincers, Damiens, who cried out executioners gathered round and Damiens told them not to swear,
profusely, though without swearing, raised his head and looked at to carry out their task and that he did not think ill of them; he
himself; the same executioner dipped an iron spoon in the pot con begged them to pray to God for him, and asked the parish priest
taining the boiling potion, which he poured liberally over each of St Paul's to pray for him at the first mass.
wound. Then the ropes that were to be harnessed to the horses were 'After two or three attempts, the executioner Samson and he who
attached with cords to the patient's body; the horses were then had used the pincers each drew out a knife from his pocket and cut
harnessed and placed alongside the arms and legs, one at each the body at the thighs instead of severing the legs at the joints; 'the
limb. four horses gave a tug and carried off the two thighs after them,
'Monsieur Le Breton, the clerk of the court, went up to the namely, that of the right side first, the other following; then the
patient several times and asked him if he had anything to say. He same was done to the arms, the shoulders, the arm-pits and the four
said he had not; at each torment, he cried out, as the damned in hell limbs; the flesh had to be cut almost to the bone, the horses pulling
are supposed to cry out, "Pardon, my God! Pardon, Lord." hard carried off the right arm first and the other afterwards.
Despite all this pain, he raised his head from time to time and looked 'When the four limbs had been pulled away, the confessors came
at himself boldly. The cords had been tied so tightly by the men to speak to him; but his executioner told them that he was dead,
who pulled the ends that they caused him indescribable pain. though the truth was that I saw the man move, his lower jaw moving
Monsieur le Breton went up to him again and asked him if he had from side to side as if he were talkfog. One of the executioners even
anything to say; he said no. Several confessors went up to him and said shortly afterwards that when they had lifted the trunk to throw
spoke to him at length; he willingly kissed the crucifix that was held it on the stake, he was still alive. The four limbs were untied from
out to him; he opened his lips and repeated: "Pardon, Lord." the ropes and thrown on the stake set up in the enclosure in line
'The horses tugged hard, each pulling straight on a limb, each with the scaffold, then the trunk and the rest were covered with logs
horse held by an executioner. After a quarter of an hour, the same and faggots, and fire was put to the straw mixed with this wood.
ceremony was repeated and finally, after several attempts, the ' ... In accordance with the decree, the whole was reduced to
direction of the horses had to be changed, thus: those at the arms ashes. The last piece to be found in the embers was still burning at
were made to pull towards the head, those at the thighs towards the half-past ten in the evening. The pieces of flesh and the trunk had
arms, which broke the arms at the joints. This was repeated several taken about four hours to bum. The officers of whom I was one,
times without success. He raised his head and looked at himself. as also was my son, and a detachment of archers remained in the
Two more horses had to be added to those harnessed to the thighs, square until nearly eleven o'clock.
which made si~ horses in all. Without success. 'There were those who made something of the fact that a dog
'Finally, the executioner, Samson, said to Monsieur Le Breton had lain the day before on the grass where the fire had been, had
that there was no way or hope of succeeding, and told him to ask been chased away se"'.eralt imes, and had always returned. But it is
4

Torture The body of the condemned
not difficult to understand that an animal found this place warmer Art. 25. At four o'clock the prisoners leave their workshops and
than elsewhere' (quoted in Zevaes, 201-14). go into the courtyards where they wash their hands and form into
divisions for the refectory.
Eighty years later, Leon Faucher drew up his rules 'for the House Art 26. ·supper and the recreation that follows it last until five
of young prisoners in Paris': o'clock: the prisoners then return to the workshops.
'Art. 17. The prisoners' day will begin at six in the morning in Art 27. At seven o'clock in the summer, at eight in winter,
winter and at five in summer. They will work for nine hours a day work stops; bread is distributed for the last time in the workshops.
throughout the year. Two hours a day will be devoted to instruc For a quarter of an hour one of the prisoners or supervisors reads a
tion. Work and the day will end at nine o'clock in winter and at passage from some instructive or uplifting work. This is followed
eight in summer. by evening prayer.
Art. 18. Rising. At the first drum-roll, the prisoners must rise and Art. 28. At half-past seven in summer, half-past eight in winter,
dress in silence, as the supervisor opens the cell doors. At the second the prisoners must be back in their cells after the washing of hands
drum-roll, they must be dressed and make their beds. At the third, and the inspection of clothes in the courtyard; at the first drum-roll,
they must line up and proceed to the chapel for morning prayer. they must undress, and at the second get into bed. The cell doors
There is a five-minute interval between each drum-roll. are closed! and the supervisors go the rounds in the corridors, to
Art. 19. The prayers are conducted by the chaplain and followed ensure order and silence' (Faucher, 274-82).
by a moral or religious reading. This exercise must not last more
than half an hour. We have, then, a public execution and a time-table. They do not
Art. 20. Wor/c. At a quarter to six in the summer, a quarter to punish the same crimes or the same type of delinquent. But they
seven in winter, the prisoners go down into the courtyard where each define a certain penal style. Less than a century separates them.
they must wash their hands and faces, and receive their first ration It was a time when, in Europe and in the United States, the entire
of bread. Immediately afterwards, they form into work-teams and economy of punishment was redistributed. It was a time of great
go off to work, which must begin at six in summer and seven in 'scandals' for traditional justice, a time of innumerable projects for
winter. reform. It saw a new theory of law and crime, a new moral or politi
Art. 21. Meal. At ten o'clock the prisoners leave their work and cal justification of the right to punish; old laws were abolished, old
go to the refectory; they wash their hands in their courtyards and customs died out. 'Modem' codes were planned or drawn up:
assemble in divisions. After the dinner, there is recreation until Russia, 1769; Prussia, 1780; Pennsylvania and Tuscany, 1786;
twenty minutes to eleven. Austria, 1788; France, 1791, Year IV, 1808 and 1810. It was a new
Art. 22. School. At twenty minutes to eleven, at the drum-roll, age for penal justice.
the prisoners form into ranks, and proceed in divisions to the Among so many changes, I shall consider one: the disappearance
school. The class lasts two hours and consists altemately--ofr eading, of torture as a public spectacle. Today we are rather inclined to ig
writing, drawing and arithmetic. nore it; perhaps, in its time, it gave rise to too much inflated rhetoric;
Art. 23. At twenty minutes to one, the prisoners leave the perhaps it has been attributed too readily and too emphatically to a
school, in divisions, and return to their courtyards for recreation. process of'humanization', thus dispensing with the need for further
At five minutes to one, at the drum-roll, they form into work analysis. And, in any case, how important is such a change, when
teams. compared with the great institutional transformations, the formula
Art. 24. At one o'clock they must be back in the workshops: they tion of explicit, general codes and unified rules of procedure; with
work until four o'clock. the almost universal adoption of the jury system, the definition of
6 7

Torture The body of the condemned
the essentially corrective character of the penalty and the tendency, across the whole of France, as far as Brest and Toulon, was replaced
which has become increasingly marked since the nineteenth century, in 1837 by inconspicuous black-painted cell-carts. Punishment had
to adapt punishment to the individual offender? Punishment of a gradually ceased to he a spectacle. And whatever theatrical elements
less immediately physical kind, a certain discretion iri the art of it still retained were now downgraded, as if the functions of the
inflicting pain, a combination of more subtle, more subdued suffer penal ceremony were gradually ceasing to be understood, as if this
ings, deprived of their visible display, should not all this be treated rite that 'concluded the crime' was suspected of being in some
as a special case, an incidental effect of deeper changes? And yet the undesirable way linked with it. It was as if the punishment was
fact remains that a few decades saw the disappearance of the tor thought to equal, if not to exceed, in savagery the crime itself, to
tured, dismembered, amputated body, symbolically branded on face accustom the spectators to a ferocity from which one wished to
or shoulder, exposed alive or dead to public view. The body as the divert them, to show them the frequency of crime, to make the
major target of penal repression disappeared. executioner resemble a criminal, judges murderers, to reverse roles
By the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth at the last moment, to make the tortured criminal an object of pity
century, the gloomy festival of punishment was dying out, though or admiration. As early as 1764, Beccaria remarked: 'The murder
here and there it flickered momentarily into life. In this transforma that is depicted as a horrible crime is repeated in cold blood,
tion, two processes were at work. They did not have quite the same remorselessly' (Beccaria, 101). The public execution is now seen as
chronology or the same raisond ' ltre. The first was the disappearance a hearth in which violence bursts again into flame.
of punishment as a spectacle. The ceremonial of punishment tended Punishment, then, will tend to become the most hidden part of
to decline; it survived only as a new legal or administrative practice. the penal process. This has several consequences: it leaves the
The amende liorwral,lew as first abolished in France in 1791, then domain of more or less everyday perception and enters that of
again in 1830 after a brief revival; the pillory was abolished in abstract consciousness; its effectiveness is seen as resulting from its
France in 1789 and in England in 1837. The use of prisoners in inevitability, not from its visible intensity; it is the certainty of being
public works, cleaning city streets or repairing the highways, was punished and not the horrifying spectacle of public punishment that
practised in Austria, Switzerland and certain of the United States must discourage crime; the exemplary mechanics of punishment
'
such as Pennsylvania. These convicts, distinguished by their changes its mechanisms. As a result, justice no longer takes public
'infamous dress' and shaven heads, 'were brought before the public. responsibility for the violence that is bound up with its practice.
The sport of the idle and the vicious, they often become incensed, If it too strikes, if it too kills, it is not as a glorification of its strength,
and naturally took violent revenge upon the aggressors. To prevent but as an element of itself that it is obliged to tolerate, that it finds
them from returning injuries which might be inflicted on them, difficult to account for. The apportioning of blame is redistributed:
they were encumbered with iron collars and chains to which bomb in punishment-as-spectacle a confused horror spread from the
shells were attached, to he dragged along while they performed their scaffold; it enveloped both executioner and condemned; and, al
degrading service, under the eyes of keepers armed with swords, though it was always ready to invert the shame inflicted on the
blunderbusses and other weapons of destruction' (Roberts Vaux, victim into pity or glory, it often turned the legal violence of the
Noticu, :u, quoted in Teeters, 1937, 24). This practice was abolished executioner into shame. Now the scandal and the light are to be
practically everywhere at the end of the eighteenth or the beginning distributed differently; it is the conviction itself that marks the
of the nineteenth century. The public exhibition of prisoners was offender with the unequivocally negative sign: the publicity has
maintained in France in 1831, despite violent criticism - 'a disgust shifted to the trial, and to the sentence; the execution itself is like an
ing scene', said Real (cf. Bibliography); it was finally abolished in additional shame that justice is ashamed to impose on the con
April 1848. While the chain-gang, which had dragged convicts demned man; so it keeps its distance from the act, tending always to
8 9

Torture The body of the condemned
entrust it to others, under the seal of secrecy. It is ugly to be punish speaking, punitive practices had become more reticent. One no
able, hut there is no glory in punishing. Hence that double system longer touched the body, or at least as little as possible, and then
of protection that justice bas set up between itself and the punish only to reach something other than the body itself. It might be
ment it imposes. Those who carry out the penalty tend to objected that imprisonment, confinement, forced labour, penal
become an autonomous sector; justice is relieved of responsibility servitude, prohibition from entering certain areas, deportation -
for it by a bureaucratic concealment of the penalty itself. It is which have occupied so important a place in modern penal systems -
typical that in F ranee the administration of the prisons should for so are 'physical' penalties: unlike fines, for example, they directly
long have been the responsibility of the Ministry of the Interior, affect the body. But the punishment-body relation is not the same
while responsibility for the bagnes, for penal servitude in the convict as it was in the torture during public executions. The body now
ships and penal settlements, lay with the Ministry of the Navy or serves as an instrument or intermediary: if one intervenes upon it
the Ministry of the Colonies. And beyond this distribution of roles to imprison it, or to make it work, it is in order to deprive the
operates a theoretical disavowal: do not imagine that the sentences individual of a liberty that is regarded both as a right and as property.
that we judges pass are activated by a desire to punish; they are The body, according to this penality, is caught up in a system of
intended to correct, reclaim, 'cure'; a technique of improvement constraints and privations, obligations and prohibitions. Physical
represses, in the penalty, the strict expiation of evil-doing, and pain, the pain of the body itself, is no longer the constituent element
relieves t~e magistrates of the demeaning task of punishing. In of the penalty. From being an art of unbearable sensations punish
modern justice and 'on the part of those who dispense it there is a ment has become an economy of suspended rights. If it is still
shame in punishing, which does not always preclude zeal. This necessary for the law to reach and manipulate the body of the con
sense of shame is constantly growing: the psychologists and the vict, it will be at a distance, in the proper way, according to strict
minor civil servants of moral orthopaedics proliferate on the wound rules, and with a much 'higher' aim. As a result of this new restraint,
it leaves. a whole army of technicians took over from the executioner, the
The disappearance of public executions marks therefore the decline immediate anatomist of pain: warders, doctors, chaplains, psychia
of the spectacle; but it also marks a slackening of the hold on the trists, psychologists, educationalists; by their very presence near the
body. In 1787, in an address to the Society for Promoting Political prisoner, they sing the praises that the law needs: they reassure it
Enquiries, Benjamin Rush remarked: 'I can only hope that the time that the body and pain are not the ultimate objects of its punitive
is not far away when gallows, pillory, scaffold, flogging and wheel action. Today a doctor must watch over those condemned to death,
will, in the history of punishment, be regarded as the marks of the right up to the last moment - thus juxtaposing himself as the agent
barbarity of centuries and of countries and as proofs of the feeble of welfare, as the alleviator of pain, with the official whose task it is
influence of reason and religion over the human mind' (Teeters, to end life. This -is worth thinking about. When the moment of
1935 , 30) . Indeed, sixty years later, Van Meenen, opening the second execution approaches, the patients are injected with tranquillizers.
penitentiary congress, in Brussels, recalled the time of his childhood A utopia of judicial reticence: take away life, but prevent the patient
as of a past age: 'I have seen the ground strewn with wheels, from feeling it; deprive the prisoner of all rights, but do not inflict
gibbets, gallows, pillories; I have seen hideously stretched skeletons pain; impose penalties free of all pain. Recourse to psycho-pharma
on wheels' (Ann.ales de la Charite, 529-30). Branding had been cology and 11:0v arious physiological 'disconnectors', even if it is
abolished in England (1834) and .in France (1832); in 1820, England temporary, is a logical consequence of this 'non-corporal' penality.
no longer dared to apply the full punishment reserved for traitors The modern rituals of execution attest to this double process: the
(Thistlewood was not quartered). Only flogging still remained ,in a disappearance of the spectacle and the elimination of pain. The same
number of penal systems (Russia, England, Prussia). But, generally movement has affected the various European legal systems, each at
10 II

Torture The body of the condemned
its own rate: the same death for all - the execution no longer bears denounced by Le Peletier; lastly, punishment for the condemned
the specific mark of the crime or the social status of the criminal; a man alone, since decapitation, the capital punishment of the nobility,
death that lasts only a moment - no torture must be added to it in was the least shaming for the criminal's family (Le Peletier, 720).
advance, no further actions performed upon the corpse; an execution The guillotine, first used in March 1792, was the perfect vehicle for
that affects life rather than the body. There are no longer any of these principles. Death was reduced to a visible, but instantaneous
those long processes in which death was both retarded by calculated event. Contact between the law, or those who carry it out, and the
interruptions and multiplied by a series of successive attacks. There body of the criminal, is reduced to a split second. There is no
are no longer any of those combinations of tortures that were physical confrontation; the executioner need be no more than a
organized for the killing of regicides, or of the kind advocated, at meticulous watchmaker. 'Experience and reason demonstrate that
the beginning of the eighteenth century, by the anonymous author the method used in the past to cut off the head of a criminal exposed
of Hanging not Punishment Enough (1701), by which the condemned him to a torture more frightful than the loss of life alone, which is
man would be broken on the wheel, then flogged until he fainted, the express intention of the law; the execution should therefore he
then hung up with chains, then finally left to die slowly of hunger. carried out in a single moment and with a single blow; examples
There are no longer any of those executions in which the condemned show how difficult it is to achieve this. For the method to work
man was dragged along on a hurdle (to prevent his head smashing perfectly, it must necessarily depend on invariable mechanical
against the cobble-stones), in which his belly was opened up, his means whose force and effect may also be determined ... It is an
entrails quickly ripped out, so that he had time to see them, with his easy enough matter to have such an unfailing machine built; decapi
own eyes, being thrown on the fire; in which he was fina1lyd ecapi tation will be performed in a moment according to the intention of
tated and his body quartered.1 The reduction of these 'thousand the new law. If this apparatus seems necessary, it will cause no
deaths' to strict capital punishment defines a whole new morality sensation an,d will be scarcely noticed' (Saint-Edme, 161). The
concerning,the act of punishing.
guillotine takes life almost without touching the body, just as prison
As early as 176o, a hanging machine had been tried out in deprives of liberty or a fine reduces wealth. It is intended to apply
England (for the execution of Lord Ferrer). It made use of a support, the law not so much to a real body capable of feeling pain as to a
which opened under the feet of the condemned man, thus avoiding juridical subject, the possessor, among other rights, of the right to
slow deaths and the altercations that occurred between victim and exist. It had to have the abstraction of the law itself.
executioner. It was improved and finally adopted in 1783, the same No doubt something of the old public execution was, for a time,
year in which the traditional procession from Newgate to Tyhum superimposed in F ranee on the sobriety of the new method. Parri
was abolished, and in which the opportunity offered by the rebuild cides - and the regicides who were regarded as such - were led to
ing of the prison, after the Gordon Riots, was used to set up the the scaffold wearing a black veil; there, until 1832, one of their
scaffolds in Newgate itself (see Hibbert, 85-6). The celebrated hands was cut off. Thereafter, nothing remained but the ornamental
article J of the French Code of 1791 - 'Every man condemned to crepe. Thus it was in the case of Fieschi, the would-be assassin of
death will have his head cut off' - bears this triple signification: an Louis-Philip,pe, in November r836: 'He will he taken to the place
equal death for all ('Crimes of the same kind will be punished by the of execution wearing a shirt, barefoot, his head covered with a black
same kind of punishment, whatever the rank and state of the guilty veil; he will be exhibited upon a scaffold while an usher reads the
man may be,' in the words of the motion proposed by Guillotin and sentence to the people, and he will be immediately executed.' We
passed on 1 December 1789); one death per condemned man, should remember Damiens - and note that the last addition to penal
obtained by a single blow, without recourse to those 'long and death was a mourning veil. The condemned man was no longer to
consequently cruel' methods of execution, such as the gallows, be seen. Only the reading of the sentence on the scaffold announced
'12 13

Torture The body of the condemned
the crime - and that crime must be faceless. (The more monstrous a in certain countries such as Austria, Russia, the United States,
criminal was, the more he must he deprived of light: he must not see France under the Constituent Assembly, then the retreat at the
or be seen, This was a common enough notion at the time. For th; time of the counter-revolutions in Europe and the great social fear
parricide one should 'construct an iron cage or dig an impenetrable of the years 1820-48; more or less temporary changes introduced by
dungeon that would. serve him as an eternal retreat' - De Molene emergency courts or laws; the gap between the laws and the real
275-7.) The last vestige of the great public execution was its annul~ practice of the courts (which was by no means a faithful reflection
ment: ~ drapery to hide a body. Benoit, triply infamous (his of the state of legislation). AU these factors account for the irregu
mothers murderer, a homosexual, an assassin), was the first of the larity of the transformation that occurred at the turn of the century.
parricides not to have a hand cut off: 'As the sentence was being It should be added that, although most of the changes had been
read, he stood on the scaffold supported by the executioners. It was achieved by 1840, although the mechanisms of punishment had by
a horrible sight; wrapped in a large white shroud his face covered then assumed their new way of functioning, the process was far
with black crepe, the parricide escaped the gaze of the silent crowd, from complete. The reduction in the use of torture was a tendency
and beneath these mysterious and gloomy clothes, life was mani that was rooted in the great transformation of the years 176o--1840,
fested only by frightful cries, which soon expired under rhe knife' but it did not end there; it can be said that the practice of the public
(Gazette des crihunaux, 30 August 1832). execution haunted our penal system for a long time and still haunts
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, then, the great it today. In France, the guillotine, that machine for the production
spectacl~ of physical ~unishment disappeared; the tortured body of rapid and discreet deaths, represented a new ethic of legal death.
was avoided; the theatrical representation of pain was excluded from But the Revolution had immediately endowed it with a great theatri
punishment. The age of sobriety in punishment had begun. By cal ritual. For years it provided a spectacle. It had to be removed to
1~30-48, public executions, preceded ·by torture, had almost entirely the Barriere Saint-Jacques; the open cart was replaced by a closed
~1sappeared. Of course, this generalization requires some qualifica carriage; the condemned man was hustled from the vehicle straight
tion. To begin with, the changes did not come about at once or as to the scaffold; hasty executions were organized at unexpected times.
part of_a single process. There were delays. Paradoxically, England In the end, the guillotine had to be placed inside prison walls and
was one of the countries most loath to see the disappearance of the made inaccessible to the public (after the execution of Weidmann
public execution: perhaps because of the role of model that the in 1939), by blocking the streets leading to the prison in which the
institution of the jury, public hearings and respect of habeas corpus scaffold was hidden, and in which the execution would take place in
had given to her criminal law; above all, no doubt, because she did secret (the execution of Buffet and Bontemps at the Sante in 1972).
not_w is~ to diminish the rigour of her penal laws during the great Wimesses who described the scene could even be prosecuted, there
social_d isturbances of the years 1780-1820. For a long time Rornilly, by ensuring that the execution should cease to be a spectacle and
Mackmtosh and F owell Buxton failed in their attempts to attenuate remain a strange secret between the law and those it condemns. One
the multiplicity and severity of the penalties laid down by English has only to point out so many precautions to realize that capital
law - that 'horrible butchery', as Rossi described it. Its severity (in punishment remains fundamentally, even today, a spectacle that
fact, the juries regarded the penalties laid down as excessive and must actually be forbidden.
were consequently more lenient in their application) had even Similarly, the hold on the body did not entirely disappear in the
increased: in 1760, Blackstone had listed 16o capital crimes in mid-nineteenth century. Punishment had no doubt ceased to be
English legislation, while by 1819 there were 223. One should also centred on torture as a technique of pain; it assumed as its principal
take into account the advances and retreats that the process as a object loss ,of wealth or rights. But a punishment like forced labour
whole underwent between 176o and 1840; the rapidity of reform or even imprisonment - mere loss of liberty - has never functioned
14 15

Torture
The body of the condemned
without a certain additional element of punishment that certainly came on the scene, masked. It was the end of a certain kind of
concerns the body itself: rationing of food, sexual deprivation, tragedy; comedy began, with shadow play, faceless voices, impalp
corporal punishment, solitary confinement. Are these the uninten able entities. The apparatus of punitive justice must now bite into
tional, but ir:ievitable, consequence of imprisonment? In fact, in its this bodiless reality.
most explicit practices, imprisonment has always involved a certain Is this any more than a mere theoretical assertion, contradicted
degree of physical pain. The criticism that was often levelled at the by penal practice? Such a conclusion would be over-hasty. It is true
penitentiary system in the early nineteenth century (imprisonment that, today, to punish is not simply a matter of converting a soul;
is not a sufficient punishment: prisoners are less hungry, less cold, but Mably's principle has not remained a pious wish. Its effects can
less deprived in general than many poor people or even workers) be felt throughout modem penality.
suggests a postulate that was never explicitly denied: it is just that a To begin with, there is a substitution of objects. By this I do not
condemned man should suffer physically more than other men. It is mean that one has suddenly set about punishing other crimes. No
difficult to dissociate punishment from additional physical pain. doubt the definition of offences, the hierarchy of their seriousness,
What would a non-corporal punishment be? the margins of indulgence, what was tolerated in fact and what was
There remains, therefore, a trace of 'torture' in the modern legally permitted - all this has considerably changed over the last
mechanisms of criminal justice - a trace that has not been entirely 200 years; many crimes have ceased to be so because they were
overcome, but which is enveloped, increasingly, by the non-corporal bound up with a certain exercise of religious authority or a par
nature of the penal system.
ticular type of economic activity; blasphemy has lost its status as a
crime; smuggling and domestic larceny some of their seriousness.
The reduction in penal severity in the last 200 years is a pheno But these displacements are perhaps not the most important fact:
menon with which legal historians are well acquainted. But, for a the division between the perm-itted and the forbidden has preserved
long time, it has been regarded in an overall way as a quantitative a certain constancy from one century to another. On the other
phenomenon: less cruelty, less pain, more kindness, more respect, hand, 'crime', the object with which penal practice is concerned, has
more 'humanity'. In fact, these changes are accompanied by a dis profoundly altered: the quality, the nature, in a sense the substance
placement in the very object of the punitive operation. Is there a of which the punishable element is made, rather than its formal
diminution of intensity? Perhaps. There is certainly a change of definition. Undercover of the relative stability of the law, a mass of
objective.
subtle and rapid changes has occurred. Certainly the 'crimes' and
If the penality in its most severe forms no longer addresses itself 'offences' on which judgement is passed are juridical objects defined
to the body, on what does it lay hold? The answer of the theoreti by the code, but judgement is also passed on the passions, instincts,
cians - those who, about 176o, opened up a new period that is not anomalies, infirmities, maladjustments, effects of environment or
yet at an end - is simple, almost obvious. It seems to be contained heredity; acts of aggression are punished, so also, through them, is
in the question itself: since it is no longer the body, it must be the aggressivity; rape, but at the same time perversions; murders, but
soul. The expiation that once rained down upon the body must be also drives and desires. But, it will be objected, judgement is not
replaced by a punishment that acts in depth on the heart, the actually being passed on them; if they are referred to at all it is·to
thoughts, the will, the inclinations. Mably formulated the principle explain the actions in question, and to determine to what extent the
once and for all: 'Punishment, if I may so put it, should strike the the subject's will was involved in the crime. This is no answer. For
soul rather than the body' (Mably, 326). it is these shadows lurking behind the case itself that are judged and
It was an important moment. The old partners of the spectacle punished. They are judged indirectly as 'attenuating circumstances'
of punishment, the body and the blood, gave way. A new character that introduce into the verdict not only 'circumstantial' evidence,
r6
17

Torture The body of the condemned
but something quite different, which is not juridically codifiable: and !imitative, and is in fact expansionist. During the I 50 or 200
the knowledge of the criminal, one's estimation of him, what is years that Europe has been setting up its new penal systems, the
known about the relations between him, his past and his crime, and judges have gradually, by means of a process that goes back very far
what might be expected of him in the future. They are also judged indeed, taken to judging something other than crimes, namely, the
by: the interplay ,of all those notions that have circulated between 'soul' of the criminal.
medicine and jurisprudence since the nineteenth century (the 'mon And, by that very fact, they have begun to do something other
sters' of Georget's times, Chaumie's 'psychical anomalies', the than pass judgement. Or, to be more precise, within the very judicial
'perverts' and 'maladjusted' of our own experts) and which, behind modality of judgement, other types of assessment have slipped in,
the pretext of explaining an action, are ways of defining an indivi profoundly altering its rules of elaboration. Ever since the Middle
dual. They are punished by means of a punishment that has the Ages slowly and painfully built up the great procedure of investiga
function of making the offender 'not only desirous, but also capable, tion, to judge was to establish the truth of a crime, it was to deter
of living within the law and of providing for his own needs'; they mine its author and to apply a legal punishment. Knowledge of the
are punished by the internal economy of a penalty which, while offence, knowledge of the offender, knowledge of the law: these
intended to punish the crime, may be altered (shortened or, in three conditions made it possible to ground a judgement in truth.
certain cases, extended) according to changes in the prisoner's But now a quite different question of truth is inscribed in the course
behaviour; and they are punished by the 'security measures' that of the penal judgement. The question is no longer simply: 'Has the
accompany the penalty (prohibition of entering certain areas, pro act been established and is it punishable?' But also: 'What is.t his act,
bation, obligatory medical treatment), and which are intended not
what is this act of violence or this murder? To what level or to what
to punish the offence, but to supervise the individual, to neutralize
field of reality does it belong? Is it a phantasy, a psychotic reaction, a
his dangerous stare of mind, to alter his criminal tendencies, and to
delusional episode, a perverse action?' It is no longer simply: 'Who
continue even when this change has been achieved. The criminal's
committed it?' But: 'How can we assign the causal process that
soul is not referred to in the trial merely to explain his crime and
produced it? Where did it originate in the author himself? Instinct,
as a factor in the juridical apportioning of responsibility; if it is
unconscious, environment, heredity?' It is no longer simply: 'What
brought before the court, with such pomp and circumstance, such
law punishes this offence?' But: 'What would be the most appropriate
concern to understand and such 'scientific' application, it is because
measures to take? How do we see the future development of the
it too, as well as the crime itself, is to be judged and to share in the offender? What would be the best way of rehabilitating him?' A
punishment. Throughout the penal ritual, from the preliminary
whole set of assessing, diagnostic, prognostic, normative judge
investigation to the sentence and the final effects of the penalty, a
ments concerning the criminal have become lodged in the frame
domain has been penetrated by objects that not only duplicate, but
work of penal judgement. Another truth has penetrated the truth
also dissociate the juridically defined and coded objects. Psychiatric
that was required by the legal machinery; a truth which, entangled
expertise, but also in a more general way criminal anthropology and with the first, has turned the assertion of guilt into a strange
the repetitive discourse of criminology, find one of their precise
scientifico-juridical complex. A significant fact is the way in which
functions here: by solemnly inscribing offences in the field of objects the question of madness has evolved in penal practice. According
susceptible of scientific knowledge, they provide the mechanisms
to the 1810 code, madness was dealt with only in terms of article 64.
of legal punishment with a justifiable hold not only on offences, but
Now this article states that there is neither crime nor offence if the
on individuals; not only on what they do, but also on what they are, offender was of unsound mind at the time of the act. The possibility
will be, may be. The additional factor of the offender's soul, which
of ascertaining madness was, therefore, a quite separate matter from
the legal system has laid hold of, is only apparently explanatory
the definition of an act as a crime; the gravity of the act was not
18

Torture The body of the condemned
an assessment of normality and a technical prescription for a possible
altered by the fact that its author was insane, nor the punishment
reduced as a consequence; the crime itself disappeared. It was im normalization. Today the judge - magistrate or juror - certainly does
more than 'judge'.
possible, therefore, to declare that someone was both guilty and
And he is not alone in judging. Throughout the penal procedure
mad; once the diagnosis of madness had been accepted, it could not
and the implementation of the sentence there swarms a whole
be included in the judgement; it interrupted the procedure and
series of subsidiary authorities. Small-scale legal systems and
loosened the hold of the law on the author of the act. Not only the
paraJiel judges have multiplied around the principal judgement:
examination of the criminal suspected of insanity, but the very
psychiatric or psychological experts, magistrates concerned with
effects of this examination had to be external and anterior to the
the implementation of sentences, educationalists, members of the
sentence. But, very soon, the courts of the nineteenth century began
prison service, al1 fragment the legal power to punish; it might be
to misunderstand the meaning of article 64. Despite several decisions
objected that none of them really shares the right to judge; that some,
of the supreme court of appeal confirming that insanity could not
after sentence is passed, have no other right than to implement the
result either in a light penalty, or even in an acquittal, but required
punishment laid down by the court and, above all, that others - the
that the case be dismissed, the ordinary courts continued to bring
experts - intervene before the sentence not to pass judgement, but
the question of insanity to bear on their verdicts. They accepted
to assist the judges in their decision. But as soon as the penalties and
that one could be both guilty and mad; less guilty the madder one
the security measures defined by the court are not absolutely deter
was; guilty certainly, but someone to be put away and treated rather
mined, from the moment they may be modified along the way,
than punished; not only a guilty man, but also dangerous, since
from the moment one leaves to others than the judges of the offence
quite obviously sick, etc. From the point of view of the penal code,
the task of deciding whether the condemned man 'deserves' to be
the result was a m;iss of juridical absurdities. But this was the starting
placed in semi-liberty or conditional liberty, whether they may
point of an evolution that jurisprudence and legislation itself was to
precipitate in the course of the next 1 50 years: already the reform bring his penal tutelage to an end, one is handing over to them
of 1832, introducing attenuating circumstances, made it possible to mechanisms of legal punishment to be used at their discretion:
modify the sentence according to the supposed degrees of an illness subsidiary judges they may be, but they are judges all the same.
The whole machinery that has been developing for years around
or the forms of a semi-insanity. And the practice of calling on
psychiatric expertise, which is widespread in the assize courts and the implementation of sentences, and their adjustment to individuals,
sometimes extended to courts of summary jurisdiction, means that creates a proliferation of the authorities of judicial decision-making
the sentence, even if it is always formulated in terms of legal punish and extends its powers of decision well beyond the sentence. The
psychiatric experts, for their part, may well refrain from judging.
ment, implies, more or less obscurely, judgements of normality,
Let us examine the three questions to which, since the 1958 ruling,
attributions of causality, assessments of possible changes, anticipa
they have to address themselves: Does the convicted person repre
tions as to the offender's future. It would be wrong to say that all
sent a danger to society? Is he susceptible to penal punishment? Is he
these operations give substance to a judgement from the outside;
curable or readjustable? These questions have nothing to do with
they are directly integrated in the process of forming the sentence.
Instead of insanity eliminating the crime according to the original article 64, nor with the possible insanity of the convicted person at
the moment of the act. They do not concern 'responsibility'. They
meaning of article 64, every crime and even every offence now
concern nothing but the administration of the penalty, its necessity,
carries within it, as a legitimate suspicion, but also as a right that may
be claimed, the hypothesis of insanity, in any case of anomaly. And its usefulness, its possible effectiveness; they make it possible to
show, in an almost transparent vocabulary, whether the mental hos
the sentence that condemns or acquits is not simply a judgement of
pital would be a more suitable place of confinement than the prison,
guilt, a legal decision that lays down punishment; it bears within it
21
20

Torture The body of the condemned
whether this confinement should be short or long, whether medical displacement, a whole field of recent objects, a whole new system of
treatment or security measures are called for. What, then, is the role truth and a mass of roles hitherto unknown in the exercise of criminal
of the psychiatrist in penal matters? He is not an expert in responsi justice. A corpus of knowledge, techniques, 'scientific' discourses is
bility, but an adviser on punishment; it is up to him to say whether formed and becomes entangled with the practice of the power to
the subject is 'dangerous', in what way one should be protected punish.
from him, how one should intervene to alter him, whether it would This book is intended as a correlative history of the modern soul
be better to try to force him into submission or to treat him. At the and of a new power to judge; a genealogy of the present scientifico
very beginning of its history, psychiatric expertise was called upon legal complex from which the power to punish derives its bases,
to formulate 'true' propositions as to the part that the liberty of the justifications and rules, from which it extends its effects and by which
offender had played in the act he had committed; it is now called it masks its exorbitant singularity.
upon to suggest a prescription for what might be called his 'medico But from what point can such a history of the modem soul on
judicial treatment'. trial be written? If one confined oneself to the evolution of legisla
To sum up, ever since the new penal system - that defined by the tion or of penal procedures, one would run the risk of allowing a
great codes of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries - has been in change in the collective sensibility, an increase in humanization or
operation, a general process has led judges to judge something the development of the human sciences to emerge as a massive,
other than crimes; they have been led in their sentences to do some external, inert and primary fact. By studying only the general social
thing other than judge; and the power of judging has been trans forms, as Durkheim did (cf. Bibliography), one runs the risk of
ferred, in part, to other authorities than the judges of the offence. positing as the principle of greater leniency in punishment pro
The whole penal operation has taken on extra-juridical elements and cesses of individualization that are rather one of the effects of the
personnel. It will be said that there is nothing extraordinary in this, new tactics of power, among which are to be included the new penal
that it is part of the destiny of the law to absorb little by little mechanisms .. This study obeys four general rules:
elements that are alien to it. But what is odd about modern criminal 1. Do not concentrate the study of the punitive mechanisms on
justice is that, although it has taken on so many extra-juridical their 'repressive' effects alone, on their 'punishment' aspects alone,
elements, it has done so not in order to be able to define them but situate them in a whole series of their possible positive effects,
juridically and gradually to integrate them into the actual power to even if these seem marginal at first sight. As a consequence, regard
punish: on the contrary, it has done so in order to make them func punishment as a complex social function.
tion within the penal operation as non-juridical elements; in order 2. Analyse punitive methods not simply as consequences of
to stop this operation being simply a legal punishment; in order to legislation or as indicators of social structures, but as techniques
exculpate the judge from being purely and simply he who punishes. possessing their own specificity in the more general field of other
'Of course, we pass sentence, but this sentence is not in direct ways of exercising power. Regard punishment as a political tactic.
relation to the crime. It is quite clear that for us it functions as a way J· Instead of treating the history of penal law and the history of
of treating a criminal. We punish, but this is a way of saying that the human sciences as two separate series whose overlapping appears
we wish to obtain a cure.' Today, criminal justice functions and to have had on one or the other, or perhaps on both, a disturbing
justifies itself only by this perpetual reference to something other or useful effect, according to one's point of view, see whether there
than itself, by this unceasing reinscription in non-juridical systems. is not some common matrix or whether they do not both derive
Its fate is to be redefined by knowledge. from a single process of 'epistemologico-juridical' formation; in
Beneath the increasing leniency of punishment, then, one may short, make the technology of power the very principle both of the
map a displacement of its point of application; and through this humanization of the penal system and of the knowledge of man.
22 23

Torture The body of the condemned
4. Try to discover whether this entry of the soul on to the scene punitive mechanisms serve to provide an additional labour force -
of penal justice, and with it the insertion in legal practice of a whole and to constitute a body of'civil' slaves in addition to those provided
cerpus of 'scientific' knowledge, is not the effect of a transformation by war or trading; with feudalism, at a time when money and pro
of the way in which the body itself is invested by power relations. duction were still at an early stage of development, we find a sudden
In short, try to study the metamorphosis of punitive methods on increase in corporal punishments - the body being in most cases the
the basis of a political· technology of the body in which might be only property accessible; the penitentiary (the Hopital General, the
read a common history of power relations and object relations. Spinhuis or the Rasphuis), forced labour and the prison factory
Thus, by an analysis of penal leniency as a technique of power, appear with the development of the mercantile economy. But the
one might understand both how man, the soul, the normal or industrial system requires a free market in labour and, in the nine
abnormal individual have come to duplicate crime as objects of teenth century, the role of forced labour in the mechanisms of
penal intervention; and in what way a specific mode of subjection punishment diminishes accordingly and 'corrective' detention takes
was able to give birth to man as an object of knowledge for a dis its place. There are no doubt a number of observations to be made
course with a 'scientific' status. about such a strict correlation.
But I am not claiming to be the first to have worked in this But we can surely accept the general proposition that, in our
direction. 2 societies, the systems of punishment are to be situated in a certain
'political economy' of the body: even if they do not make use of
Rusche and Kirchheimer's great work, Punishment and Social violent or bloody punishment, even when they use 'lenient' methods
Structures, provides a number of essential reference points. We must involving confinement or correction, it is always the body that is at
first rid ourselves of the illusion that penality is above all (if not issue - the body and its forces, their utility and their docility, their
exclusively) a means of reducing crime and that, in this role, accord distribution and their submission. It is certainly legitimate to write
ing to the social forms, the political systems or beliefs, it may be a history of punishment against the background of moral ideas or
severe or 1enient, tend towards expiation of obtaining redress, to legal structures. But can one write such a history against the back
wards the pursuit of individuals or the attribution of collective ground of a history of bodies, when such systems of punishment
responsibility. We must analyse rather the 'concrete systems of claim to have only the secret souls of criminals as their objective?
punishment', study them as social phenomena that cannot be Historians long ago began to write the history of the body. They
accounted for by the juridical structure of society alone, nor by its have studied the body in the field of historical demography or
fundamental ethical choices; we must situate them in their field of pathology; they have considered it as the seat of needs and appetites,
operation, in which the punishment of crime is not the sole element; as the locus of physiological processes and metabolisms, as a target
we must show that punitive measures are not simply 'negative' for the attacks of germs or viruses; they have shown to what extent
mechanisms that make it possible to repress, to prevent, to exclude, historical processes were involved in what might seem to be the
to eliminate; but that they are linked to a whole series of positive purely biological base of existence; and what place should be given
and useful effects which it is their task to support (and, in this sense, in the history of society to biological 'events' such as the circulation
although legal punishment is carried out in order to punish offences, of bacilli, or the extension of the life-span (cf. Le Roy-Ladurie).
one might say that the definition of offences and their prosecution But the body is also directly involved in a political field; power
are carried out in turn in order to maintain the punitive mechanisms relations have an immediate hold upon it; they invest it, mark it,
and their functions). From this point of view, Rusche and Kirch train it, torture it, force it to carry out tasks, to perform ceremonies,
heimer relate the different systems of punishment with the systems to emit signs. This political investment of the body is bound up,
of production within which they operate: thus, in a slave economy, in accordance with complex reciprocal relations, with its economic
24

Torture The body of the condemned
use; it is largely as a force of production that the body is invested is manifested and sometimes extended by the position of those who
with relations of power and domination; but, on the other hand, its are dominated. Furthermore, this power is not exercised simply as
constitution as labour power is possible only if it is caught up in a an obligation or a prohibition on those who 'do not have it'·, it
system of subjection (in which need is also a political instrument invests them, is transmitted by them and through them; it exerts
meticulously prepared, calculated and used); the body becomes a pressure upon them, just as they themselves, in their struggle against
useful force only if it is both a productive body and a subjected body. it, resist the grip it has on them. This means that these relations go
This subjection is not only obtained by the instruments of violence right down into the depths of society, that they are not localized in
or ideology; it can also be direct, physical, pitting force against the relations between the state and its citizens or on the frontier
force, bearing on material elements, and yet without involving between classes and that they do not merely reproduce, at the level
violence; it may be calculated, organized, technically thought out; of individuals, bodies, gestures and behaviour, the general form of
it may be subtle, make use neither of weapons nor of terror and yet the law or government; that, although there is continuity (they are
remain of a physical order. That is to say, there may be a 'knowledge' indeed articulated on this form through a whole series of complex
of the body that is not exactly the science of its functioning, and a mechanisms), there is neither analogy nor homology, but a specific
mastery of its forces that is more than the ability to conquer them: ity of mechanism and modality. Lastly, they are not univocal; they
this knowledge and this mastery constitute what might be called the define innumerable points of confrontation, focuses of instability,
political technology of the body. Of course, this technology is each of which has its own risks of conflict, of struggles, and of an
diffuse, rarely formulated in continuous, systematic discourse; it is at least temporary inversion of the power relations. The overthrow
often made up of bits and pieces; it implements a disparate set of of these 'micro-powers' does not, then, obey the law of all or
tools or methods. In spite of the coherence of its results, it is nothing; it is not acquired once and for all by a new control of the
generally no more than a multiform instrumentation. Moreover, it apparatuses nor by a new functioning or a destruction of the in
cannot be localized in a particular type of institution or state stitutions; on the other hand, none of its localized episodes may be
apparatus. For they have recourse to it; they use, select or impose inscribed in history except by the effects that it induces on the entire
certain of its methods. But, in its mechanisms and its effects, it is network in which it is caught up.
situated at a quite different level. What the apparatuses and institu Perhaps, too, we should abandon a whole tradition that allows
tions operate is, in a sense, a micro-physics of power, whose field us to imagine that knowledge can exist only where the power rela
of validity is situated in a sense between these great functionings tions are suspended and that knowledge can develop only outside its
and the bodies themselves with their materiality and their forces. injunctions, its demands and its interests. Perhaps we should aban
Now, the study of this micro-physics presupposes that the power don the belief that power makes mad and that, by the same token,
exercised on the body is conceived not as a property, but as a the renunciation of power is one of the conditions of knowledge.
strategy, that its effects of domination are attributed not to 'appro We should admit rather that power produces knowledge (and not
priation', but to dispositions, manoeuvres, tactics, techniques, simply by encouraging it because it serves power or by applying it
functionings; that one should decipher in it a network of relations, because it is useful); that power and knowledge directly imply one
constantly in tension, in activity, rather than a privilege that one another; that there is no power relation without the correlative
might possess; that one should take as its model a perpetual battle constitution of a field of knowledge, nor any knowledge that does
rather than a contract regulating a transaction or the conquest of a not presuppose and constitute at the same time power relations.
territory. In short this power is exercised rather than possessed; These 'power-knowledge relations' are to be analysed, therefore,
it is not the 'privilege', acquired or preserved, of the dominant not on the basis of a subject of knowledge who is or is not free in
class, bur the overall effect of its strategic positions - an effect that relation to the power system, but, on the contrary, the subject who
27

Torture The body of the condemned
knows, the objects to be known and the modalities of knowledge of the king and the demands of the Crown, and a whole ritual t~at
must be regarded as so many effects of these fundamental implica reaches its height in the coronation, the funeral and the ceremorues
tions of power-knowledge and their historical transformations. In of submission. At the opposite pole one might imagine placing the
short, it is not the activity of the subject of knowledge that pro body of the condemned man; he, too, has his legal status; he gi:"es
duces a corpus of knowledge, useful or resistant to power, but rise to his own ceremonial and he calls forth a whole theoretical
power-knowledge, the processes and struggles that traverse it and discourse not in order to ground the 'surplus power' possessed by
of which it is made up, that determines the forms and possible the perso~ of the sovereign, but in order to code the 'lack of power'
domains of knowledge. with which those subjected to punishment are marked. In the darkest
To analyse the political investment of the body and the micro region of the political field the condemned man represents the srm
physics of power presupposes, therefore, that one abandons - where metrical, inverted figure of the king. We should analyse what might
power is concerned - the violence-ideology opposition, the meta be called, in homage to Kantorowitz, 'the least body of the con
phor of property, the model of the contract or of conquest; that - demned man'.
where knowledge is concerned - one abandons the opposition If the surplus power possessed by the king gives rise to the
between what is 'interested' and what is 'disinterested', the model of duplication of his body, has not the surplus power exercised on the
knowledge and the primacy of the subject. Borrowing a word from subjected body of the condemned man given rise to another type of
Petty and his contemporaries, but giving it a different meaning from duplication? That of a 'non-corporal', a 'soul', as Mably called it.
the one current in the seventeenth century, one might imagine a The history of this 'micro-physics' of the punitive power would then
political 'anatomy'. This would not be the study of a state in terms of be a genealogy or an element in a genealogy of the modern 'soul'.
a 'body' (with its elements, its resources and its forces), nor would Rather than seeing this soul as the reactivated remnants of an ideo
it be the study of the body and its surroundings in terms of a small logy, one would see it as the present correlative of a certain tech
state. One would be concerned with the 'body politic', as a set of nology of power over the body. It would be wrong to say _that_th e
material elements and techniques that serve as weapons, relays, soul is an illusion, or an ideological effect. On the contrary, 1te xtsts,
communication routes and supports for the power and knowledge it has a reality, it is produced permanently around, on, within the
relations that invest human bodies and subjugate them by turning body by the functioning of a power that is exercised on t~ose
them into objects of knowledge.
punished - and, in a more general way, on those one supervises,
It is a question of situating the techniques of punishment - trains and corrects, over madmen, children at home and at school,
whether they seize the body in the ritual of public torture and the colonized, over those who are stuck at a machine and supervised
execution or whether they are addressed to the soul - in the history for the rest of their lives. This is the historical reality of this soul,
of this body politic; of considering penal practices less as a conse which, unlike the soul represented by Christian theology, is not
quence of legal theories than as a chapter of political anatomy. born in sin and subject to punishment, but is horn rather out of
Kantorowitz gives a remarkable analysis of 'The King's Body': methods of punishment, supervision and constraint. This real, non
a double body according to the juridical theology of the Middle corporal soul is not a substance; it is the element in which are
Ages, since it involves not only the transitory element that is born articulated the effects of a certain type of power and the reference
and dies, but another that remains unchanged by time and is main of a certain type of knowledge, the machinery by which the power
tained as the physical yet intangible support of the kingdom; relations give rise to a possible corpus of knowledge, and knowledge
around this duality, which was originally close to the Christological extends and reinforces the effects of this power. On this reality
model, are organized an iconography, a political theory of monarchy, reference, various concepts have been constructed and domains of
legal mechanisms that distinguish between as well as link the person analysis carved out: psyche, subjectivity, personality, consciousness,
28

Torture The body of the condemned
etc.; on it have been built scientific techniques and discourses, prison, with all the political investments of the body that it gathers
and the moral claims of humanism. But let there be no misunder together in its closed architecture. Why? Simply because I am
standing: it is not that a real man, the object of knowledge, philo interested in the past? No, if one means by that writing a history of
sophical reflection or technical intervention, has been substituted the past in terms of the present. Yes, if one means writing the
for the soul, the illusion of the theologians. The man described for history of the present.3
us, whom we are invited to free, is already in himself the effect of a
subjection much more profound than himself. A 'soul' inhabits him
and brings him to existence, which is itself a factor in the mastery
that power exercises over the body. The soul is the effect and
instrument of a political anatomy; the soul is the prison of the body.
That punishment in general and the prison in particular belong
to a political technology of the body is a lesson that I have learnt
not so much from history as from the present. In recent years,
prison revolts have occurred throughout the world. There was cer
tainly something paradoxical about their aims, their slogans and the
way they took place. They were revolts against an entire state of
physical misery that is over a century old: against cold, suffocation
and overcrowding, against decrepit walls, hunger, physical mal
treatment. But they were also revolts against model prisons, tran
quillizers, isolation, the medical or educational services. Were they
revolts whose aims were merely material? Or contradictory revolts: •
against the obsolete, but also against comfort; against the warders,
but also against the psychiatrists? In fact, all these movements - and
the innumerable discourses that the prison has given rise to since
the early nineteenth century - have been about the body and
material things. What has sustained these discourses, these mem
ories and invectives are indeed those minute material details. One
may, if one is so disposed, see them as no more than blind demands
or suspect the existence behind them of alien strategies. In fact, they
were revolts, at the level of the body, against the very body of the
prison. What was at issue was not whether the prison environment
was too harsh or too aseptic, too primitive or too efficient, but its
very materiality as an fostrument and vector of power; it is this
whole technology of power over the body that the technology of
the 'soul' - that of the educationalists, psychologists and psychia
trists - fails either to conceal or to compensate, for the simple reason
that it is one of its tools. I would like to write the history of this
JO 31

The spectacle of the scaffold
1730 (and twenty-six out of 500 between 1781 and 1790 - cf.
The spectacle of the scaffold
2. Dautricourt). But it must not be forgotten that the courts found
many ways of relaxing the rigours of the penal system, either by
refusing to prosecute offences that were too heavily punished or by
modifying the definition of the crime; sometimes too the royal
power indicated that some particularly severe ordinance was not to
be applied too strictly (which was how Choiseul dealt with the
declaration of 3 August 1744 on vagabonds - Choiseul, 128---9).
In any case, the majority of the sentences involved banishment or
The ordinance of 1670 regulated the general forms of p_enalp ractice fines: in a court such as that of the Chatelet (which dealt only with
up to the Revolution. It laid down the following hierarchy of relatively serious offences), banishment represented over half the
penalties: 'Death, judicial torture pending proof, penal servitude, sentences passed between 1755 and 1785. But many of these non
flogging, amende honorable, banishment.' A high proportion of corporal penalties were accompanied by additional penalties that
physical punishment. Customs, the nature of the crimes, the status involved a degree of torture: public exhibition, pillory, carcan,
of the condemned accounted for still more variations. 'Capital flogging, branding; this was the case for all sentehces to the 'galleys'
punishment comprises many kinds of death: some prisoners may be or to what was the equivalent for women - reclusion in the hospital;
condemned to be hanged, others to having their hands cut off or banishment was often preceded by public exhibition and branding;
their tongues cut out or pierced and then to be hanged; others, for fines were sometimes accompanied by flogging. It was not only in
more serious crimes, to be broken alive and to die on the wheel, the great solemn executions, but also in this additional form of
after having their limbs broken; others to be broken until they die punishment, that torture revealed the significant part it played in
a natural death, others to be strangled and then broken, others to penality: every penalty of a certain seriousness had to involve an
be burnt alive, others to be burnt after first being strangled; others element of torture, of supp/ice.
to be drawn by four horses, others to have their heads cut off, and What is a supplice? 'Corporal punishment, painful to a more or
others to have their heads broken' (Soulatges, 169-71). And Sou less horrible degree,' said Jaucourt in his Encyclopedie article and
latges adds, almost in passing, that there are also lighter penalties added: 'It is an inexplicable phenomenon that the extension of
not mentioned by the ordinance: satisfaction to the injured party, man's imagiination creates out of the barbarous and the cruel.'
warning, reprimand, a short period of imprisonment, prohibition Inexplicable, perhaps, but certainly neither irregular nor primitive.
from entering a certain area and, lastly, pecuniary punishments - Torture is a technique; it is not an extreme expression of lawless
fines or confiscation. rage. To be torture, punishment must obey three principal criteria:
But we must not be misled. There was a considerable gap between first, it must produce a certain degree of pain, which may be meas
this arsenal of horrors and everyday penal practice. Public torture ured exactly, or at least calculated, compared and hierarchized;
and execution was by no means the most frequent form of punish death is a torture in so far as it is not simply a withdrawal of the
ment. To us today the proportion of death sentences in the penal right to live, but is the occasion and the culmination of a calculated
practice of the classical age may seem high: at the Chatelet1 during gradation of pain: from decapitation (which reduces all pain to a
the period 1755-85 under 10 per cent of the sentences passed in single gesture, performed in a single moment - the zero degree of
volved capital punishment: the wheel, the gallows or the stake torture), through hanging, the stake and the wheel (all of which
(Petrovitch, 226ff); the Parlement of Flanders passed thirty-nine prolong the agony), to quartering, which carries pain almost
death sentences, out of a total of 26o sentences, between 1721 and to infinity; death-torture is the art of maintaining life in pain, by
32

Torture The spectacle of the s~old
subdividing it into a 'thousand deaths', by achieving before life forgetting its principles, losing all restraint. In the 'excesses' of
ceases 'the most exquisite agonies' (cf. Ollyffe). Torture rests on a torture, a whole economy of power is invested.
whole quantitative art of pain. But there is more to it: this production
of pain is regulated. Torture correlates the type of corporal effect, the The tortured! body is first inscribed in the legal ceremonial that
quality, intensity, duration of pain, with the gravity of the crime, must produce, open for all to see, the truth of the crime.
the person of the criminal, the rank of his victims. There is a legal In F ranee, as in most European countries, with the notable
code of pain; when it involves torture, punishment does not fall exception of England, the entire criminal procedure, right up to the
upon the body indiscriminately or equally; it is calculated according sentence, remained secret: that is to say, opaque, not only to the
to detailed rules: the number of lashes of the whip, the positioning public but also to the accused himself. It took place without him,
of the branding iron, the duration of the death agony on the stake or at least without his having any knowledge either of the charges
or the wheel ( the court decides whether the criminal is to be or of the evidence. In the order of criminal justice, knowledge was
strangled at once or allowed to die slowly,. and the points at which the absolute privilege of the prosecution. The preliminary investiga
this gesture of pity must occur), the type of mutilation to be used tion was carried out 'as diligently and secretly as may be', .ast he edict
(hand cut off, lips or tongue pierced). All these various elements of 1498 put it. According to the ordinance of 1670, which confirmed
multiply the punishments and are combined according to the court and, on certain points, reinforced the severity of the preceding
and the crime. 'The poetry of Dante put into laws,' was how Rossi period, it was impossible for the accused to have access to the docu
described it; a long course in physico-penal knowledge, in any case. ments of the case, impossible to know the identity of his accusers,
Furthermore, torture forms part of a ritual. It is an element in the impossible to know the nature of the evidence before objecting to
liturgy of punishment and meets two demands. It must mark the witnesses, impossible to make use, until the last moments of the
victim: it is intended, either by the scar it leaves on the body, or by trial, of the documents in proof, impossible to have a lawyer, either
the spectacle that accompanies it, to brand the victim with infamy; to ensure the proper conduct of the case, or to take part, on the
even if its function is to 'purge' the crime, torture does not recon main issue, in the defence. The magistrate, for his part, had the
cile; it traces around or, rather, on the very body of the condemned right to accept anonymous denunciations, to conceal from the ac
man signs that must not be effaced; in any case, men will remember cused the nature of the action, to question him with a view to
public exhibition, the pillory, torture and pain duly observed. And, catching him out, to use insinuations. (Up to the eighteenth century,
from the point of view of the law that imposes it, public torture and lengthy arguments took place as to whether, in the course of
execution must he spectacular, it must be seen by all almost as its 'captious' questioning, it was lawful for the judge to use false
triumph. The very excess of the violence employed is one of the promises, lies, words with double meaning - a whole casuistry of
elements of its glory: the fact that the guilty man should moan and legal bad faith.) The magistrate constituted, in solitary omnipotence,
cry out under the blows is not a shameful side-effect, it is the very a truth by which he invested the accused; and the judges received
ceremonial of justice being expressed in all its force. Hence no doubt this truth ready made, in the form of documents and written state
those tortures that take place even after death: corpses humt, ashes ments; for them, these factors alone were proof; they met the
thrown to the winds, bodies dragged on hurdles and exhibited at accused only once in order to question him before passing sentence.
the roadside. Justice pursues the body beyond all possible pain. The secret and written form of the procedure reflects the principle
The term 'penal torture' does not cover any corporal punishment: that in criminal matters the establishment of truth was the absolute
it is a differentiated production of pain, an organized ritual for the right and the exclusive power of the sovereign and his judges.
marking of victims and the expression of the power that punishes; Ayrault supposed that this procedure (which was more or less
not the expression of a legal system driven to exasperation and, established by the sixteenth century) originated in 'the fear of the
34 35

Torture The spectacle of the scaffold
uproar, shouting and cheering that the people usually indulge in, may be combined to form a semi-proof; but, however many there
the fear that there would be disorder, violence, and outbursts against may be of them, they can never, of themselves, constitute a complete
the parties, or even against the judges'; the king wished to show in proof. We have, then, a penal arithmetic that is meticulous on many
this that the 'sovereign power' from which the right to punish points, but which still leaves a margin for a good deal of argument: in
derived could in no case belong to the 'multitude' (cf. Ayrault, order for a capital sentence to be passed, is a single full proof enough
LIii, chapters LXXII and LXIX). Before the justice of the sover or must it be accompanied by other slighter clues? Are two approxi
eign, all voices must be still. mate proofs always equivalent to a full proof? Should not three be
Yet, despite the use of secrecy, certain rules had to be obeyed in required or two plus distant clues? Are there elements that may be
establishing the truth. Secrecy itself required that a rigorous model regarded as clues only for certain crimes, in certain circumstances
of penal truth be defined. A whole tradition dating from the Middle and in relatiion to certain persons (thus evidence is disregarded if it
Ages and considerably developed by the great lawyers of the comes from a vagabond; it is reinforced, on the contrary, if it is
Renaissance laid down what the nature and the use of evidence provided by 'a considerable person' or by a master in the case of a
might be. Even in the eighteenth century, it was still common to domestic offence). It is an arithmetic modulated by casuistry, whose
meet distinctions like the following: true, direct, or legitimate proof function is to define how a legal proof is to be constructed. On the
(that provided by witnesses, for example) and indirect, conjectural, one hand, this system of 'legal proofs' makes truth in the penal
artificial proof (obtained by argument); or, again, manifest proof, domain the result of a complex art; it obeys rules known only to
considerable proof, imperfect or slight (Jousse, 66o); or, again, specialists, and, consequently, it reinforces the principle of secrecy.
'urgent or necessary' proof that did not allow one to doubt the 'It is not enough that the judge should have the conviction that any
truth of the deed (this was 'full' proof: thus two irreproachable wit reasonable man may have. .. Nothing is more incorrect than this
nesses·a ffirming that they saw the accused, carrying an unsheathed way of judging, which, in truth, is no other than a more or less well
and bloody sword, leave the place where, some time later, the body founded opinion.' But, on the other hand, it is a severe constraint
of the dead man was found with sta.b wounds); approximate or semi for the magistrate; in the absence 'of this regularity, 'every sentence
full proof, which may be regarded as true as long as the accused does would be reckless, and in a sense it may be said that it is unjust even
not destroy it with evidence to the contrary (the evidence of a single when, in truth, the accused is guilty' (Pou!lain du Pare, 112-13 - see
eye-witness or death threats preceding a murder); lastly, distant or also Esmein, 26<r83 and Mittermaier, 15-19), The day will come
'adminicule' clues, which consisted only of opinion (rumour, the when the singularity of this judicial truth will appear scandalous:
flight of the suspect, his _mannerw hen questioned, etc. - Muyart de as if the law did not have to obey the rules of common truth. 'What
Vouglans, 1757, 345-7). Now, these distinctions are not simply would be said of a semi-proof in the sciences capable of demonstra
theoretical subtleties. They have an operational function. First, tion? What would a geometrical or algebraic semi-proof amount
because each of these kinds of evidence, taken in isolation, may have to?' (Seigneux de Correvon, 63). But it should not be forgotten
a particular type of judicial effect: 'full' proof may lead to any that these formal constraints on legal proof were a mode of regula
sentence; 'semi-full' proof may lead to any of the 'pein.esa fflictives', tion internal to absolute power and exclusive of knowledge.
or heavy penalties, except death; imperfect and slight clues are Written, secret, subjected, in order to construct its proofs, to
enough for the suspect to have a writ issued against him, to have rigorous rules, the penal investigation was a machine that might
the case deferred for further inqµiry or to have a fine imposed on produce the truth in the absence of the accused. And by this very
him. Secondly, because they are combined according to precise fact, though the law strictly speaking did not require it, this pro
arithmetical rules: two 'semi-full' proofs may make a complete proof; cedure was to tend necessarily to the confession. And for two
'adminicules', providing there are several of them and they concur, reasons: first, because the confession constituted so strong a proof
37

Torture The spectacle of the scaffold
that there was scarcely any need to add others, or to enter the diffi to the minjmum the work of investigation and the mechanics of
cult and dubious combinatory of clues; the confession, provided it demonstration, the confession was therefore highly valued; every
was obtained in the correct manner, almost discharged the prosecu possible coercion would be used to obtain it. But, although it had
tion of the obligation to provide further evidence (in any case the to be, in the procedure, the living and oral counterpart of the
most difficult evidence). Secondly, the only way that this procedure written preliminary investigation, although it had to be its reply,
might use all its unequivocal authority, and become a real victory its authentication, as it were, on the part of the accused, it had to be
over the accused, the only way in which the truth might exert all its surrounded by guarantees and formalities. It preserved something
power, was for the criminal to accept responsibility for his own of a transaction: that is why it had to be 'spontaneous', why it had
crime and himself sign what had been skilfully and obscurely to be formulated before the competent court, why it had to be made
constructed by ~he preliminary investigation. 'It is not enough', as in full consciousness, why it should not concern impossible things,
~yrault, who did nor_c are for ~hese secret procedures, remarked, etc. 2 Through the confession, the accused committed himself to the
that wrong-doers be Justly purushed. They must if possible judge procedure; he signed the truth of the preliminary investigation.
and condemn themselves' (Ayrault, 1. I, chapter 14). Within the This double ambiguity of the confession (an element of proof and
crime reconstituted by writing, the criminal who confessed came to the counterpart of preliminary investigation; the effect of constraint
play the role of living truth. The confession, an act of the criminal, and a semi-voluntary transaction) explains the two great means used
responsible and speaking subject, was the complement to the written, by classical criminal law to obtain it: the oath that the accused was
secret preliminary investigation. Hence the importance that all this asked to make before his interrogatory (and therefore under threat
procedure of an inquisitorial type accorded to the confession. of perjury before both human and divine justice; and, at the same
Hence, too, the ambiguities of its role. On the one hand an time, a ritual act of commitment); judicial torture (physical violence
attempt was made to introduce it into the general arithmeti~ of to obtain truth, which, in any case, had then to be repeated before
evidence; it was stressed that it was no more than one proof among the judges, as a 'spontaneous' confession, if it were to constitute
many. It was not the eviden.tia rei; nor was it the strongest of the proof). At the end of the eighteenth century, torture was to be
proofs, it was not in itself enough to bring convjction, it had to be denounced! as a survival of the barbarities of another age: the mark
accompanied by additional, circumstantial evidence; for it is a well of a savagery that was denounced as 'Gothic'. It is true that the
known fact that the accused sometimes declare themselves to be practice of torture is of ancient origin: it goes back at least as far
guilty of crimes that they have not committed; the examining magis as the Inquisition, of course, and probably to the torture of slaves.
trate had therefore to carry out additional investigations if he But it did not figure in classical law as a survival or defect. It occu
possessed no more than the confession of the accused. But, on the pied a strict place in a complex penal mechanism, in which the
other hand, the confession had priority over any other kind of procedure of an inquisitorial type was reinforced with elements of
evidence. To a certain extent, it transcended all other evidence· an the accusatory system; in which the written demonstration required
element in the calculation of the truth, it was also the act by which an oral correlative; in which the techniques of proof administered
the accused accepted the charge and recognized its truth; it trans by the magistrates were mingled with the methods of the ordeal to
formed _an investigation carried out without him into a voluntary which the accused was challenged; in which he was called upon - if
~ffirmat'.on. Through the confession, the accused himself took part necessary by the most violent persuasion - to play the role of
m the ritual of producing penal truth. As medieval law put it, the voluntary partner in the procedure; in which it was a question, in
confession 'renders the thing notorious and manifest'. To this first short, of producing truth by a mechanism consisting of two ele
ambiguity was added a· second: as a particularly strong proof, ments - that of the investigation carried out in secret by the judicial
requiring for a conviction only a few additional clues, thus reducing authority and that of the act ritually performed by the accused. The
38 39

'Forture The spectacle of the scaffold
body of the accused, the speaking and, if necessary, suffering body, confess, the magistrate was forced to drop the charges. The tortured
assured the interlocking of these two mechanisms; that is why, man had then won. Hence the custom, which had been introduced
until the classical system of punishment was re-examined from top for the most serious cases, of imposing judicial torture 'pending
to bottom, there were so few radical criticisms of torture (the most proof': in this case the magistrate could continue with his investiga
famous being Nicolas's Si la torture est un moyen civ erifier !es crimes tion after the torture had failed; the suspect was not declared
of 1682). Much more frequent were simple recommendations of innocent by his resistance; but at least his victory saved him from
prudence: 'Judicial torture is a dangerous means of arriving at being condemned to death. The judge kept all his cards, except the
knowledge of the truth; that is why judges must not resort to it with principal one. Omnia citra mortem. Hence the recommendation
out due consideration. Nothing is more equivocal. There are guilty often made to magistrates, in the case of the most serious crimes,
men who have enough firmness to hide a true crime ... and innocent not to subject to judicial torture a suspect against whom the evidence
victims who are made to confess crimes of which they were not was sufficiently convincing for, if he managed to resist the torture,
guilty' (Ferriere, 612). the magistrate would no longer have the right to pass the death
On this basis one may see the functioning of judicial torture, or sentence, which he nevertheless deserved; in such a joust, justice
interrogation under torture, as a torture of the truth. To begin with, would be the loser: if the evidence was sufficient 'to condemn such a
judicial torture was not a way of obtaining the truth at all costs; it guilty person to death', one should not 'leave the conviction to
was not the unrestrained torture of modem interrogations; it was chance and to the outcome of a provisional interrogation that often
certainly cruel, but it was not savage. It was a regulated practice, leads to nothing; for it is in the interest of public safety to make
obeying a well-defined procedure; the various stages, their duration, examples of grave, horrible and capital crimes' (Rousseaud de la
the instruments used, the length of ropes and the heaviness of the Combe, 503).
weights used, the number of interventions made by the interrogating Beneath an apparently determined, impatient search for truth,
magistrate, all this was, according to the different local practices, one finds in classical torture the regulated mechanism of an ordeal:
carefully codified (In 1729, Aguesseau ordered an investigation into a physical challenge that must define the truth; if the patient is
the means and rules of torture used in F ranee. For a summary of the guilty, the pains that it imposes are not unjust; but it is also a mark
findings, cf. Joly de Fleury, 322-8.) Torture was a strict judicial of exculpation if he is innocent. In the practice of torture, pain,
game. And, as such, it was linked to the old tests or trials - ordeals, confrontation and truth were bound together: they worked to
judicial duels, judgements of God - that were practised in accusatory gether on the patient's body. The search for truth through judicial
procedures long before the techniques of the Inquisition. Something torture was certainly a way of obtaining evidence, the most serious
of the joust survived, between the judge who ordered the judicial of all - the confession of the guilty person; but it was also the battle,
torture and the suspect who was tortured; the 'patient' - this is the and this victory of one adversary over the other, that 'produced'
term used to designate the victim - was subjected to a series of trials, truth according to a ritual. In torture employed to extract a con
graduated in severity, in which he succeeded if he 'held out', or fession, there was an element of the investigation; there also was an
failed if he confessed. (The first degree of torture was the sight of element of the duel.
the instruments. In the case of children or of persons over the age It is as if investigation and punishment had become mixed. And
of seventy, one did not go beyond this stage.) But the examining this is not the least paradoxical thing about it. Judicial torture was
magistrate did not employ corture without himself taking certain indeed defined as a way of complementing the demonstration when
risks (apart, that is, from the danger of causing the suspect's death); 'there are not sufficient penalties in the trial'. For it was included
he had a stake in the game, namely, the evidence that he had already among the penalties; it was a penalty so grave that, in the hierarchy
collected; for the rule was that if the accused 'held out' and did not of punishments, the ordinance of 176o placed it immediately after

Torcure The specracle of the scaffold
death. How can a penaliy be used as a means? one was later to ask. through the body continued, evidence having been confirmed and
How can one treat as a punishment what ought to be a method of sentence passed, in the actual carrying out of the penaliy; and the
demonstration? The reason is to be found in the way in which body of the condemned man was once again an essential element in
criminal justice, in the classical period, operated the production of the ceremonial of public punishment. It was the 1asl<o f the guUiy
truth. The different pieces of evidence did not constitute so many man to bear openly his condemnation and the truth of the crime
neutral elements, until such time as they could be gathered together that he had committed. His body, displayed, exhibited in procession,
into a single body of evidence that would bring the final certainty corm.red, served as the public support of a procedure that had
of guilt. Each piece of evidence aroused a particular degree of hitherto remained in the shade; in him, on him, the sentence had 10
abomination. Guilt did not begin when al\ the evidence was gathered be legible for all. This immediate, striking manifestation of the
together; piece by piece, it was constitut,ed by each of the elements truth in the public 1mplementatiori of penalties assumed, in the
that made it possible to recognize a guiliy person. Thus a semi eighteenth century, several aspects.
proof did not leave the suspect innocent until ,such time as it was J. It made the guilty man the herald of his own condemnation.
completed; it made him semi-guilty; slight evidence of a serious He :wasg iven the task, in a sense, of proclaiming it and thus attesting
crime marked someone as slightly criminal. In short, penal demon to the truth of what he had been charged with: the procession
stration did not obey a dualistic system: true or false; but a through the streets, the placard attached to his back, chest or head
principle 0£ continuous gradation; a degree reached in ,he demon as a reminder of the sentence; the halts at various crossroads, the
stration already formed a degree of guilt and consequcntlyinv.olved reading of the sentence, the amwde honorahlep erformed' at the doors
a degree of punishment. The suspect, as such, al,ways deserved a of churches, in•w hich the condemned man solemnly acknowledged
ce,rtainp unishment; one could not be th~ object of suspicion and be his crime: 'Barefoot, wearing a shirt, carrying a torch, kneeling, to
completely innocenr. Suspicion implied an element o~dernonstration say and 10 declare that wickedly, horribly, treacherously, he has
as regards the judge, the mark of a c~rtain degree of guilt as regards committed tht?m ost detestablec rime, etc.'; exliibition at a s1.ake
the suspe~t and a limited form of penalty as regards punishmenL A where his·decds a.nd the sentence were read out; yec another reading
suspect, who remained a suspect, was not for all thal declared inno of the ,;entence at the foot of the scaffold; whether he was to go
cent, but was partially punished. When one reached a ccriain degree simply 10 the pillory or 10 the stake and the wheel, the condemned
of presumption, one could then legirimarely bring inro play a man published his crime and the justice that had been meted out to
practice that had a dual role: to begin the punishmenr in pursuance him by bearing tliem physically on his body.
of ~he information already collected and to make use of this first 2. It took up once again tlie scene of the confessitm. Jr dupli
stage of fiunishmenr in order to extort the lruth that was still miss cated the forced proclamation of the amende honorabl, with a
ing. In the eighteenth century, judicial torture functioned in that spontaneous, public acknowledgement. It established the public
strange economy in which the ritual that produced the truth went execution as the moment of ,rruth. These last moments, when the
side by sidew ith 1her itualt hat imposedt he punishmentT he body guiltym ann o lo}lgehr asa nything 1 0 lose,a rcw on for the ful!l ight
interrogated in torture constituted ihe point of applicadon of the of truth. After the passing of the sentence, the court could decide
punishment and the locus of extortion of the truth. And just as on some new torture to obtain the names of possible accomplices.
presumption was in.separably an element in the investigation and' a h was also recognized that at the very moment he mounted the
fragment of guilt, ,he regulated pain involved in judicial torture scaffold the condemned man could ask for a respite in order to make
was a means both of punishment and of investigation. new revelations. The public expected this new cum in the course of
truth. Many made use of it in order to gain time, as did Michel
Now, curiously enough, this interlocking 9f the two rituals Barbier, found guiliy of armed assault: 'He stared impudently at the
43

Torture The spectacle of rhe scaffold
scaffqld and said that it had certainly nor·been set up for Jiim, since 'symbolic' torture in which rhe forms of the execution referred to
he was innocenr; he first asked 10 Ieturn 10 rhe chamber, where he rhe narUieo f the crime: the rongues of blasphemers were pierced, the
beat about the bush for half an hour, still trying 10 justify himself; Impure were burnt, the right hand of murderers was cut off; some
then, when he was sent back to execution, he ascended rhe scaffold times the condemned man was made to carry the instrument of his
with a purposeful air, bur, when he saw himself undressed and tied crime - thus Damiens was made to holi:li n his guilty right hand the
to rhe cross before being stretched, he asked to go back 10 the famous dagger with whicli he had committed tl1e crime, hand and
chamber a. second rime and there made a full confession of his dagger being smeared wirh sulphur and burnt together. As Vico
crimes and even declared that he was guilty of another murder' remarked, chis old jurisprudence was 1an entire. poetics'.
(Hardy, IV, 80). The function of the public torrure and execution There were even some cases of an almost theatrical .reproduction
was to reveal rhe truth; and in this respect it continued, in the public of the crime in the execution of the guilry man - with the same
eye, the work of the judicial torture conducted in private. It added instrumems:, the same gestures. Thus justice h;td the crime re-
16 the conviction-the signature of the convicted man. A successful enacted before the eyes of all, publishing it in its rruth and at the
public execution justified justice, in that it published the truth of the !l;lmet ime annulling it in the death of the guilty man. Even as.lare
crime in tl)e very body of the man to be executed.,A n example of the in rhe eighteenth century as 1772, one finds sentences like rhe follow
good condemned man was F ran~ois.Billiard, a senior postal official, ing: a servant girl at Cambrai, having killed her mistress, was con
who murdered his wjfe in 1771. The execution.er wanted to hide demned to be taken to the place of her execution in a carr 'used 10
his face to spare him the insults of the crowd: ' "This punishment, collect rubbish at the crossroads'; there a gibbet was 10 be set up
which I have merited, has not been ii:iAicted'Uponm e," he said, "so 'at the foot of which will be placed the·same chair in which tl1es aid
rhat I should not be seen by the public. .. " He was still wearing Laleu, her mistress, was sitting ac the time of the murder; and having
mourning dress in honour of his wife. .. He was wearing new seated the criminal there, the executioner of the High Court of
shoes, his hair had been recently curled and powdered, and he had a Justice will cut oft her righr hand, throw it in her presence inro the
countenance so modest and so dignified that those present who fire, and, immediately afterwards, will strike her four blows with
found themselves observing him more closely said that he musr be the cleaver wirh which she murdered the said Laleu, the first and
the most perfect Christian or rhe greatest of all hypocrites. The •~cond being on the head, che third on rhe left forearm and the
placard that he was wearing on his chest had go.ne askew, and ir was fourth on rhe chest; this done, she will be hung and $trangled on the
noticed that he had srraighrened it himself, no doubt so that people <aid gibber until she be dead; and when two hours have elapsed her
could read ir'the more easily' (Hardy, I, 327). lf each of die partici dead body will be removed and rhe head separated from it at die
pants played his role well, the penal ceremony had the effectiveness fo1lt of the said gibbet on the said scaffold, with the same cleaver
of a lpng public confession. she used 10 murder her mistress, and the same head exhibited
3. Jr pinned the public torture on to the crime itself; itesrablished on a pole twenty feet high outside the gates of the said Cambrai,
fromo ne to the other a serieso f decipherablere lacioos. le was an withinr eacho f rher oad thatl eadst o Douai,a nd the resto f the body
exhil:iition of the corpse of the condemned man at tl1e scene of his put in a sack, and buried near the said pole at a depth of ten feet'
crime, or at one of the near-by crossroads. The execution was.often (quored in Dautricourr, ~69""70). '
carried out at the very place where the crime had been commirred - 4. Lastly, the slowness of the process of torture and execution,
as in the case of the student who, in 1723, had killed several persons its sudden d~matic moments, the cries and sufferlngs of the con•
and for whom the presidia] court of Nantes decided 10 set up a demoed man -serve as an ultimate proof at the end of the judicial
scaffold in front of die inn where he .had committed his murders rirual. Every death agony expresses a certain truth: but, when it
(Nantes, F.F. u4;. cf. Pa!{~uru, XX:V). There was the use of mkes place on the scaffold, it does so with more intensity, in that it
44 4S

The spectacle of the scaffold
Toriure
is hastened by pain; with more rigour, because it occurs exactly at of religion and repentance that he gave'; the man 'l"hOJ iad shown
the juncture between the judgement 0£ men and the judgement.of tl)e most marked signs of contrition throughout rhe journey to the
God; with more ostentation, because it takes place in public. The scaffold, but who, when placed alive on the wheel, 'did not cease
sufferings of the condemned man are an extension of those of the 10 let forth the most fiqrrible cries'; or again the woman who 'had
judicial torture that precedes them; in the judicial torture,.however; preserved her calm up 10 the moment when ihe sentence was read,
but whose wits then began to tum; she was quite mad by the time
the game was not yet over and one could still save one's life~n ow
one will die, v.,ithout any doubt, arid it is one's soul that one must she was hange& (Hanly, I, 13; IV, 42; V, 134).
save. The eternal game has already begun: the torture of the execua We have come full circle: from the judicial torture ro ,he execu
tion anticipates ,he punishments of the beyond; it shows·what ,hey tion, the body has produced and reproduced the tru.th of the crime
are; ic is the theatre of hell; the cries of the condemned man,. his -or rather it constitutes the element which, through a whole set of
struggles, his blasphemies, already signify his irremediable destiny. rituals and trials, confesses that the crime took place, admits that the
accused did indeed commit it, shows that he bore it inscribed in
But the pain.s here below may also be counted as penitence and so
alleviate the punishments of the beyond: God will not fail to take himself and on himself, supports the operation of punishment and
such a martyrdomi nto account, providingi t is borne with·r esigna manifests its effects in the most striking ""'IY· The body, several
times tortured, provides the synthesis of the reality of the deeds and
tion. The cruelty of rhe earthly punishment will be deducted from
the• punishment to come: in it is glimpsed the promise of forgive the trqth of the investigation, of the documents of the case and the
ness. Bur, it might be said, are not such terrible sufferings a sign statements of the criminal, of the crime and the punishment Jt is an
that God has abandoned the guilty man to the mercy of his fellow essential element, therefore, in a penal liturgy., in which it must
creatures~ And, for from securing future absolution, do they not SCl'Vaes the partner of a procedure order~ around the formidable
prefigure imminent damnation; so that, if the condemned man dies rights of ihe sovereign, the prosecution and secrecy.
quickly, without a prolonged agony, is i1 not proof chat God wishes
to protect him and to prevenr him from falling inro despairi' There The public execution is to be unders,ood not only as a judicial,
is, therefore, an ambiguity in this suffering that may signify equally but also as a political ritual. It belongs, even in minor cases, 10 the
well the truth of the crime or the error of the judges, the goodness ceremonies by which power is manifested.
or the evil of.the criminal, the coincidence or the divergence betwe~n An offence, according to 1he law of the classical age, quite apart
the judgement of men and that of God. Hence the insatiable curiosity from the damage it may produce, apact even from the rule that it
that drove the spectators to the scaffold 10 witness the spectacle of breaks, offends the rec,itude of those who abide by the law: 'If one
sufferings truly endured; there one could decipher crime and inno commits somethi.r)g that the law forbids, even if there is neither harm
cence, the past and the future, the here below and the eternal. It was nor injury to rhe individual, itis an offence that demands reparation,
because the right of the superior man is violated and because it
a moment of truth chat all the spectators questioned: each-word, each
cry, the duration of the agony; the resisting body,·the life that clung nffends the dignity of his character' (Risi, 9). Besidc,si is immediate
desperately to it, all this constituted a sign. There was the man who victim, the crime anacks the sovereign: it attacks him personally,
survived 'six hours on the wheel, and did not want the executioner, •ince the law represents the will of the sovereign; ir attacks him
who consoled and heartened him no doubt as best he could, t0 leave physically.,s ince the force of the law is the force of the P,rince.
him for a moment'; there was the man who died 'with true Cltristiao 'for a law to be in force in this kingdom, it must necessarily have
feeling, and who manifested the most sincere repentance'; the man emanated directly from the sovereign, or at least been confirmed by
the seal of his authority' (Muyart de Vouglans, xxxiv). The inter
who·'expited on the wheel an hour after being put there; it is said
that the spectators of his torture were moved by the outward signs vention of the sovereign is not, therefore, an arbitration between
'
47

Tort1tre The spectacle of the s.:afl'old
two adversaries; it is much more, even, than an action co enforce as to bring into play, as irs extreme point, the dissymmetry between
respect for the rights of che individual; it is a direct reply ro the the subject who has dared to violate the la;w and the all-powerful
person who has offended him. There can be no doubt that 'the sovereign who displays_h is strength. Although redress of the private
exercise of the sovereign power in the punishment of.crime is one injury occasioned by the offencem ust be proportionate, although the
of the essential parts of the administration of justice' (Jousse, vii). sentence must be equitable, the punishment is carried our in such a
Punishment, therefore, cannoc be identified with or even measured way as 10 give a spectacle not oCm easure, but of imbalance and
by the redress of che injury; in punishment, there must always be a excess; in this liturgy of punishment, there must be an empharic
portion that belongs to the prince, and, even when it is combined affirmation of power and of its intrinsic superiority. And this superi
with the redress laid down, ic constiruces the most important element ority, is not simply that of rigl)t, but that of the physii:a] strength
in the penal liquidation of the crime. N'ow, this portion belonging of the sovereign bearing down upon the body of his adversary and
to the prince is not in itself simple: on the one hand, it requires mastering it: by breaking the law, the offendet has touched the very
redress for the injury 1hat bas been done to his kingdom (as an person of the prince; and it is the prince - or at least d1osc to whom
element of disorder and as an example given to others, this con he bas delegated his force - who seizes upon the body of the con•
siderable injury is out of all proportion to chat which has been demned man and displays it marked, beaten, broken. The ceremony
committed upon a private individual); but it also requires that the of punishmen1, ,hen, is an exercise of 'terror'. When the jurisrs of
king take revenge for an affront 10 his very person. the eighteenth century began their polemic with the reformers, they
The righr to punish, thetefore, is an aspect of the sovereign's offered a restrictive, 'modernist' interpretation of the physical
righ, to make war on his enemies: 10 punish belongs to '1ha1 cruelty of the penalties imposed by the law: if severe penalties are
absolute power of life and death which Roman law calls muum required, it is because their example must be deeply inscribed in the
imµrium, a right by virtue of which the prince sees that his law is hearts of men. Yet, in fact, what had lutherto maintained this
respected by ordering the punishmeni of crime' (Muyan de Vou practice of torrure was not an economy of example, in the sense in
glans, xxxiv). But punishment is also a way of exacting retribution which it was 10 be understood at.the time of the idlologtie~( that the
that is both personal and public, since the physico-political force representation of the penalty should be greater than the in1eresr of
of rhe sovereign is in a sense present in the law: 'One secs by the the crime), but a policy of terror: to make everyone aware,-through
very definition of the law that it tends not only to prohibit, but also the body, of the criminal, of the unrestrained presence of ,he sover
10 avenge contempt for its authority by the punishment of 1hose who eign. The public execution did not re-establish justice; it reactivated
violate its prohibitions' (Muyart de Vouglans, xxxiv). ln ihe execu power. In 1he sevemeenth century, and even in the early eighteenth
tion of rhe most ordinary penalty, in the mosrpunctilious respect of century, it was not, therefore, with all its theatre of terror, a linger
legal forms, reign the active· forces of revenge. ing hang-over from an earlier age. Its ruthlessness, i.rss pectacle, its
The public execution, then, has a juridico-political funciiqn. It is physical violence, i1s unbalanced play of forces, its rneticulous
a ceremonial by whicha momenrarilyin jured sovereigntyis recon cerell\onial, i1s entire apparatus were inscribed in the political
stitu1ed. It restores that sovereignty by manifesting it at its most functioning of the peJlal system.
spectacular. The public execution, however hasty and everyday, This enables us to understand some of tbe characieristics of the
belongs to a whole series of great rituals in which power is eclipsed liturgy of torture and execution - above all, the importance of a
and restored (coronation, entry of 1he king in10 a conquered city, ritual that ,was to deploy its pomp in public. Nothing was to be
the submission of rebellious subjects); over and above the crime hidden of this triumph of the law. Its episodes were traditionally the
that has placed the sovereign in contempt, it deploys before all eyes ,nme and yet the sentences never failed to list them, so important
an invincible force. Its aim is not so much to re-establish a balance were tltey in the penal mechanism: proccssioos, hairs ar crossroads
49

Torture The spectacle of the scaffold
and church doors, the public reading of the sentence, kneeling, pince at Avignon and which was one of the first 10 arouse the
declarations of repentance for the offence to God and 10 the king. Indignation of contemporaries. This was an apparently paradoxical
Sometimes questions 9f precedence and ceremonial were settled by ,eremony, since it took place almost entirely after death, and since
the cou.rt itSelf: 'The officers will ride acc()rding to the following lustice did little more than deploy its magnificent theatre, the ritual
order: namely, at the head two police sergeants; then the patient; 11niiseo f irs force, on a corpse. The condemned man was blind
after the patient, BonfortandLe Corre on his·Jeftwilhv:ilk together, rolded and tied to a stake; all around, on the scaffold, were stakes
followed by the clerk of the court and in this manner shall go to the with iron hooks. 1The confessor whispered in the patient's ear and,
market sq_uarea t which place th'e judgement shall be carried out' •f,er he had given him the blessing, the executioner, who had an
(quoted in Corre, 7). Now, this meticulous ceremonial was not only Iron bludgeon of the kind used in slaughte.r houses, delivered a blow
legal, but quire explicitly military. The justice of the king was with all his might on the temple of the wretch, who fell dead: the
shown 10 be an armed justice. The sword that punished the guilty mor,i, exaator, who bad a large .knife, then cut his throat, which
was also the sword that destroyed enemies. A whole milirary macliine ipattered him with blood; it was a horrible sight to see; he severed
surrounded the scaffold: ·cavalry of the watch, archers, guardsmen, rhe sinews near the two heels, and then •opened up the belly fr(!m
soldiers. This was intended, of course, 10 prevent any escape or which he drew tl1eh eart, liver, spleen and,lungs, which he stuck on
show of force; it was also to prevent any outburst of sympathy or "" iron hook, and cut and dissected into pieces, ,which he then stuck
anger on the part of the people; any attempt to save the condemned un the other hooks as he cut them, as one does with an animal.
or 10 have them immediately put to death; but it was also a reminder 1,ook who can at such a sight' (Bruneau, 259). In the explicit
that every crime constituted as it were a rebellion against the. law ,cCe.renceto tl1eb utcher's trade, the infinitesimal destruction of the
and tha,~he criminal was an enemy of the prince. All these reasons - hody is linked here with spectacle: each piece is placed on display.
W:hethera matter of precaution in partic.ularc ircumstances or a The execution was accompanied by a whole ceremonial of
functional element in the performance of the ritual - made the public triumph;b ul itnlso included, asa dramaticn uc]eus in its monotonous
execution more than an act of justice; it was a manifestation of progress, a scene of confrontation: this was the immediate, direct
force; ot rather, it was justice as the physical, material and awesome •ction·of the executioner on tl1eb ody of the 'patiem'. lt was a coded
force.o f the sovereign deployed there. The eere!l'ony of the public 1101iono,f : course,,since custom and, often qui1.ee xplicitly, the sen-
,orture and execution displayed for all ,o see ,he power relation 1cncep rescribed its principal episodes. Nevertheless, it did preserve
that gave his force to the Jaw. ,omething of the battle. The executioner not only implemented the
As a ritual of armed law, in which ,he prince showed himself, 1.iw,h e aJso deployed the force; he was the agent of a violence applied,
indissociably, both as head of justice and head of war, the public in order 10 master it, to the violence of the crime. Materially, physic•
execution had two aspects: one of victory, the other of struggle. oily,h e:was the adversary of this crime: an adve.rsaryw ho could show
11 brought to a solemn end a war, the outcome of which was pity or ruthlessness. Damhoudhe complained, with many of his
decidedi n advance,b etwef:nth e criminaal nd the sovereigni;t bad contemporarietsh,a t the ex~111ioneetxse rci$e'de veryc rueltyw ith
co manifest the disproportion of power of the sovereign ove, those regatdt n the evil-doing patients, ,rearing them; buffeting and killing
whom he had reduced 10 impotence. The dissymmetry, the irre• rhcm as if they had a beast in their hands' (Damhoudere, 219). And
versible imbalance of forces were an essential element in the public for a long time the habit did not die out.' There was still an element
execution. A body effaced, reduced to dus, and thrown to the winds, of challenge and of jousting in the ceremony of public execution.
a body destroyed piece by piece by the infinite power of the sover If the executioner rriumphed, if he managed to cut off the head with
eign constituted n<;>otn ly the ideal, bur the real limit of,punishment. ,, single blow, he 'showed it to the people, put it down on the ground
Take die celebrated torture and execution of _Massola,w hich took :ind then waved 10 the-public who greatly applauded Jiis skill by
50 51

Torture The spectacle of the scaffold
clapping'. (A scene observed by T. S. Gueulette, at the execution of lUrrounding this 'very necessary' yet 'unnatural' of!ice are w.ell
Montigny in t737 - cf. Anchel, 62-<J.)C onversely, if_he failed, if he known (Loyseau, 80-81). The executioner may havt been, in a
did not succeed in killing the 'patient' as required, he W11S liable ro •cnse, rhe king's sword, but he shared the infamy of his adversary.
punishment. This was the case ofDamiens's executioner-who, being '!'he sovereign power that enjoined him ro kill, and which through
unable to quarter his patient accord.ing to the rules, had to cut him him did kill, was not present in him; it was not identified with his
up with a knife; as a result, Damiens's hair, which had been prom rmn ruthlessness. And it never appeared with more spectacular
ised to him, was confiscated and the money obtained from the sale c/Tecrt han when it interrupted the executioner's gesrure with a lene.
given 10 ,he poor. Some years later, an executioner at Avignon llf pardon. The short. time that usually elapsed between sentence
caused excessive pain to three bandits, ,who were nevertheless 11nde xecution (often a few hours) meant that the pardon usually
formidable characters, whom he had ti) hang; the spectators became arrived at the very last moment.' But the ceremony, by the very
angry; they denounced him; in order 10 punish him and also to ,lowness of its progress, was no doubt arranged to leave room for
protect him from mob violence, he was put into prison {Duhamel, this evencualiry. (Cf. Hardy, 30 January t769, I, 125 and r4 Decem
25). And, behind this punishment of ,he unskilful executioner, ber 1779, IV, ».9; Anchel, 162-;i, tells the story of Antoine Boulle
stands a traditioo, whi,ch is still close to us, according to which the ccix, who was already at the foot of the scaffqld wheo a horseman
condemned man should be pardoned if the execution happened ,o urrived carrying ,he cel~rated parchment. Shouts of 'God save the
fail. It was a custom clearly established in cerrain countries: in King' arose and Boulleteix was taken to the tavern, while the c\erk
Burgundy, for instance (cf. Chassan~e, 15). The people of,en of the court made a collection on his behalf.) The condemned
expected it to be applied, and would ,sometimes protect a condemned always hoped for a pardon and, in order to drag things out, they
man who had escaped death in this way. In order ,o abolish both would pretend, even at the foot of the scaffold, that they had further
custom and expectation, they had to revive the adage, 'the gibbet revelations ro make. When the people wamed a pardon they called
does not lose its prey', to introduce explicit instructions in capital for it aloud and tried to 11ostponet he last moment, looking our for
sent~nces, such as 'hanged by the neck until he be dead'. And jurists 1he arrival of the messenger bearing the letter w,ith the green wax.
like Serpillon or Blackst6ne were insisting in the middle o( the seal-and if necessary claiming that he was on his way (ibis happened
eighteenth century t:hara failure on the part of the executioner did during the execution of those condemned for ,he uprising against
not mean that the condemned man's Ufew as spared (Serpillon, III, child abduction on 3 August 1750). The sovereign was present at
1100). ln his Comm,ntariu on ti,, Lal!', of England, Blackstone 1hee xecution not only as the power exacting the vengeance of the
remarks: 'It is clear, that if, upon judgement to be hanged by the law, but as the power that could suspend bo1h law and vengeance.
neck till he is dead, the criminal be not thoroughly killed, but He alone must remain master, he alone could wash away the offences
revives, the sheriff must hang him again. For the former hanging committed on his person; although it is rrue that he delegated to the
was no execution of the sentence; and if a false tenderness were 10 courts the rask of exercising his power to dispense justice, he had
1
be indulgedi n such cases,a multirudeo f collusionms ight onsue' not transferred ii; he ref!lined it injts entirety and he cou\d suspend
(Blackstone, 199). There was something of the ordeal and something the sentence or increase it at will.
of God's judgement that was still indecipherable in the ceremony of We must regard the public execution, as it was still ritualized in
execution. In bis confrontation with the condemned man, the execu 1:hee ighteenth century, as a political operation. It was logically
tioner was a li11lel ike the king's champion, Yet he was,an unaclcnow inscribed in a system of punishment, in which the sovereign, directly
ledgeable and u.nacknowledgcdc hampion: rhe tradition was, it seems, or indirectly, demanded, decided and carried out punishments, i,n
that when the executioner's letters were sealed, they were not placed so far as it was he who, through rhe law, had been injured by the
on the table, but thrown on the ground. The various prohibitions crime.I ne very offence,r herew as a uime,i 1~Jajesra1far nd in the least
n
12

Torture
The spectacle of the scaffold
criminal a potential regicide. And rhe regicide, in turn, was neither
in a sense biological, situation: the ravages of disease and hunger,
more nor less-, than rhe total, absolute c,riminal since, instead of
the periodic massacres of 1}1e epidemics, the fo~idable child mo~•
attacking, like any offender, a particular decision or wish of the
ralicyr ate, the precariousness of the bio-econom1c balances-all tlus
sovereign power, he atracked che very principle and physical person
made death familiar and gave rise ro rituals imended to integrate it,
of the prince. The ideal punishment of the regicide had to constitute '°
make it acceptable and ro give a meaning 10 its permanent
the summum_ of all possible tortures. Ir would be an expression of aggression. But in analysing :why the public executions survived for
infinite vengeance: French law, in any case, made provisions for no
so long, one must also refec to the historical conjuncrure; i~ ~use
fixed penalties for this sort of monstrosity. For the execution of
not be forgotten that the ordinance of 1670 that regulated cr1mmal
Ravaillao the form of the ceremony had to be invented, by combin
justice almost up to the Revolution had even increased in certain
ing all the cruellest tortures then practised in F ranee. For Damiens,
respects tl1er igour of the old edicts; Pussorr, who, among the com
an attempt was made to think up siill more atrocious tortures.
missioners entrusted with the task of drawing up the documents,
Suggestions were made, but they were considered co be less perfect.
represented the intentions of the king, was responsible for this,
So the form of Ravaillac's execution was repeated. And it must be
despiic the views of such magistrates as Lamoignon; the number of
admitted tl1a1i t was relatively modest if one thinks bow in 1584 the
uprisings ar the very height of the classical age, the, rumbling,close
assassin of William of Orange was abandoned to what seems like an
at hand of civil war, the king's desire to assert his power at the
infinity of vengeance. 'On the first day, he was taken to the square
expense of the parlements go a long way to expla.in the survival of
where he found a cauldron of boiling water, in which was submerged
so severe a penal system.
the arm with,which he had committed the crime. The next day the
l,n ac<:ountingfor a penal system involving so much t~nurc, these
arm wa$ cut off, and, since it fell at his feet-, he was constandy
a,e gene.ral and in a sense external reasons; tliey explain not only
kicking it up and down rhe scaffold; on tl1e third day, red-hot
the possibility and the long survival of physical punishments, but
pincers were applied 10 his breasts and the from of his aan; on the
also the weakness and the rather sporadic nature of the opposition
fourth day, the pincers were applied similarly on the back of his
to them. Against this general background we must bring out their
arm and on his buttocks; and thus, consecutively, chis man was
precise function. 1f torture was so strongly embedded in !~al
tortured for eighteen days.' On the las, day, he was put to rhe wheel
practice, ir was because ir revealed truth and showed rhe operation
and 'mailloce'[ beaten with a wooden club]. After six hours, he was
of power. It assured the articulation of the written on the oral, the
still asking for water, which was nor given him. 'Finally ,he police
secret on the public, the procedure of investigation on the operation
magistrate was begged to put an end to him by strangling, so that
of the confession; it made it possible t0 reproduce the crime on the
his soul should not despair and be lost• (Brantome, 11, r91-2).
'Visibleb ody of ,he criminal; in the same horror, the crime had to
be manifested and annulled. T, .also made ihe body of the condemned
There can be no doubt that the existence of public tortures and
man the place where the vengeance of the sovereign was applied,
executions were connected with something quite ,other than this
the a11chorinpgo int for a manifestationo f power,a n opportunity
internal organiz.ation. Rusche and Kirchheimer are right io see it as
oCa ffirming rhe dissymmetry of forces. W c shall see later that tl1c
the effect of a system of production in which· labour power, and
truth-power relation remains at the heart of aU mechanisms of
therefore ,he human body, has neither the utiliiy nor tl1ec ommercial
punishment and that it is Still t0 be found in contemporary penal
value that are conferred on them in an economy of an industrial practice- but in a'quite different form and with very diHerent effects.
type. Moreover, this 'contempt' for the body is certainly related to
The Enlightenment was soon to condemn public torture and C)(CCU·
a general auii.ude to death; and, in such an auitude, one can detect tion as an 'atrociiy' - a term that was often used to ·describe it, but
not only the v.ilues proper to Christianity, but a demographical, without any critical intention, by jurists themselves. Perhaps the
5S

Torture The spectacle of the scaffold
notion of 'atrocity' is one of those that best designates the economy that it inflicts. 'Let us hasten to proscribe such tortures. They were
of the public execution in the old penal practice. To begin with, worthy only of the crowned monsters who go'(erned the Romans'
atrocity is a characteristic of some of the great crimes: it refers to the (Pastoret, on the subject of the punis~ment of regicides,Il, 61). But,
number of natu.ral or pos.itive, divine or human laws that they according to the penal practice of the preceding period, the proxim
attack, to the scandalous openness or, on the contrary, to the secret ity in the pu!>lice xecution of the sovereign and the crime, the mix
cunning with which they have been committed, to the rank and mre that was produced in it of •demonstratibnJa nd punishment,
status of those who are,1rhei-ra uthors and victims, to 1he disorder were not the result of a barbarous confusion; what joined them
that they presuppose or bring with them, to the horror they together was the mechanism of a1rocity and its necessary concatena
arouse. Iri so far as it must bring the crime before everyone's eyes, tions. The atrocity of the expiation organized the ritual destruction
ii\ all its severity, the punishment must take responsibility for this of infamy by omnipotence.
atrocity: it must bring it to light by confessions, s.tatements, inscrip The fact that the crime and the punishmenl were related and
tions that make it ~ublic; it must reproduce· it in ceremonies that bound up in the form of atrocity was not the result of some ob
apply it to the body of the guilty person fo ,he form of humiliation scurely accepted law of retaliation. It was the effect, in the rites of
and pain. Atrocity is that part of the crime that th" punishment punishment, of a certain mechan.ismo f power: of a power that not
turns .back as torture in order to display it 'in the full ligh, of day; only did not hesitale to exert itself directly on bodies, bu, was
it is a figure inherent in the mechanism that produces the visible exalted and strengthened by its visible manifestations; of a power
truth of the crime at the very heart of the punishment itself: The that asserted itself as an armed power whose functions of maintain
public execution formed part of the procedure that established the ing order were not entirely unconnected with the functions of war;
reality of what one punished. Furthermore, the atrocity of a crime of a power that prO"sentedru les and obligations as personal bonds, a
was also the violence of the challenge flung at the sovereign; it was breach of which constituted an offence and called for vengeance;
that which v,ould move him to make a reply whose function was to of a power for which disobedience was an act of hostility, the first
go further than this atrocity, to maste.r it, to overcome it by an sign of rebellion, which is not in principle different from civil war;
excess that annulled it. The atrocity that haunted the public execu• of a power that had to demonstrate not why it enforCO"idt s laws,
tion played, therefore, a double role; it was the principle of the but who were its enemies, and what unleashing of force·rhreatened
communication between the crime and the punishment, it was also them; of a power which, in the absence of continual supervision,
the exacerbation of the_punishment lh relation to the ~rime. It pro sought a renewal of its elf<"Ctin,thes pectacle of its individual mani
vided the spectacle with both truth and power; it was· the culmina fes111tionso;f a power that was recharged in the ritual display of ils
tion of the ritual of the investigation and the ceremony in which the reality;a s 'super-power•.
sovereign triumphed. And it joined both together in the torrured
body. The punitive practice of the nineteenth century was to strive Of all the reasons why punishment that was not in the least
to put as muchd istancea s possibleb etweent he 'serene's earchf or ashamedo f being' atrociousw; asr eplac;cd by punishmentth at was
truth and the violence that cannot be entirely effaced from punish 10 claim the honour of being 'humane' there is one that must be
ment. It set out to mark the heterogeneity that separates tlle c·ime analysed at once, for it is internal to the public ex=uon itself: at
that is to be punished and the punishment imposed by the public once an element of its functioning and the principle of its perpetual
power. Between truth and punishment, there should no longer be di.sorder.
any other relation than one of legitimate consequence. The punish In the ceremonies of the public execution, the main character was
ing power should not soil its hands with a crime greater than the 1h e people, whose real and immediate presence was required for the
one it wished to punish. le should remafo innocent of the penalty performance. An execution that w~s known to be raking place, but
57

Torture The speciacle of the scaffold
which did so in secret, would scarcely have had any meaning. The offered to the insults, sometimes to the attacks of the spectators.
aim was to make an example, not only by making people aware that The vengeance of 1he people was called upon to become an un
the slightest offence was lil~ely ro be punished, but by arousing obtrusive part of the vengeance of the sovereign. Not that it was
feelings of terror by the spectacle of power letting its anger fall upon in any way fundamental, or that the kihg had to express in his own
the guilty person: 'ln criminal matters, the most difficult point is way the people's revenge; it was rather that the people ltad to bring
the imposition of the penalty: it is the aim and the end of the its assistance 10 the king when the king undertook 'to be avenged
procedure, and its only fruit, by example and terror, when it is well on his enemies', especially when those enemies were to be found
applied to. the guilty person' (Bruneau, unnumbered preface to the among the people. It was rath.er like a 'scafl'old service' that the
first part). people owed the king's vengeance. This 'service' had been specified
But, in this scene of terror, the role of the·people :wasa n ambigu in the old ordinances; the edict of 1347 concerning blasphemers
ous one. People were summoned as spectators: they were assembled stipulated that they would be exhibited at the pillory 'from the hour
to observe public exhibitions and arrwules l,o,,oral,/es;p illories, of prime, 10 that of their deaths. And mud and other refuse, though
gallows and scaffolds were erected ih public squares or by the road no stone or anything injurious, could be thrown at their faces. ..
side; sometimes the corpses of the executed persons were displayed The second time, in case of relapse, iris our will that he be put in the
for several days near the scenes of their crimes. Not only must pillory on a solemn marke, day, and tha, his upper lip be split so
people know, they must see w(th their own eyes. Because they must that the teeth appear.' No doubr, ar the classical period, this form
be made to be afraid; but also because they. must be the witnesses, of participation in the torture was no more than tolerated and
the guarantors, of the punishment, and because they must to a anempis :werem ade 10 limit it: because of the barbarities rhat it gave
certain extent take part in it. The righti to be witnes~ was one that rise to and the usurpation it involved of thep o:wer to punish. Bur it
they possessed and claimed; a hidden execution was a privileged belonged too closely to the general economy of tl1ep ublic execution
execution, and in such cases it was often suspected that it had not for it to be elimina1ed alt0gether. Even in the ·eighteenth century,
taken place with all its customary severity. There were protests rherc were scenes like the one that accompanied the execution of
when at the last moment the victim was taken away our of sight. Montigny in f737; as the executioner was carrying out the execu
The senior postal official who had been pu1 on public exhibition tion, the local fish-wives walked in procession, holding aloft an
for killing !;usw ife was later taken away from the crowd. 'He was ·effigyo f the condemned man, and then cut of!' its head (Anchel, 63).
put into a hired coach; it was thought that if he had not been well And very ofr~n, as they moved slowly in prooession through ir;,
escorted, it would have been difficul~ 10 protect him from being criminals had to be 'protected' from the crowd - both as an example
ill-treated by rhe populace, who yelled and jeered at him' (Hardy, I, and a,s a iarget, a possible threat and a 'prey', promised but also
328). When the woman Lescombat was hanged, care was taken to forbidden. In calling on the crowd ro manifest its power, the
hide her face; she had 'a kerchief over her neck and head, which sovereign 10lera1edf or a moment acts of violence, which he accepted
made th.e public murmur and say that it was not Lescombat' asa sign of allegiance, but whichw eres trictly limited by the sover•
(Anchcl, 70-71). The people claimed the ri&ht to observe rhe execu eign's own privileges.
tion and 10 see who was being executed. The first time the,guillotine Now it was on tl1is point that the people, drawn to 1.hes pectacle
was used 1he C!,roniqued e Pari$ reported that people complained intended to terrorize it, could express its rejection of the punitive
that they could not see anytl1ing and chanted, 'Give us back our power. and sometimes revolt. Preventing an execution that was
gallows' (Lawrence, 71 fl'). The people also had a tight to tal<ep arr. regarded as unjusr;, snatching a condemned man from the hands of
The condemned man, carried in procession, exhibited, humiliated, the executioner, obtaining his pardon by force, possibly pursuing
with the horror of bis crime recalled in innumerable ways, -was and assaulting the-executioners, in any case abusing the judges and
59

Tor-rure The spectacle of the scaffold
causing an uproar against the· sentence - all this formed part of the d' Argis, 128-9). In these exeeutlons, which oughr to show only the
popular practices that invested, traversed and often overrurned the terrorizing power of the prince, there was a whole aspect of the
ritual of the public execution. This often happened, of course, in the carnival, in which rules were inverted, authority mocked and
case of those condemned for rioting: there were the disturbances criminals transformed into heroes. The shame was tUmed round;
that followed a famous case of child abduction, when the crowd the courage, li~e the tears and the cries ·of tlte. condemned, caused
wanted 10 prevent the execution of threesupposed rioters, who were offence only ro the law. Fielding nores with .regret; 'To unite the
to be hanged at the cemetery o( Saint-Jean, 'because there were ideas of death and shame is not so easy 35" may be imagined ... I
fewer entrances and processions to guard';' the terrified executioner will appeal to any man who hath seen an execution, or a procession
cut do'l\'n one of the condemned men; the archers ler Oy iheir arrows. to an execution; let him 1ell me. When he hath beheld a poor
It occurred again after the corn riots of 1775; and again in 1786, wretch, bound in a cart, just on the verge of eternity, all pale and
when the day-labourers marched on Versailles and ser about freeing trembling with his approaching fate, whether the idea of shame
their arrested comrades, But apart from lhese cases, when the pro hath ever intruded on his mind? much less will the bold daring
cess of agitation had been triggered oil' previously and for reasons rogue, who glories in his present condition, inspire the beholder
that did not concern some measure of penal justice, one finds many with any such sensation' (Fielding, 450). For the people who are
examples when the agitation was provoked directly by a verdict lhere and observe, the.re is always, even in the most extreme--ven..
and an execution: small, but innumerable 'disturbances around the geance of the sovereign a pretext for revenge.
scaffold'. Tbis was especially the case if the. conviction was regarded as
In their mdst elementary forms, these disturbances began wirh the unjust - or if bne saw a man of the people pur to death, for a crime
shouts of encouragement, sometimes the cheering, .thata ccompanied that would have merited, for someone better born or richer, a com
the condemned man to his execution. Throughout rhe long proces paratively light penalty. It would seem that certain practices of penal
sion, he was sustained by •the compassion of the meek and tender. . justice were no longer supported in the eighteenth century - and
hearted, ·and with the applause, admiration and envy of all the bold perhaps for longer - by che lower strata of the population. This
and hardened' (Fielding, 449). .If the crowd gathered round the would explain why execurions could easily lead to the beginnings
scaffold, it was not simply·to witness the sufferings of the condemned of social disturbances. Since the pooreSt - it was a magistrace who
man or to e.~cite the anger· of the executioner: it was also to hear an made the observation (Dupaty, c78G,2 47) -could not be heard in
individual who had nothing more 10 lose curse the judges, the laws, che courts of law, it was where the law was manifested publicly,
the government and religion. The public execution allowed the where they were called upon to ace as ·witnesses and almost as co
luxury of these mo,mentary sarurnalia, when nothing remained to adjucors of this ]aw, tlm they could intervene, physically: enter by
prohibit or 10 punish. Under the protection of imminent death, the force imo the punitive mt'Chanism and redistribute its effects; iake
criminal could say everything and the crowd cheered. 'If there were up in another sense the violence of the punitive riruals. There was
annals in which the ·last words of the tortured ancl executed were agjtationa gainstt hed ifferencein penaltil!Sa ccordingt o socialc lass:.
scrupulously recorded, and if one had the courage to read through in , 78,, the parish priest of Champ re! had been )(illedb y the lord
them, even if one did no more than question the vile populace that of rhe manor, and an attempt was made 10 declare the murderer
gathers around the-scaffoldso ut of crud curiosity, one would be told insane; 'the peasants, who were extremely attached to tlleir pastor,
that no one who had diecl on the wheel did nor accuse heaven for the were furious and had at first seemed ready to lay violent hands upon
misery that brought him to the crime, reproach his judges for tl1eit their lord and co ser fire to the castle. .. Evecyone protested, and
barbarity, curse the minister of the ali,irs who accompanies them rightly, against the indulgence of the minister who deprived justice
and blaspheme against the God whose organ he is' (Boucher of the means of punishing so abominable a crime' (Hardy, IV, 394).
6o 61

Tonure The spectacle of the scaffold
There was agitation, 100, against the excessive sentences passed on ensure order around the scaffolds, to take steps that were 'distressing
ec.rtainc ommon offences that were nor regardeda s serious (such as to the people' and 'humiliating for the authorities' (Argenson, 141)?
house-breaking); or against punishments for certain offences con It was evident iliat the great spectacle of punishment ran the risk
nected wi,h social conditions such-as petty larceny; ,he death penalty of being rejected by the very people ro whom it was addressed. In
for this crime aroused a great deal of discontent, bec;mse there were fact, the terror of ilie public execution created centres of illegality:
many domestic servants in 'a single household and it was difficult pn execution days, work stopped, rhe taverns were ful~ the authori
for tJ1e11in1 ,s uch a case, to prove their i,nnocence,a nd also because ties were abused,i nsultso r stones were throwna t the executioner,
they could easily be victims of their employers' spite and b«ause the guards and the ·soldiers; attempts were made to sei1.et he con
the indulgence of certain masters who shut their eyes to such demned man, either c.os ave him or 10 kill him more surely; fights
behaviour made the fare of servants accused, condemned and hanged broke our, and there was no better prey for thieves than the curious
even more iniquitous. The execution of such servants often gave throng around the sea/fold. (Hardy recounts a number of cases like
rise to protests (cf. Hardy, I, 319,367; ill, 227-8; IV, 180). There the important theft that was committed in the very house in which
was a small riot.in Paris in 1761 in favour of a servant woman who the police inagistrate was lodging- IV, f6,) But above all- and this
had stolen a piece of cloth from her master. Despite ihe fact that the was why il1esed isadvantages became a political danger - the people
woman admitted her guilt, handed b•cli the material-and begged for never felt closer to rbose who paid the penalty than in those riruals
mercy, the master refused to withdraw his complaint; 011 the day intended to st)ow the horror of the crirne and the invincibility of
of the execution, the )ocal people prevented the banging, invaded the power; never did the people feel more threatened, like them, by a
merchant's shop and looted it; in the end, the servant was pardoned, legal violence exercised,without moderation or restrainL The solid
but a woman, who arcempted,,unsuccessfully, to stick a needle into ariry of a whole section of the population with those we would call
the wicked master, was banished for three years (Anchel, 116). petty offenders - vagrn_nts,f alse beggars, the indigent poor, pick
One remembers the great legal affairs-of the eighteenth ccnrury, pockets, receivers and dealers in srolen goods - was cons1anrly
when enlightened opinion intervened in the persons of the philoso cxpressed: resistance to police searches, the pursuit of informers.,
phu •nd certain magistrates: Calas, Sirven and the Chevalier de La atracks on the Vyatcho r inspectors provide abundant evidence of
Barre, fot instance. Bu, less atrenti,on is given to the popular agita this (cf. Richet, 118-19). And it was the breaking up of this solidar
tions caused by ,punitive practice. Indeed, they seldom spread be ity that was becoming the aim of penal and police repression. Yer
yond a town, or even a district. Yer they did have a real imporrance. out o,f the ceremony of the public execution, out of that unccnain
Sometimes these movements, which originated from below, spread festival in which violence was ins12n1aneously. reversible, it was this
and attracted ,he auention of more highly placed persons who, solidarity much more than the sovereign power that was likely to
taking them up, gave chem a new dimension (in the years preceding emerge with redoubled strength. The reformers of the eighteenth
the Revolution, the·affair of Catherine Espinas, falsely convicted of nnd nineteenth centuries were not to forget that, in the last resort,
parricidein 1785,o r the caseo f the threem eno f·C ha4montc; on the executionds id not, in fact; frightent he people.O ne of their
demned 10 the wheel, for whom Dupary, in 1786, wrote his cele first cries was to demand their abolition.
brate<! memoir, or ,hat of Marie Fran~oise Salmon, whom the To clarify the polirical _problemp osed by the intervention of the
padement of Rouen in 1781 had condemned to the stake, for poison people in the spectacle of the executions, ·,one need only cite two
ing, but who in 1786 had still not been executed). More usually, events. The first rook place at Avignon ar the end of the seventeenth
those disturbances had maintained around penal justice anc( its century. It contained all the principal elements of the theatre of
manifesratio11Sw, hich ought 10 have been exemplary, a state of horror: the physical confrontation berween the executioner and the
permanent unrest. How often had it proved necessary, in order to condemned man, the reversal of the duel, the executioner pursued

Torrure The spectacle of the scaffold
by the people, the condemned man saved by the ensuing riot and place in the nineteenth century - cf. Lawrence, s6 and 19s-8).
the violent inversion of the penal machinery. A murderer by the The oilier event took place in Paris, a cenrury later. Ii was in r775,
name of Pierre du Fort was to be hanged; several times he 'had shonly af1er the com .riot. Because of the srate of extreme 1ension
caught his feet in the steps' and ~ad not been able to S\Vingf reely. among the people, the authorities wan1ed the execution to rake
'Seeing 1his, 1he executioner had pulled his jerkin up over his face plaee wi1hout in1erruption. Berween the scaffold and the public,
and struck him below i:he knees, on i:he stomach and on the belly. kepi ai a safe.d isiance, rwo ranks of soldiers stood on guard, one
When the people saw that 1he executioner was causing him too facing tl,e execution 1hat was a bout 10 take place, i:heo ther facing
much pain, and even believing tha1 he was killing him down there the people in case of riot. Con1act was broken: it was a public
with a bayone1 ... moved by compassion for the patien1 and fury ~ecution, but one in which the element of speciacle was oeUlralized,
at 1he executioner, they threw st0nes a, ihe sca!Told just as the or rather reduced to abstract intimidation. Protecied by force of
execu1ioner knocked away the two ladders and threw 1he patieni arms, on an.empty square, jus1ice quietly did i1s work. If it showed
do.wn and leaped on 10h is shoulders and kicked him, while the wife the death iha1 i1 had dealt, it was from high and far: 'The two
of the said execu1ioner ·pulled ai his feet from under 1he gallows. gallo.ws, which were eighteen feet high, no doubt by way of an
In doing so, 1hey made blood come from his mouth. Bu, 1he hail example, were not set up until three o'clock in 1he afternoon. From
of stones came 1hicke, - one stone even struck the han·ged man on LWO o'clqck, the Place de Greve and all the surrounding stree1s had
the head -which forced the executioner to dash 10 the ladder, which been filled wi1h detachments of different troops, some on foot, some
he descended so rapidly 1ha1 half 0 way down he fell from i1, and on horse; th.e Swiss and the French guards continued to patrol i:he
struck his head on the ground. Then a crowd of people fell upon adjaeen1-streets. No one was allo1Vedo n to the Greve during the
him. Fie go, to his feet, bayoner in hand, 1hreatening 10 kill anyone execution, and all around one could see a double row of soldiers,
who came near him; after falling several 1imes, he finally got 10 his bayonets at the ready, sianding back to back, so 1hat some looked
feet, only to be beaten by the crowd, rolled in the mud and nearly outwards and some imo the square; the two wreiches ... cried ou1
drowned in the scream, rhen dragged by rhe exciied and enraged all the way mat they were innocent and continued to pro1est in like
crowd 10 the University and 10 the Cordeliers Ceme1ery. His manner as 1hey moun1ed the ladder' (Hardy,JII, 67). Wha1ever the
servant was also beaten and, with bruises on his head and body, ~1as part played by feelings of humanity for ihe condemned in the
raken 10 the hospital where he died some days later. However, some abandonment of the liturgy of 1he public executions, there was, in
strangers and unknown people mounted lhe ladder and cut 1he rope any case, on the pari of ,he m11ep ower., a political fear of the effects
while others caught 1he hanged man from below after he had been of lhese ambi_guousr ituals.
hanging 1here longer than i1 100k 10 say a full Miserere. The crowd
1hen smashed the gallows and broke 1he·execu1ioner's ladder into Such an equivocal at1i1ude appeared clearly in what might be
pieces. .. Children carried off the gallows and 1hrew it into 1he called ihe 'gallows speeches'. The rile of execution was so arranged
Rhone.'T he condemnemd anw ast bent akent o a cemetety 'so that that lfle cot\dei!'\neclm an would himself proclaim his guilt by the
he should nor be recaptured by the law and from there 10 the church amend, A9nomble that he spoke, by ,he placar,d that he displayed
of Sainie-Amoine'. The archbishop gave him his pardon, had him and also by 1hf/,s tatemenrs diat he was no doubt forced to make.
taken to 1he hospital and asked 1hai parricular•cire be taken of him. Furthermore, at the moment of i:hee xecution, ii seems that he was
Lastly, adds ,he writer of 1hea ccounr, 'we had a new suit, two pairs given anod1er opportuni1y to speak, not to proclaim his innocence,
of s1ockings and shoes made for him. We dressed him in new but to acknowledge his crime and ,he jus1ice of his convic1ion. The
clothes from head 10 toe. Our colleagues gave him shins, breeches chronicles rela1e a good many speeches of this kind. Were 1hey
and a wig' (Duhamel, i-6; scenes of this kind were still 1aking acrually delivered? In a number of cases, ccr1ainly. Or were they

Torture The spectacle of the scaffold
fictional speeches thar were later circulated by way of example and But the ell'ecr, like the use, 0£ this literature was equivocal. The
exhortation? This, no doubt, was more often the case. . What credit condemned man found himself transformed into a hero by the sheer
are we to accord, for example, to the account of the death of Marion extent of his widely advertised crimes, and sometimes tbe affirmation
Le Goff, who had been_a famous bandit leader in Brittany in rhe of h~ belated repentance. Against the law, again~t tbe rich, the
mid-eighreenth century? 'She is supposed 10 have cried out from rhe 1'0Wcrfu1the magistrates, the constabulary or the watch, against
1
scaffold: 'Fathers and mothers 'l'fho hear me now, watch over your raxes and their collectors, he appeared ro have waged a struggle
children and teach them well; in my childhood I was a liar and good -with which one all 100 easily identified. The.proclamation of these
for-nothing; I began by s,ealing a small six-liard knife ... Then I crimes blew up to epic proportions rhe tiny struggle that passed
robbed pedlars and cattle dealers; linally, I led a robber band and unperceived in everyday life. Tf the condemned man was shown to
that is why I am here. Tell all this 10 your children and let it i>ea n be repenran11a cc~pting the verdict, asking both God and man for
example to rhem' (Corre, 117). Such a speech is 100 close, even in its forgiveness for his crimes,Jt was as if he bad come through some
turn of phrase, to the morality traditionally to be found in the process of purification:. he died, in his own way, like a saint. But
broadsheets and pamphlets for it nor 10 be apocryphal. But the indomirabiliry wasa n alternative claim to greatness: by not giving
existence of the 'lasr words of a condemned man' genre is in itself in under torture, he gave proof of .i strength that no power had
significant. The law required 1hi11ir s victim should authenticate in succeeded in bending: 'On che day of tbe execution - rhis will seem
some sense the tortures rhat he had undergone. The criminal was scarcely'c redible - I showed no trace of emotion as I performed my
1
asked to consecrate his own punishment by proclaiming the black amend,h onorabl,,a nd when l finally lay down on the cross I showed
ness of his crimes; he was made to say, as was Jean-Dominique no fear' (the Complainteo f J.-D. Langlade; executell at Avignon
Langlade, three times a murderer:' Listen to my horrible, infamous 11 April 1768). Black hero or Ieconciled criminal, defender of ,he
and lamentable deed, committed in the city of Avignon, where rhe true right or an indomitable force, rhe c,iminal of the broadsheets,
memory of me is execrable, for having inhumanly violated the pamphlets, almanacs and ·adventure stories brought wirh him, be
sacred rites of friendship' (Duhamel, 31). In one sense, tl1e broad neath the apparent morality of (he example not to be followed, a
sheer and the death song were the sequel ro the trial; or rather they whole memory of struggles and confrontations. A convicted criminal
pursued that mechanism by which the public execution transferred could become after his death a sort of saint, his memory honoured
the secret, written truth of the procedure to the body, gesnire and and his grave respected. (fhis was the case ofTanguy, executed in
speech of the criminal. Justice required chese apocrypha i.no rder to Brittany about 1740. Before being convicted, it is ,rue, he had begun
be grounded in rruth. Its decisions were thus surrounded by all a long penitence ordered by his confessor. Was this a conflict
these posthumous 'proofs'. Sometimes, 100, accounts of crimes and between civil justice and religious penitence? Cf. Corre, 21.) The
infamous lives were published, simply as propag,inda, before any criminal has been almost entirely transformed into a positive hero.
trial had taken place, in order to force rhe hand of a court that was There were those for whom glory and abomination were not dis
suspected of bei~g too tolmnt. In order ro discredit smugglers, rhe SMiated, but CQexisredi n a reversible 'figure. Perhaps we shoul~ ~
Compagnie des Fermes published 'bulletins' recounting rheir this literature of crime, which proliferated around a few exemplary
crimes: in 1768, it distributed broadsheecs against a certain Mon figures,• neither as a spontaneous form of 'popular expression', nor
tagne, the leader of a gang, of whom the writer himself says: 'Some as a concerted programme of propaganda and moralization from
thefts have been ascribed 10 him the truth of which is somewhat aboye; i~ was a locus in which rwo inves,menrs of penal practice
uncertain ... ; Montagne has been depicted as a wild 'beast, a second met - a sort of battleground around the crime, its punishment and
hyena 10 be hunted down; given che hotheads of the Auvergne, this its memory. If these accounts were allowed to· be printed and circu
idea has caught on' (cf, Juillard, 24). lated, it was because they were expected to have the ell'ccc of an
66

Torture The spectacle of the scaffold
ideological control - the printing and the distribution of these becomes the exclusive privilege of those who are really great. The
almanacs, broadsheets, ere. was in,p rinciple subject to strict cont.roL great murders are not for the pedlars of petty crime. While, from
But if these true stories of everyday history were received so avidly, Gaboriau onwards, the literature of crime follows this first shift: by
if they formed part of the basic reading of the lower classes, it was his cunning, his tricks, his sharp-wittedness, the criminal represented
because people found in them not only memories, but also prece in this literature has made himself impervious to suspicio/l; and the
denrs; the interesr of 'curiosity' is also a political interest. Thus tl1ese struggle between two pure minds - the murderer and the detective -
te,crs may be read as two-sided discourses, in !he facts !hat they will constitute the essential form of ,he confrontation. We arc far
relate, in the elfecrs they give to these facrs and in the glory they removed indeed from ihose accounts of the life and misdeeds of the
confer on those 'illustrious' criminals, and no doubt in the very criminal in which lie admirted his crimes, and which recounted in
words they use (one should study the use of such categories as detail the torrures of his execu1ion: we have moved ,from the
ci:nisforrune'o r 'abomination' or such epithets as 'famous' or exposition of the facrs or the confession to, the slow process of
'lamentable' in accounts such as Tke History of tlie Life, Great discovery; from the execution to the investigation; from the phy•
Robberies and Tricks of Guilleri and his Companionsa nd of thtir sical confrontation to the inteUecruals truggle between criminal and
Lamtntablt and Unhappy End.• investigator. lt was not only ,he broadsheers that disappeared with
Perhaps we should ,compare !his literature with the 'disturbances 1he birth of a literature of crime; the glory of the rustic malefactor
around the scaffold' in which, through rhe tortured body of the ood his sombre transformation i1110a hero by the process of toriure
ariminal, the power that condemned confronted the pe'ople that was and execution went with them. The man of the people was now
the witness, !he participant, the possible and indirect victim of this toQ.simple to be the protagonist of subtle tru1hs. In this new genre,
execution. In rhe wake of a ceremony that inadequately channelled Lherw:ee re no more popularh eroes or greate xecutions;t he criminal
the power relations it sought to ritualize, a whole mass of discourses was wicked, of course, but be was also imelligenc; and ahhough he
appeared pursuing rhe same confrontation; 1he p.osthumous pro was punished, he did not have to suffer. The lite.ramre of crime
clamation of the crimes justified justice, but also glorified the cri 1ransposest o another social class 1he spectacle chat had surrounded
minal. That was why the reformers of the penal system were soon tl1e cdminal. Meanwhile the newspapers took over 1he cask of
demanding suppression of these broadsheers.' That was why the recounting the grey, unheroic details 'of everyday crime and punish
people showed so lively an interest in what served more or less as ment. The split was complete; the people was robbed of its old
the minor, everyday epic of illegalities. TI1at was why the broad pride in i1sc rimes; the great murders had become the quiet game of
sheets lost their importance as the :political function of popular the well behaved.
illegality altered.
And !hey disappeared as a whole new literamre of crime deve
loped: a literamre jn whi.ch crime is glorified, because it is one of rhe
6ne arts, because it .:an be the work only of exceptional natures,
because it reveals the monstrousness of the strong and powerful,
because villainy is ye, another mode of privilege: from the adventure
Story to de Quincey, c;,rf rom tl1e Cast!, ofOtranto to Baudelaire,
there is a whole aesthetic rewriting of crime, which is also the
appropriation of criminality fo acceptable forms. In appearance, it is
the disc,;,very of the beauty and greatness of crime; in fact, it is the
affirmation that greatness too has a right to crime and that it even
68

PART TWO
Punishment

•
Generalized punishment
1.
'Let penalties be regulated and proportioned to the offences, let the
death sentence be passed only on ihose convicted of murder, and
let the tortures that revolt humanity be abolished.' Thus, in 1789,
the chancellery summed up the general position of the pethions
addressed to the authorities concerning tortures and executions (cf.
Seli~man, and Desjardin, 13-20). Protests against the public execu
dons proliferated in the second half of the eighreench cenrury: among
1he philosophers and theoreticians of the law; among lawyers and
parltmtnraires;i n popular petitions and among the legislators of the
:lssemblies. Another form of punishment was needed: the physical
confrontation between the sovereign and the condemned man must
end; this hand-to-hand fight between the vengeance of the prince and
the contained anger of the people, through the mediation of the victim
"nd the executione,, muse be concluded. Very soon the public execu
tion became intoler,ble. On the side of power, where it betrayed
tyranny, excess, the thirst for revenge, and 'the cruel pleasure taken
in punishing' (Petion de Villeneuve, 641), it was revolting. On the
side of ,he victim who, though reduced to despair, was still expected
10 bless 'heaven and its judges who appeared to have abandoned
him' (Boucher d'Argis, 1781',l l)), it was shameful. It was, in any
cr.>.sed, angerous, in that it provided a support for a confrontation
hecv,,eernh e violenceo f the king and rhe violenceo f the people.I t
was as if the sovereign power did not see, in this emulation of
utrociiy, a challenge that it itself threw down and which might one
day be taken up: accusromed as it was to 'seeing blood Aow', the
people soon learnt ,hat 'it could be revenged only with blood'
{Lachhe). In these ceremonies, which were the object of so much
,,dversei nvestment,o ne sees chei ntersect-ioonf chee xcesso f armed
Justice and the anger of the threatened people. Joseph de Maistre
73

Punishmem Generalized punishment
was to recognize in this relation one·of the fundamental mechanisms today whenever che problem of an economy of punishment is posed.
of absolute power: d1e executioner acts as a cog between the prince T1 is as if the eighteemh century had opened up the crisis of this
and the people; the deadt he deals is like that of the serfs who built economy and, in order 10 resolve it, proposed the fundamental law
St Petersburg over swamp and pestilence: it is a princip)e of uni that punishment must have ;humanity' as its 'me3$ure', without any
versality; of the individual will of the despot, ir makes a law for all, definitive meaning lleing given to this principle, which nevertheless
and of each of those destroyed bodies, a stone for the State; it hardly is regarded as insuperable. We muse, therefore, recount ,he birth
matters that innocents, 100, are srruck down! In this same dangerous nnd early days of this ,enigmatic 'leniency'.
and ritual violence, the eighteemh ..c enrury reformers denounced, on
the contrary, that which exceeded, on both sides, the legitimate Homage is paid to the 'gr:eat teformers' - Beccaria, Servan,
exercise of power: in this violence, according to them, tyranny Dupaty, Lacretelle, Duport, Pastoret, Target, Bergasse, the com•
confronts rebellion; each calls forth the other. It is a double danger. pilers o( the Cahiers,o r petitions, and the Constituent Assembly -
Instead of taking revenge, criminal justice should simply punish. for having imposed this leniency on a .legal machinery and on
This need for punishment without torture was first ·formulated 'classical' cheoreticians who, at the end of the eighreenth century,
as a cry from tlie heart or from ,m outraged nature. In the,worst of were still rejecting it with well-formulated arguments. (Cf., in par
murderers, there is one thing, at leasr, to be respectedw hen one licular, Muyarr de Vouglans's polemic against Beccaria - t,1uyart,
punishes: his 'humanity'. The day was to come, in the .nineteench 1766.)
century, wlien chis·'man', discovered in the criminal, would become Yet this reform must b.es ituated in a process that historians have
the target of penal intervention, d1eo bject that ic claimed to correct recently uncovered through the study .of legal archives: tl.e relaxa
and transform, the domain of a whole series of 'criminolOgical' tion 6f penality in the eighreenth century or, to be more·precise,
sciences and Strange 'penitentiary' practices. au,, at the time of the the double movement by which, during this period, crimes seemed
Enlighrenment, it was nol as a theme of positive. knowledge that to lose their violence, while punishments, reciprocally, lose·s ome of
man was opposed to che barbarity of the pu!ilic executions, but as a their intensity, but at the cost of greater intervention. Fron, the end
legal limit: the legitimate frontiec of the power to punish. Not ,hat of the sevenreenth century, in fact, one observes a cpnsiderable
~1hicb must. be reached in order to alter him
1
bur that which must diminution in murders and, generally speaking, in physical acts of
be left intact in order 10 respcct·him. Noli me tangere.I , marks the aggression; offences against property seem to take over from crimes
end of the sovereign's vengeance. The 'man' that the reformers set of violence; thefr and swindling, from murder and assauh; the
up against the despotism of rhe scaffold has also become a 'man diffuse, occasional, but frequent delinquency of the poorest classes
measure': not' of things, but of power. was superseded by a limiced, but 'skilled' delinquency; the criminals
There is, therefore, a problem here: how was this-man-measure of the seventeenth cenmry were 'harassed men, ill-fed, quick ro act,
opposed 10 the traditional practice of punishment? How did he quick to anger, seasonal criminals'; chose of the eighteenth, 'crafty,
becomet heg reatn ,oralj usrificaiioonf the reformm ovememWr hy eunnings,l y,c alculatingc'r iminalosn thef ringeso fs ociety( Ghaunu,
this universal horror of rorrure and such lyrical insistence rhat 196>, >36 and 1966, 107-8). Lastly, the imernal organizacions of
punishmenc be 'humane'? Or, which amounts to che same thing, delinquency ahered; the great gangs of malefactors (looters working
how are the two elements, whiclt are everywhere present in demands in.small, armed units, groups ofsmuggltrs.liring on the agents of the
,for a more lenient penal system, 'measure'a nd 'humanity', to be tax authorities, disbanded soldiers or deserters who roamed the
articulated upon one another, in a single scraregy? These elernenrs countryside togetfter) rended to break up; tracked down more
are so necessary and yet so uncertain that it is they, as disturbing as efficiently and forced to work in smaller groups - ofcen no more
ever and still associated in the same dubious relation, that one finds than half-a-dozen men - in order to pass undecected, the)' contented
74 7l

Punishment Generalized punishment
themselves with more furtive operations, wlth a more modest doily lay waste the subsistence of the cultivators. They are, quite
deployment of forces. and less risk of bloodshed: 'The physical literally, enemy troops spreading over ,he surface of the territory,
destruction or institutional dislocation of large gangs ... left the living as they wish, as in a conquered country, exacting levies under
field free for an anti-property form of delinquency practised by the name of alms.' They cost the poorest peasants more than taXes:
individuals or very small groups e>fr obbers and pickpockets, seldom the richer peasants had ro pay anything up to a third of their
more than four in number' (Le Roy-Ladurie). A general mbvement incomes (Le Trosne, 1764, 4). Most observers maintained that crime
shifted criminality from the attack •of bodies 10 the more or Jess was increasing - ,hey included, of course, those who advocated
dlrect seliure of goods; and from a 'mass criminality' to a 'marginal s<ernet measures; tbey also included those who thought that a law
criminality', partly the preserve of professionals. Tt was as if there that was more restrained in its use of violence ivould be more
had been a gradual lowering of level - 'a clefusion of the tensions effective, less liable to retreat before its own consequences (cf., for
that dominate human relarions, . , . a bet.ter control of. violent example, Dupaty, 147); and they included the magistrates who
impulses'' - and as jf the illegal practices had themselve.ss lackened claimed ·to be swamped by the number of trials, 'the misery of the
their hold on the body and 'turned 10 other targets. Crime ·became people and the corruption of morals have increased the number of
less violent long before punishment became less severe. But this crimes and convicted criminals' ( one of the judges of tl,e Chambre
transformation cannot be separated from several underlying pro de la Toumelle in an address to the king, 2 August ,768, quoted
cesses. The first of rhese, as P. Cbaunu observes, was a change in in Farge,6 6); in aay case, thatc rimew as on the increasew as shown
the operation of economic pressures, a general rise in "the standard by fhe real practice of the courts, 'The revolutionary and imperial
of living, a large demographic expansion, an increase in we~lth and erac ould already be sensed in the last years of the Ancien Regime.
property and 'a.consequent need for security' (Chaunu, 1971, 56). One is struck, in the trials of 1782-9, by the increase in tension.
Furthermore, throughout the eighteenth century, one can observe a There is a new severity towards the poor, a concerted rejection of
certain increased severity in ,he law: in England, out of the 223 evidence, a rise in mutual mistrust, hatred and fear' (Chaunu, r 966,
capita_!c rimes in force ar the beginning of the nineteenth century, ,08).
J 56 had been introduced during the preceding hundred years In facr, rhe shifr from a criminality of blood to a criminality of
(Buxton, XXXIX);i n France, the legislation on vagabondage had fraud forms part of a whole complex mechanism, embracing the·
been revisedi n the directiono f great.ers everityo n severalo ccasions de,,,elopment of production, the increase of wealth, a higher juridical
since the seventeenthc entury;a tighter. morem_ eticulousi mplemen and moral value placed on property relations, stricter methods of
tation of rhe law tended to take account of a mass of minor offences surveillance, a tighter partitioning of the populaiion, more efficient
that it once allowed to escape more easily: 'in the eighteenth century, 1echniqueso f locating and obtaining information: the shift in illegal
the law became slower, heavier, harder on theft, whose relative practicesi s correlativew ith an extensiona nd a refinemento f puni
frequency had increased,. and rowards which it now assumed tl1e tive practices.
bourgeois appearances 01 a class justice';8 th~ gr6wtl1 in France Was this a general change of attitude, a 'change that belongs to
above all, and-especiallyi n Paris, of a police apparatus 1hat prevented the domain of the spirit and the subconscious' (the. expression is
the development of organized, open criminality, shifted it towards Mogensen's)? Perhaps, bur more certainly and more immediate!)
more discreet forms; to this set of precautions, one should add the it was an effort to adjust the mechanisms of power ,hat frame tht
very widespread belie~ in a consrnnr and dangerous rise in crime. everyday lives of individuals; an adaptation and a refinement of th<
Whereas the historians of today observe a diminution In the great machinery that assumes responsibility for and places under surveil
gangs of malefactors, Le Trosne saw them roaming the French lance their everyday behaviour, their identity, their activity, their
countryside like swarms of locusts: 'It is these voracious insects who apparently unimportant gestures; another policy for 1hatm ultiplicity
77

Punishmem Generalized punishment
of bodies and forces thatconstitutes a population. What was emerg• 1heb ai)ifts' courts and above all with the piesidial courts, which had
ing no doubt was not so much a new respect for the humanity of recenily been created as intermediary instances); thQS!w' hich, dejure
the condemned - torture was still frequent in the execution of even or defatto, were administered by governmental authorities (such as
minor criminals - as a tendency towards a more finely tuned justice, the ,1ruendants, or provincial administrators) or police authorities
towards a closer penal mapping of the social body. Following a (such •~ dte provosts and police magistrates); to these should also
circular process, the dtreshold of the passage to violent crimes rises, be added the right possessed by the king or his representatives to
intolerance ro economic 'offences increases;,c ontr6ls become more rake decisions on inrernment or exile quite outside any regular
thorough, penal inte~entions at once more p,emature and more procedure. By rheir very plethora these innumerable authorities
numerous. cancelled each other out and were incapable of covering the social
If one compa!"'5 this process with the critical discourse of the body in its entirety. Paradoxically, their overlapping left ~nal
reformers, a remarkable strategic coincidence emerges. What they justice with innumerable loopholes. This incompleteness was a result
were attacking in traditional justice, before they set out the prin of differences of custom and procedu.re, despite the Ordonnanq,
ciples of a new penality, was cercainly the excessive nature of,the 0enerale of 1670; of internal conflicts of responsibility; of priv;ue
punishments; but an excess that was bound up with an irregularity interests - political or economic- which each authority found itself
even more than with an abuse of the power 10 punish. On 24 March defending; and, lastly, of the inter.ventions of the royal power, which
1790, Thouret opened the debate in the Constituent Assembly on could prevent, by means of pardons, commuted sentences, the evo
the new organization of the judicial power. In his view, this power CBtiono f a case before the royal council or direct pressure exerted
had become 'denatured' in France in three ways. By private appro on magistrates, the regular, austere course of justice.
priation: the ollit<!so f judge we.re sold; they were hereditary; they The criticism of the reformers was di~ected not so much a, the
had a commercial value and, for that reason, the justice that was weakness or cruelty of those in au.c.\iority,a s at a b~d economy of
handed out was onerou,s. By a confusion between two types of power. There was too much power in the lower jurisdictions, which
power: that which dispenses justice and formulates a sentence by could - aided by rhe ignorance and poverty of those convicted -
applying the law and that which creates the law itself. Lastly, by the Ignore appeal procedure and carry our arbitrary sentences without
existence,of a whole series of privileges that made the implement•• •dequate supervision; there was 100 much power on the side of die
tion of the .lawi ncons~stem:t here were couns, procedures.,l itigants, prosecution, which pQSsesseda lmost unlimited means of pursuing
even offences that were 'privileged' and fell outside common law i,s investigations, while the accused opposed it virtually unarmed -
(Archives parl,memairu, XIl, 344). This was only one of the many ,his led judges, 10 be sometimes over-severe and sometimes, by way
criticisms that had be<!nl evied at the legal system for the past fifty of reaction, too lenient; there was 100 much power in the hands of
years. at least, all of which denounefd in this denaturation the the judges who were able 10 content themselves with futile evidence,
principle of an irregular justice. Penal justice was irregular first of providing it was 'legal' evidence, and who were allowed 100 great
all by virtut of th6 multiplicity o( courts responsible for assuring it, u freedom in che choice of Jl(!nalty;t here, was too much power in
without ever forming a single and continuous pyramid (cf. Linguer the hands of the 'gms du roi', or royal magisrrates, in relation to the
or Boucher d'Argis, 1789). Quile apart from the ecclesiastical juris •ccused, but also in relation 10 other magistrates; lastly, there was
dictions, we must take imo account the discontinuities, overlappings 100 much power ~xerciscd by the king, who could suspend courts
and conflicts between the different legal systems: those of the of just.ice,a lter rhtir dedsions, re.move ~agisrrares from office, or
nobility, which still played ari important role in judging petty C1(ilet hem, and replace them by judges acting under royal com
offences; those of the king, which were themselves numerous and inission. The paralysis of justice was due not so much to a weakening
badly coordinated (the sovereign courts were often in conflict with ..s 10 a badly regulated distribution of power, to its concentration
79

Punishment Generalized punishment
at a certain number of points and to the conflicts and discontinuities economic cost (that is,to say, by dissociating it from the system of
that resulted. property, of buying and selling, of con:uption in ob1aining not only
This. dysfunction of power was related to a central excess; what offices, but die decisions themselve~) and its political'cost (by dis
might be called the monarchical 'super-power', which identified die sociating it from the arbitrariness of monarchical power). The new
right 10 punish with the personal power of the §overeign. This juridical theory of penali1y corresponds in fact to a new 'political
theoretical identification made the king the,f o,11j us1i1ia<b;u t the economy' of die power to punish. This explains wl)y the 'reform'
practical consequences of rhis were m be found even in that which did not have a single origin. k was not the more enlightened mem
appeared to-oppose him and to limit his absolutism. It was bec.1use bers of the public, nor the R!tilosophesw, ho regarded themselves as
ihe king, in order to raise money, had appropria1ed ,he righ1 10 sell enemies of despotism and friends of mankind; it was not even the
legal offices, which 'belonged' 10 l\im, tha1 he was confromed by social groups opposed to lhe parlem,nrairesw ho fostiga1ed the
magistrates who owned their offices and who were not only in tract• reform. Or rather j1 was not they alone; in this same overall project
able, but ignor•nt, self-interested and frequently compromised. It of a new·dislTibution of the power to punish, and of a new distribu
was because he was constan1ly creating new ollicl!'Sth at he multiplied tion ofits effects, many different interests came together. The reform
die conflicts of power and authority. It was because he exercised 100 was not prepared outside the legal ·machinery and against all its
close a power over his 'guts' and conferred on them almost dis• reprl!'Sentarivesi;t was prepared, for !he most part, from within, by
crerionary powers that he intensified ,he conAicis wi1hin the magis a large number of magistrates and on the basis of shared objectives
trature. It was because he had brought 1he law into conAict wi1h 100 and tl)e power conflicts that divided them. Certainly the· reformers
many summary acts of justice (the jurisdictions of lhe provosts·or die!n ot form a majority ·of the magistrates; but it was a body of
police magistrates) or with administralive measures, that he· para lawyers who outlined its general principles: a power 10 judge that
lysed normal j1.osticer,e ndered it sometimes lenient and inconsistent, would no, be affected by the immediate exercise of the prince's
but sometimes over•hasty and severe.3 sovereignty; diat would be relieved of any claim to legislate; that
lt was not so much, or not only, the privileges of justice, its would be demched fro!l) property relations; and which, having no
arbitrariness, its archaic arrogance, its uncontrolled rights that were othe,r functions but to judge, would exercise dm power to the full.
cr.iticized;b ur rather the mixture of its weaknesses and excesses, its In short, the power to judge should no longer depend on the
exaggerations and its loopholes, and above all the very principle of innumerable, discontinuous, sometimes contradictory privileges of
this mixture, rhe 'super-power' of the. monarch. The 111Jeo bjective sovereignty, but on the continuously distributed effecis of public
of the reform movement, even in its most general formulations, was power. This general principle defined an overall strategy that
not so much to establish a new righ, to punish based on more oovered many different struggles. Those of philosophers like
equitable principles, as to ser up a new 'economy' of the power 10 Voltaire and of publicists like Brissot or Marat; bur also those of
punish, to assure its bener distribution, so that it sh()uld be neiiher magistrates Whose interests were nevertheless very diverse: Le
Trosnea, judgea totbep residiac!o urto f Orleansa, ndL a.recelleth, e
\00 concent,.ited at cert~in privileged poing, nor too dividtd I;;;.
tween opposing authorities; so that it should be distributed in advocate-general at the parlemem; Target, who with ,he parlements
J.
homogeneous circuits capable of operat1ng everywhere, in a con was opposed to Maupeou's reform; but also N. Moreau, who
tinuous way, down to the finest grain of ,he social body.• The su~porteil the royal power against the parl,m,ntair,s; Servan and
reform of criminal law must be read as a Strategy for the rcarr.1nge Dupaty,, both magistrates, but in conflict with their'colle,agul!'Se, tc.
men1 of the power 10 punish, according to modalities that render Throughout the eigh1eeri1hc entury, inside and outside the legal
it more regular, more effective, more constant and more detailed in nppararus, in both ev.eryday penal practice and the criticism of
its effects; in short, which increase its effects while diminishing its institutions, one sees the emergence of a new strategy for the
80 81

Punishment Generalized punishment
exerciseo f the power 10 punish.A nd ireform',i i, the stricts ense, as nttempts 10 reduce certain privileges dismrbed the nobility, the
it was formulated in the theories of Jaw or as ir was oudined in rhc olergy and the bourgeoisie.
various projects, was the political or philosophical resumption of l'his necessary illegality, of which every social stratum bore
chi~s tracegy, with irs primary objectives: to make of the punishment within itself specific forms, was caught up in a series of paradoxes.
and repression of illegalities a regular function ' coextensive with [n its lower. regions, it was identified with criminality, from which
soci' ety; not to punish less, but to punish better; to punish with an it was difficult to distinguish it juridically, if not morally: from fiscal
attenuated severity perhaps, but in order co punish with more illegality co customs illegalitJ, 10 smuggling, to looting, m the
~niversality_a nd necessity; to insert· the power ro punish more deeply armed struggle against the government's taxation agents, then
mto the social body. against the soldiers themselves and, finally, 10 rebellion, there was
a continuity, in which it was difficult 10 mark the frontiers; or, again,
The con'iu ncture that saw the birth of reform is not
'
therefore
,
vagabondage (severely punished according to the te.rms of·ordin
that of a new sensibility, but that of another policy with regard to ances that were never implemented) with the pillage, aggravated
illegalities. theft, even murder chat went with it, provided a welcome environ
Roughly speaking, one might say that, under the Ancien Regime ment 10 the unemployed, to workers who had left their employers
e_acho f the differe~t s?cial strata had its margin of tolerated illega in irregular circumstances, to domestic servanrs who had some
hcy: the non-applicatton of ,he rule', the non-observance of the reason to flee their mascers, to ill-treated apprentices, to deserting
innume.rable edicts or ordinances were a condicion of rbe political soldiers, to all those who wished 10 escape the press-ga.ng. So
and economic funccioning of society. This feature may not have cri01inalirymerged into a wide, illegality, to which the lower strata
been peculiar 10 the Ancien Regime. But illegality was so deeply were attached as 10 conditions of existence; and, conversely, this
rooced and so necessary to the life of each social stramm, that it had illegality was a ~rpetual factor in the increase of crime. Hence an
in a sense jts own coherencea nd economy. Some1imesit 10ok on an ambiguity in popular auirudes: on the one hand, che criminal -
absolutely statutory form. - as with the privileges accorded certain especially :when he happened to be a smuggler or a peasant w.J\oh ad
individuals and groups - which made it not so much an illegality fled from the exactions of a master - benefited from a spontaneous
as a regular exemption. Sometimes it rook the form of a massive w;ive of sympathy: his acrs of violence were seen as descending
general non-observance, which meant that for decades, sometimes directly from old struggles. On the other hand, a man who, under
for cenmries, ordinances could be published and constantly renewed cover of an illegality accepted by the population, committed crimes
without ever being implemented. Sometimes it was a matter of laws at the expense of this population, the.vagrant beggar, for example,
gradu~lly falli~g into abeyance, then suddenly being reactivated; who robbed and murdered, easily became the object of a special hate:
sometimes of silent consent on the part of the authorities, neglect, or he haq redirected upon the least favoured illegality that was integral
quite simply the actual impossibility of imposing the law and appre to their conditions of existence. Thus there greiv up around crimes
hendingo ffendersT. he l~ast-fovouresdtr ata of the populationd id a n~tworko f glorificationan d blameJe ffectiveh,e lp and fear alter
not have, in principle, any privileges: but they bcnefiiecl,w ithin the nated with regard 10 this shifting population, which one knew was
margins of what was imposed on them by law and custom, from a ve,:y near, but from which one felt that crime could emerge.
space of tolerance, gained by force or obstinacy; and this space was Popular illegality enveloped a whole nucleu~ of criminality that was
for them so indispensable a condition of cxiS1encet hat they were both its extreme form and irs internal danger.
often ready 10 rise up 10 defend it; the attempts that were made Between th.is illegality of the depths and those of the other social
periodically 10 reduce it, by reviving old laws or by improving the casres, there was neither an exact convergence nor a profound opposi•
methods of apprehending, provoked popular disturbances, just as ti,;m. Generally speaking, the different illegalities proper to each

Punishment Genera.lized punishment
group maintained relations with one another that involved not only the illegality of rights, it found it difficult 10 support illegality when
rivalry, compe1ition and conllicts of interest, but also mutual help it was a question of jts own property rights. Nothing could be more
and complicity: ihe peasants' refusal 10 pay certain state or eccle typical of this than the problem of peasant delinquency at the end
siastical rents was not necessarily disapproved of by ,he landowners; of the eighteenth cel>tury and especially after the Revolution
the non-application by artisans of manufacturing regulations was (Berce, 161). The transition co an intensive agriculture exercised,
often encouraged by the new entrepreneurs; smuggling - the s,ory over the rights to use common laods,_o ver various tolerated prac
of Mandrin, welcomed by the enti(e population, received in ca.sties tices, over small accepted illegalifies, a more and mpre restrictive
and protected by par/un,mairu proves tl\is - was very widely pressure. Furthermore, as it was acquired in part by the bourgeoisie,
supported. At most, one had seen in the seventeenth century the now free of the feudal burdens that once weighed upon ic, landed
different fiscal refusals coalesce in serious revolts among widely properiy heca.me absolute -property: all the toler,ited 'rights' that
separated social strata. In short, the reciprocal interplay of illegali the peasantry had acquired or preserved (the abandonment of old
ties formed part of the polifical and economic life of society. Or ob)igations or the consolidation of irregular practi~es: the right of
ra,her, a number of transformations (the abeyance into which freep asture, wood-collecting, e,c.) were now rejected by the new
Colbert's regulations had fallen, for example, the non-observance owners who regarded them quite simply as theft (thus leading,
of customs barriers within the kingdom, the breakdown of guild •mong the people, to a series of chain reactions of an increasingly
practices) had operated in the breach that was being widened every Illegal, or, if one prefers dte term, criminal kind: breaches of close,
=
day by popular illegality; the bourgeoisie had needed these the theft or killing of cattle, fires, assaults, murders ( cf. Festy
formations; and economic growth was due, in patt, to them. and Agulhon). The illegality of rights, which often meant
Tolerance cben became encouragement. 1he survival of 1he most deprived, ,ended, with tlie new slaws of
In the second half of the eighteenth century, the process tended to property, ro become an illegality of property. It then had co be
be reversed. First, with the general increase in wealth, bur a\sowith punished.
the sudden demographic expansion, the principal targer of popu.lar And this illegality, while resented by the bourgeoisie where the
illegality tended ro be not so much righ,s, -as goods: pilfering ownership of land was concerned, was intolerable in commercial and
and theft ten.ded 10 replace smuggling and the armed struggle Industrial ownership: tl1ed evelopment of the porrs, the appearance
against the tax agents. And, in_d 1is respec,, che peasants, farmers of great warenouses in whi.ch merchandise was stored, the organiza-
and artisans were ofren its principal vic.tims. . Le Ti-osne was oo 1ioo of huge workshops (wi,h considerable quantities of raw
doubt exaggerating a real tendency when he described the peasants' materials, tools and manufactured articles, which ,belonged to the
suffering under die exactions of vagabonds, even more than they entrepreneurs and which were difficult co supen,ise) also necessitated
had suffered under feudal demands: thieves now attacked them like ~ severe repression of illegality. The way in which wealth iended to
a cloud of maleficent insects, devouring crops and depleting the be invested, on a much larger scale than ever before, in commodities
granaries (Le Trosne,1 764, 4). Ir might be said that gradually in nnd m~chines presupposed a syswmatic, armed intolerance of
the eighteenth century a crisis of popular illegality had occurred; illegality. The phenomenon was obviously very evident where
and neither the movements at the beginning of the· Revolution ctonomic development was most intense. Colquhoun set out to
(around the refusal of seigniorial riglits), nor those later movements, give proof, supported by figures, 1>ft he urgent need to check the
in which 1he so-uggle against property rights, political and religious lnnumei.ole illegal practices that had grown up: according to 1he
protests and the refusal of conscription came rogether, recombined cSfimates of the entrepreneurs and insutance companies, the theft
illegality in its old, welcoming form. F urihermore, although a large nf produce imported from America and warehoused along the banks
pan of the bourgeoisie had accepted, without too much trouble, 11f rhe Thames ,had risen, on average, to £250,000 per annum; in

Punishment Generalized punishment
all, approximately £500,000 worth of goods was stolen each year colerated form, or in• violent form, to the illegality of rights were
in ,he Pon of London itself (and thjs did not include the arsenals reduced by force 10 an illegality of property. In that movement
and warehouses outside the port proper); 10 this should be added which transforrned a society ofjuridico-poli.tical levies into a society
£700,000 for the town itself. In this situation of permanent pilfering, ~f the appropriation of the means and products of labour, theft
three phenomena, says Colquhoun, should be taken lnto considera cended to become the first of the great loopholes in legali1y. Or, to
tion: first, the complicity and often the active pacticipation of the pur it another way, the economy of illegalities was restrucrured
clerks, overseers, foremen and workers: 'Whenever a large number with the development of.capitalis.ts ociety. The illegality of property
of workers are gathered t0ge1her in one place, there are bound to be was separate.d from the illegality of rights. This distinction repre
a lot of bad chara.ctersa mong them'; second, the existence of a whole sents a class opposition because, on the one hand, the illegality
organization of illicit commerce, which began in the workshops or chat was to be most accessible to the lower classes was chat of
property - che violent transfer of ownership - and because, on the
docks., then passed on 10 the rec~ivcrs - wholesale receivers,
specializing in certain kinds of commodity, and retail receivers Qther, the bourgeoisie was co reserve to itself the illegality of rights:
whose stalls offered a 'wretched display of old iron, rags and worn che possibility of getting roµnd its own regulacions and its own laws,
of ensuring for itself an immense sector of economic circulation by
clothes, whereas at the hack of the shop were hidden naval munitions
of great value, copper bolts and nails, pieces of cast iron and precious
11s kilful manipulation of gaps in cite law - gaps that wer~ foreseen
metals, produce from the West Indies, furniture and all kinds-of by its silences, or opened up by de facco tolerance. And this great
goods bought from the labourers' - then on to dealers and pedlars redisrribution of illegalities was even co be expressed 1hrough a
who distributed the stolen goods far into the countryside (Colqu specialization of the legal circuits: for illegalities of property - for
houn, 1797; in chapters Vll,·VIIl and. XV, he gives a very detailed cheft - chere were the ordinary couns and punishments; for the
account of this process); third, counterfeiting (it seems that there Illegalities of rights - fraud, tax evasion, irregular commercial
were between forty and fifty mints producing counterfeit money operations - special legal -institutions applied with transactions,
throughout England, in permanent operation). But what facilitated accommodations, reduced fines, etc. The bourgeoisie reserved to
the work of this huge undertaking, involving both depredation and ,rself the fruitful domain of the illegality of righcs. And at the same
competition, was a whole set of lO!erances:s ome amounted almost cime as chis split was raking place, there emerged the need for
to acquired right (the right, for example, to collect bits of iron or • constant policing concerned essentially with this illegality of
rope around ships or to resell the sugar sweepings); others were of property.Jr became necessary to get rid of the old economy of che
the narure of a moral acceptance; the pilferers themselves regarded power to punish, based on the principles of the confused and in
their wo.rk as a kind of smuggling, which 'they did not regard as a .1dti:quatme ultiplicity of authQr'ities,t he distribucion and concemra
tton of che power correlative with actual inertia and inevitable
serious offence'.
1olcranccp, unishmentst hat were speoracularin their manifestations
lt proved necessary, therefore, to control chese illicit pract.ices
andi ntroducen ewl egislatiotno covert hem.T heo ffencehs adt o be ,tnd h,i!ph~i;irdi n their application. ~t became necessary to, de~ne a
1trmegy and techniques of punishment in which an economy of
properly defined and more surely punished; out of this mass of
<(>ntinuitya nd permanence would replace that of expenditure and
irregularities, sometimes tolerated and sometimes punished with a
excess. In short, penal reform was born at rite point of junction
severity out of all proportion to the offence, one had to determine
between the struggle against the supet•power of the sovereign and
what was an intolerable offence, and the offenders had to be appre
that against che infr••power of acquired and tolerated illegalities.
hended and punished. With ,he new forms of capital accumulation,
And if penal reform was anything more than the temporary result
new relations of production and the new legal status of property,
all the popular practices that belonged, either in a silent, everyday, uf -up urely circumstantiale ncounrer, it was because, between this
8G

Punishment Generalized punishment
super-po~er an'd this infra-powe,r, a whole network of relations of die public execmion should have assumed such importance in
was being formed. By placing on rhe side of the sovereign the penal reform; for it was the form in which, in the most visible way,
additional burden of a spectacular, unlimited, personal, irregular ,he unlimited powet of the sovereign and the ever-active illegality
and discontinuous power, \he form of monarchical sovereignry left of the people came together. Humanity in the sentences was the
the subjects free ro practise a constant illegalicy; this illegality was rule given 10 a system of punishment that must fix their limits on
like the correlative of this type of power. So much so that in attack both. The 'man' that must be respected in the sentence was the
ing the various prerogatives· orches overeign one was also attacking juridical and moral form given to this double delimitation.
the functioning of the illegalities. The two objeciives were in con But, ·although it is true that reform, as a penal theory and as a
tiouiLy. And, according to particular circumstances or tactics, the strategy of the power to punish, rook shape at the point of coinci
reformers laid more stress on one or the other. Le Trosne, the dence of these two objectives, its stability in the future was due to
physioorat who was a judge at the presidia) court of Orl~ans, may the fact that, for a long tim~, priority-was given to the second. It was
serve as an example. In 1764, he published a memorandum on vaga beqiuse the pressure on popular illegalities had become, at the period
bondage: that hot-bed of thieves and murderers 'who live in the of the Revolution, then under rhe Empire, and finally throughout
midsrnf society without being members ofit", who wage 'a veritable the nineteenth century, an essential imperative, ·chat reform was able
war on all Citizens', and who are in che mi~sr of us 'in that state chat to pass from the project stage to that of an institution and set of
one supposes existed before the establishment of civil society'. practices. That is to say, although the new criminal legislation
Against them, he demanded the most severe penalties (character appears to be characterized by less severe penalties, a clearer codi
istically, he expressed surprise lhat one should be more indulgent fication, a marked diminution of the arbitrary, a more generally
rowards them than 10 smugglers); he wanted the police to he rein accepted consensus concerning the power to punish (in the absence
forced, the mounted constabulary to hunt them down with the help ofa more real division in jcs exercise), it is sustained in reality by an
of the population rhatsuffered from their depredations; he demanded upheaval in die 1raditional economy of illegalities and a rigorous
that these·useless and dangerous. people should be 'acqui,ed by the application of force to maintain their new adjustment. A penal sys
state and that they should belong to it as slaves to their masters'; tem muse be conceived as a mecha_nism intended 10 administer
and if necesS;1ryo ne should organize collective round-ups in the illeg.lities differentially, not to eliminate them all.
woods to drive them out, and anyone making a capture should be
paid: 'A reward of ten pounds is given for anyone who kills a wolf. Shift the object and change the scale. Define new tactics in order
A vagabond is infinitely more dangerous for society' (Le Trosne, 10 reach a target that is now more subtle buta.lso more widely spread
1764, 8, 50, 54 1 61-2). In 1777.i n Vuess ur la justicec riminelleth, e in the social body. Find. new techniques for adjusting punishment 10
same Le T rosne demanded that tl1e prerogativc-s of ,he Crown be it and for adapting its effects. Lay down new principles for regulariz
reduced, that the accused be regarded as innocent until proved ing, refining, universalizing the arr of punishing. Homogenize its
guilty, that the judge be a just ar)literb e1Weetnh em and society, 11pplica1iRone,d ucei ts economica nd politicacl ost by incre;1sinitgs
,hat laws be 'fixed, constant, determined ln rhe mosc precise way', effectiveness and by multiplying its circuits. In short, constitute a
so that subjects know 'to what they are exposed' and that magis new economy and a new reclmology of Lhe power to punish: these
trates be nothing more than the 'organ of the law' (Le Trosne, 1777, are no doubt the essential raisons d'itrt of penal reform in the
31, 37, 103-6). For Le Trosne, as for so many others at that time, •igbteenth century.
the struggle for the delimitation of the power 10 punish was articu At the level of principles, this new strategy falls easily inro the
lated directly on the need to subject popular illeg•liry 10 a stricter ));tneral theory of tlfe contract. The citizen is presumed to have
and more const~nt control. It is understandable that the criticism .,ccepteclo nce and for all, -with the laws of society, the very law by
88

.Punishment Generalized punishment
which he may be punishe<j.T hus the criminal appears as a juridically 87). Or again: 'The laws summon me to the greatest punishment
paradoxical being. He has broken the pace, be is therefore the enemy of crimes. I go with all the fury that it has inspired in me. But
of society as a whole, but he participates in the punishme111th at is what is this? They even go beyond it. .. God, who has imprinted
practised upon him. The least crime attacks the, whole of society; in our hearts an aversion to pain for ourselves and for our fellow
and the whole of society - including the cciminal- is present in ,he men, are they then those same beings, whom thou haSt created so
least punishment. Penal punishment is therefore a generalized weak and so sensible, who have invented such barbarous, such
function, coextensive wjth the function of the social body and wirh refined tortures?' (Lacrerelle, 129). The principle of moderation in
each of its elements. This gives rise to the problem of the degree of punishment, even when it is a question of punishing the enemy of
punishment, the economy of the power to punish. rhe social body, is articulated first as a dJscourse of the b.earc.O r
In effect the offence opposes an individual to the entire social raiher, it leaps for\h like a cry from the body, which is-revolted at
body; in order to punish him, society has the right 10 oppose him the sight or at the imagination of 100 much cruelty. The formulation
in its entirety. It is an unequa.ls truggle, on one side are all tbeforces, of ,he principle that penality muse remain 'humane' is expressed by
all cbe power, all ,he rights. And chis is how it should be, since the the reformers in the first person. 11 is as if the sensibility of the
defence of each individual is involved. Thus a formidable right to speaker were being expressed directly; as if the body of the philoso
punish is established, since the offender becomes the common pher or theoretician had come, between executioner and victim, to
enemy. Indeed, he is worse ,han an enemy, for it is from within affirm his own law and to impose it finally on the entire economy
society that he deliv.ers·bis blows - he is nothing less than a traitor, of punishment. Does this lyricism express an foability to find a
a 'monster'. How could society not ha.ve an absbluce eight ov,er him? rational foundation for a penal arithmetic? Between the contractual
Ho-vl cou1d it not demand, quite simply, his elimination? And, principle that expels the criminal from society and the image of the
although it is true 1ha1, J,e principle of pu.nishment must be sub monster 'vomited' by nature, where is one to find a limit, if not in a
scribed ro in the pact, must not each citizen, logically, accept ,be human nature thar is manifested - not in the rigour of the law,
extreme penalty for those of chem who attack them as a body. nor in tbe ferocity of the delinquent - but in the sensibility
'Every malefactor, by attacking che social rights, becomes, by his of che reasonable man who makes the law and does not commit
crimes, a rebel and a traitor co his country; by violating its laws he crime?
ceases to be a member of it; he even makes war upon it. In such a But this recourse co 'se11sibility' does not exactly express a
case the preservation of the state is inconsistent with bis own, and theoretical impossibility. In face, it bears within it a principle of
one or the o,her musr perish; in p_uttingt he guilty cq death we slay calculation. The body, the imagination, pain, the hean 10 be re
not so much the citizen as the enemy.'' The right to punish has been spected are noc, in effect, those of the criminal that is 10b e punished,
shifted from the vengeance of che sove1eign tQ che defence of but rhose of the men who, having subscribed 10 the pact, have the
society. But it now finds itself recombined with elements so strong right of exercising agai11Sht im the power of assembly. The pain that
that it becomeas lmostm ore1 0 be fearedT. he malefactohra s been muse exclude any reduction in punishmenist that fellb y thej udges
saved from a threat that is by its very nature excessive, bur he is or spectators with all the hardness ofhearc that it may bring with it,
exposed to a penalty that seems to be without bounds. It is a return all the ferocity induced by familiarity, or on the contrary, ill
to a terrible 'super-power'. It brings with it the need 10 establish a founded feelings o'f pity and indulgence, 'Thank God for those
principle of moderation for the power of punishment. gentle, sensitive souls on whom those horrible executions exert a
'Who does not shudderwith horror when reading in history of so kind of torture' (Lacretelle, r Jr). What has 10 be arranged and
many terrible and useless torments, invented and coldly applied by calculated are the return effects of punishment on the punishing
monsters who took upon themselves the name of sage?' (Beccaria, authority and the power that it claims co exercise.
9'

Punishment Generalized punishment
Here che principle takes root that ~ne should never apply 'in (Filangieri, 214). But this influence of a crime is nor necessarily in
humane' punishments tb a criminal, who, nevertheless, may well be direct proportion to its horror; a crime that horrifies the conscience
a rraitora nd a monster.!£r he law~musnr ow treati n a •humane way is often of less effect than an offence that everyone tolerates and feels
an individual who is 'outside nature' (whe.reast he old justice treated quite ready to imitate. There is a scarcity of great crimes; on che
the 'outlaw' inhumanely), it is not on account of some profound other hand, there is the danger that everyday offences may multiply.
humanicy that the c~iminal conceals within him, but because of a So one must not seek a qualitative relation between the crime and
necessary regulation of the effects of power. It is this 'economic' its punishmem, an equivalence of horror: 'Can the cries of a wretch
rationality that must calculate the penalty and prescribe the appro in tormem bring back from the depths of a past that cannot return
priate techniques. 'Humanity' is the respectable name given to this an action 1ha1 has already been commit1ed?' (Beccaria, 87). Goe
economy and to its meticulous calculations. ':\Vhere punishment is must ealcula1ea -penalty in terms not of the crime, but ofits possible
concerned, the minimum is ordered by humanity and counselled by repetirion. One must take into.account not the past offence, but the
policy.'' future disorder. Things muse be so arranged that the malefactor can
So, in order to understand this techno-politics of punishment, let have neither any desire 10 repeat his offence, nor .any possibility of
us take the extreme case, the ultimate crime: a deed of such enormity having imitators,• Punishment, ,hen, will be an art of effects; rather
thacjc violates all the most respected laws. It is produced in circum than opposing the enormicy of the penalty 10 the enormity of the
stances so extraordinary, in s11chp rofound secrecy, with such lack crime, one /llUSt adjust 10 one another the rwo series that follow
of restraint, as if at the very limit of possibility, that it could not from the crime: itS own effecrs and those of the penalty, A crime
be other than unique, in any case the last of its kind: no one could without, a dynasty does not call for punishment; any more than,
ever imitate h; no one could take it as an example, or even feel according ro another version of the same fable, a society on the
scandalized that it should have been committed. Ir is doomed to verge of dissolution and disappearance would have the right to erect
disappear without trace. This fable' of the 'ultimate crime' is, to the scaffolds. The last crime cannot but remain unpunished.
new penality, what original sin was to rhe old: the pure form in This was an old view. The function of punishment as example
which the reason for punishment appears. was to be found long before the eighteenth-century reform. That
Ought such a crime to be punished? According 10·w hat calcula• punishment looks towards the future, and that at least one of its
tion? Of what use could its punishment be in rhe economy of the majorf unctionsJ s to preventc rime had,I or centuries, been one of
power to punishr It would be useful 10 the extent that it coula make the current justifications of the right to punish. Bur the difference
reparation for 'the harm done to society' (Pastoret, II, 21). Now, was that the prevention that was expected as an efTec1o f the punish
ifone sets aside the scricdy material damage - which even when it is ment and its specracle- and therefore of its excess - tended now to
irreparable as in the case of a murder is of little account in relation become the principle of its economy and the measure of its just
to sociecy as a whole - ,he injl\rY that a crime inflicrs upon the proportions. One must punish exactly enough co prevent repetition.
me
social body is disorder that it introduces inro ir: the scandal·that There is, then, a shift in the ml!i:hanicso f example; in a pcnality
it gives rise 10, the example that it gives, the incitement 10 repeat it employing public torture and execurion, example was the answer
if ii is not punished, ,he possibility of becoming widespread ,hat it to the crime; it had, by a sort of twin manifestation, to show the
bears within k. In or.der 10 be useful, punishment must have as its crime and ·at the same time to show the sovereign power that
objective the consequences of ,he crime, that is to say, the series of mastered it; in a penalicy calcula1ed according to its own clfects,
disorders that it is capable of initiating: 'The proportion between example must refer bac)<1 0 the crime, but in the most discreer way
the penalcy and the quality of the offence is determined by the possible and wirh the greatest possible economy indicate che inter
influence that rhe violation of the pact has on 1he social order' vention of pbwer; ideally, too, it should prevent any subsequent
9)

Punishment Generalized punishment
reappearance of either. The example is ,no longer a ritual th.at mani no more titan a lyrical expression, was now offered ,he possibility
fests; it is a sign 1h31s erves as an obstacle. 'Through this technique of of a rational aniculation: what must be maximized is,the representa
punitive signs, which tends to reverse the whole remporal field of tion of the penalty, nor its co{poral reality.
penal action, the reformers thought they were givin~ to the power 'Floer rde of lateral e.ffecr.sT. he penalty must have its most intense
to punish an. economic, effeccive jnstrumem that could be made effects on those who have noc committed the crime; ro carry the
general tbroughouc the entire social body, capable of coding all its argumenr to its limit, if one could be sure that the criminal could nor
behaviour and consequently of reducing the whole diffuse domain repeai the crime, it would be enough 10 make others believe that he
of illegalities. The semio-technique with which one tried 10 arm the had been punished. There is a centrifugal imensificapon of effects,
power 10 punish rested on five or si,r major rules. which leads 1p the paradox 1ha1i n the calculation of penalries rl,e
The tu/~ of minimum quantity. A crime is committed because it leasr important element is still the criminal (unless h~ is likely to
procures certain advantages. If one linked, w the idea of crime, the repeat the offence). Beccaria illustrated this paradox in the punish
idea of a slightly greater disadvantage, it would cease 10 be desir ment that he· proposed to replace the death sentence - perpetual
able. 'For punishment 10p r.educe the effect that must be expected,of slavery, Is this not a physically more cruel punishment than death?
it, it is enough that the harm that it causes exceed tlte good that the Not ar all, he says: because the pain of slavery, for the condemned
criminal has derived from the crime' (Beccaria, 89). A proximity man, is divided into as many portions as he has moments left to live;
between penalty and crime can, indeed must, be accepted; but no it is an infinitely divisible penalcy, an Eleatic penalty, much less
longer in its old form, where the pu.blic execution had 10 be equi severe than capital punishment, which is only one step away from
valent in intensity to the-crime, with an additional factor that the public execution. On the other hand, for rhose who see these
marked the 'surplus power' of the sovereign carrying out his legiti slaves, or represent them to themsel\(es, ,he pains they bear are
mate vengeance; it is a quasi-equivalence at the level of imerests: a concenirated ,into a single idea; all the moments of slavery are
linle more interest in avQiding the penalty than in risking the crime. contracted into a representation that then becomes more terrifying
The rule of sufficient idea/icy. ff the motive of a crime is the than the .idea of dearh. Ir is the economically ideal punishment: ir
advantage expected of it, ,he effectiveness of the penalty is the dis is minimal for him who undergoes it {and who, reduced to slavery,
advantage expected of it. This means that the 'pain' at the heart of cannot repeat !)is crime) and it is m,aximalf or him who represents it
punishment is not the actual sensation of pain, but the idea of pain, 10 himself. 'Among the penalties, and in ,he way of applying them
displeasure, inconvenience - the 'pain' o( the idea of 'pain'. l'unish in pcoponion ,o the offences, one ml',Sic h9ose the means that will
ment has to make use not of the body, but of representation. Or leave't he most lasting impression on the minds .of the people, and
rather, if it does make use o,f rhe body, iris not so much as.the sub the least cruel on ,he body of the criminal' (Beccaria, 87).
ject of a pain as the object of-a representation: the memory of pain The rule of perf«~ certainty. With the idea of each crime and the
must prevent a repetition of the crime, just as the spectacle, how advantages to be expected of it must be assc;,ciatedt he idea· of a
ever artificial it may b~, of~ physical punishment may prevent the panicular punishment wiLh the precisei nconvenien~ that m~Ir
contagion of a crime. But it is not pain in itself that will be tl1e from it; the link from one to the other must be regarded as ~ecessary
instrumenr of the technique of punishment Therefore, as long as and unbreakable. This general element of certainty that must give
possible, and e.xcepci n cases requiring an effective representation, the system of punishment its effectiveness involves a number of
one should avoid recourse to the great panoply of the scaffold. precise measures. Tl1e laws that define the crime and lay down the
There is an elision of the body as the.subject of the punishment, but pe.nalties must be perfectly clear, 'so that each member of society
not necessarily as an clement in a spectacle. The rejection of the may distinguish criminal actions from virtuous actions' (Brissot,
public execution which, at the rhreshold of the theory, had found 14). These laws must be publi'shed, .so thar everyone has access, 10
94 95

Punishment Generalized punishment
them;w hati s neededi s not oral traditionsa ndc ustoms,b ut a written proofs tl1e use of rorrure, the extraction of confessions, the use of
legislation which can _be 'the srable monument of the social pact', the puhlic execution, the body and spectacle for che reproduction
primed ,exes available to all: 'Only printing can make the public as of truth had long isolated penal practice from the common forms of
a whole and not just a few persons depositories of the sacred code of demonsrration: semi-proofs produced semi-trurhs and sernl-guilry
the laws' (Beccaria, 26). The monarch must renounce his right of p<!.rsonsw, ords extracted by pain had gr;acer authenticity, presump
pardon so chat che force chac is prcsenc in che idea of punishme□t don involved a degree of punishment. The heterogeneity of 1His
is not auenuared by the hope of intervention: •If one aUows men to system with the ordlnary system of proof really constituted a scandal
see thar the crime may be pardoned and that punishment is not a only when the power to punish newed, for irs own economy, a
necessary consequence of it, one nourishes in rhem the hope of olimare of irrefucable certainty. How can one link absolucely in the
going unpunished ... The laws must be inexorable, chose who minds of men the idea of crime and the idea of punishment, if rhe
execute them inflexible.'' Above all, no crime committed muse reality of the punishment does not follow, in all cases, the reality
eseape the gaze of those whose task it is 10 dispense justice. Nothing of the offence? To establish rhe offence, in all evidence, and accord
so weakens the machinery of rhe law than the hope of going un ihg 10·t he means valid for all, becomes a task of first importance.
punished; how could one esrablish in the minds of the public a strict The verification of the crime musr obe.y the general criteria for aU
link becween the offence and a penalty ifit were affeccedb y a certain cruth. In the arguments it employs, in the proofs it provides, legal
coefficient of improbability? Would it nor'be necessary to make the iudgement muse he homogeneous with judgement in general. There
penalty the more 10 be feared in its violence as it is less 10 be feared is, therefore, an abandonment of legal proof, a rejection of torrure,
in its uncertainty? Rather than imitace the old system in this way the -need for a complete demonstration of the rrurh, an ·effacement
and be •more severe> one must be more vigilam•.u Hence the idea of all correlation between deg~ees of suspicion and degrees of
rhar the machinery of justice musr be duplicated by an organ of punishment. Like a. mathematical truth, the truth of the crime will
surveillance that would work side by side with it, and which would pea ccepted only when 1t is complecely proven. It follows rh,at, up
make it possible t:icherr o preventc rimes,o r, if committeclt, o arrest to the final demonstradon of his crime, the-defendant must be
their amhors; police and justice must work together as two comple regarded as innocent; ·and that, in order to Carryo ut this demonstra
mentary actions of the same process - the police assuring 'the action tion, the judge must use not ritual forms, but common lnscrumcnrs,
of society ·o~ each individual', juslice 'the rights of individuals rhat reason possessed by everyone, which is also that of philoso
againsc society' (Duporc, Archives parleme111aireXs,X I, 45). Thus phers·and scientists: 'In theory, I regard tl1e magisrrate as a philoso
every crime will come 10 the light of day and ~ punished in all pher who sets out 10 discover an interesting truth ... His sagacity
certainty. But it is also necessary that the legal procedures should will enable him 10 grasp all the ci,cumstances and all rhe rclatio,is,
not remain secret, that the reasons why a defendant is condemned or bring together or separate wharever needs· to be brought together
acqui11eds hould be known to ill, and each individual must be able or separaced in order to arrive· at a sane judgement' (Scigncux de
to recognizet he reasonsf or a penalty:'l et the magistratesp eakh is Correvon,4 9).T he investigationt,h e exerciseo f commonr eason,
opinion aloud, let him be obliged 10 read in his judgemenc the cext lays aside dte old inquisitorial model and adopts ihe much more
of the law thar condemns the defendant ... Let the procedures ,hat subtle model (doubly validated by science and common sense) of
are buried mysteriously in rhe obscuriry of the records office be empirical research. The ju~ge will be like a 'pilot steering between
opened 10 all citizens who are concerned at the fate of the con the rocks': 'What proofs. or what dues will be considered 10 be
demned' (Mably, 348). sufficient neither I nor anyone else has dared to determine in general;
The rule ofcomm~n trutA. Beneath this ordinary-seeming principle since circumstances are subjecc to infinite variations, since proofs
is hidden an important transformation. The old system of legal and clues must be deduced from these circumstances, the clearest
97

Punishment Generalit.ed punishment
clues and_p roofs must necessarily vary in proportion' (Risi, 53). the need for a parallel classification of crimes and punishments, the
Henceforth, penal pr.>ctice was 10 be subject to a common rule of need for an individualization of sentences, in. accordance wit.h the
truth, or r.ither to a complex rule in which heterogeneous elements particular characteristicso feach criminal. This individualization was
of scientific demonstr.ition, the evidence of the senses and common to weigh very heavily throughout the history of modern penal law;
sense come together to form the judge's 'deep-seated conviction'. it is rooted precisely here: in terms of the theory of law and accord
Although penal justice preserves the forms that guarantee its equiiy, ing to the requirements of eve,yday practice, it is no doubt in
it may no·w be opened up to all manner of truths, providing rhe.y radical opposition to the principle of codification; but from the
are evide'nt, well founded, acceptable to all. The legal ritual in itself standpoint of the economy of the power 10 punish, and of che
no longer generates a divided truth. It is resiruated in rhe field of techniques by whioh one wishes to circulate throughout the social
reference of common proofs. With the multiplicity of scientific body precisely calibrated.s igns of punishment, with neither excesses
discourses, a difficult, infinite relation was then forged that penal nor l9opholes, with neither a useless 'expendirure' of power nor with
justice is still unable 10 control. The master of justice is no longer tlmidity, it becomes evident that the codification of the offences
the master of its truth. punishments system and the modulation of the criminal-punish
Th, rule of optimal specification. For penal semiotics 10 cover the ment dyad go side by side, each requiring the ocher. Individualiza
whole field of illegalities that one wishes to eliminate, all offences tion appears as the ul\imate aim of a ptecisely adapted cod~.
must be defined; they must be classified and collected into species But this individualization is. very different in its nature from the
from which none of them can escape. A code is therefore necessary modulations of puni'shmen1 to be found in the old jurisprudence.
and this code must be sufficiently precisef or each type of offence to The old system - and on this point it followed Christian peniten
be clearly present in it. The silcn<>o! f the law must nor harbour the tjary practice- used cwo-serieso f variables 10 adjust the punishment,
hope of impunity. An exhaustive, explicit code is required, defining thoseo f 'circumstanceas•n d thoseo f1intention'e; leme'ntst,h atI s to
crimes and fixing penalties. (On this theme, cf., among others, say, that made it possible to qualify clie act its.elf.T he modulation
Linguet, 8.) But the same imperative need for a total coincidence of 1\10 penal,y belonged to 'casuistry' in the broad sense. (On r.he
between all possible offences and the effects-signs of punishment non-individualizing character of casuistry, cf. Cariou.) But what
forces one to go further. The idea of the same punishment does not was now beginning to emerge was a modulation_t hat referred 10 the
have the same effect on everyone: the rich do not fear fines nor the defendant himself, to his nature, to his way oflife and his attitude of
notorious infamy. The injury caused by an offen<>!a nd its value as miad, to his past, to the 'quality' and not to the intention of his will.
example differ according to the status of the offender; a crime One perceives, but as a place as yet unfilled, the locus in which, in
committed by a noble is more injurious to society than one com penal practice, psychological knowledge will take over the role of
mitted by a man of the people (Lacretelle, 144). Lastly, since punish casuistic jurisprudence. Of course, at the end of the eighteenth
ment must prevent a repetition of the off'ence it must take into century, that moment was still far off, The code-individualization
1
accountt he profoundn ature of thec riminalh imself!, hep resumable link w~s sought in the scicmilicll )odels of the period, Natural
degree of his wickedness, the intrinsic quality-of his will: 'Of two history no doubt offered the most adequate schema: the taxonomy
men.who have.committed the same theft, how much less guilty is be of species according to an uninterrupted gradation. One sought 10
who scarcely had the necessities.oflife than he who overflowed with constitute a Li~naeus of crimes and P,Unishmems, so that each
excess? Of two perjurers, how much more criminal is he on whom particular offence and each punishable individual mi.ght come, with
one has striven from his childhood to impress feelings of honour out the slightest risk of any arbitrary action, within the provisions
than he who, abandoned to nature, never received the benefit of of·• general law. 'A table muse be drawn up of all the genera of
education' (Marat, 34). One sees the emergence at the same time of crimes to be ,observed in different 'cpumries. ft,.ccording to the
99

Punishment Generalized punishment
enumerationo f crimes, a division into species must be carriedo ut. other hand, it was powerless against crimes due to 'violent passions
T~1e best rule of this division is, it seems co me, to separate rl1e that have no regard to consequences'; this, however, was unimporr. ..
crimes according to their objects. This division must be such that ant,s inces uch crimesr evealedi n theira uthors' no reasonedw icked. .
each species is quite distinct from another, and that each particular ness.~1i
crime, considered in all its relations may be placed between that Beneath ,he humanization of the penalties, what one finds are all
those rules that authorize,o r ratherd emand.' leniency',a s a ca1cu
which must precede it and that whochm ust follow it, in the strictest
g~adarion; lastly, this rable must be such that ir may be compared lilted economy of the power to punish. But they also proyoke a
with another table that will be drawn up for penalties, in such a way shift in the point of application of this power: it is no longer the
that tl1ey may correspond exactly to one another' (Lacretelle, 351- ~6dy, With the ritual play of excessive pains, spectacular brandings
352), In theory, or rather in dream, the double taxonomy of in the ritual of the public execution; it is the mind ·or rather a play
punishments and crimes will solve the problem: but how is one to elf representations and signs circulating discreetly but necessarily
apply fixed laws to particular individuals? ~nd evidently in ,he minds of all. It js no longer the body, but the
Far removed from this speculative model, forms-of anthropologi soul, said Mably. And we see very clearly wha~ he meant by this
cal individualization were being consriruted ar the same period in term: the correlative of a technique of power. Old 'anatomies' of
what was still a very rough and ready way. Let us take first the punishment are abandoned, Bu, have we really entered the age of
notion of the repetition of crime. Notthat this was unknown to the non-corporal punishment/
old criminal laws.11 Bur it was rending to become a description
of the defendant himself capable of altering the sentence passed: Ar the point of departur,; then, one may place the political
accordjng t0 the legislation of J791 recidivists }Verel iaDle in 3Jmost project of rooting out illegalities, generalizing the punitive function
1
all cases to a doubling of the penalty; according ro the law of Florea I ond delimiting, in order to control it, the power to punish. From
Year X, they had 10b e branded with the le11erR ; and the penal code 1his there emerge ~wo lines of objectification of crime and of the
of 181o inflicted on them either ,tt\e maximum possible of the normal criminal. On the one hand, the criminal designated as the enemy of
penalty, or the penalty immediately above it. Now, through the ~II, whom it is in the inter~st of.all to track down, falls outside the
repetition of the c-rime, what one was aiming at was not che author pact, disqualifies himself as a citizen and emerges, bearing within
o~an act defined by law, but the delinquent subject himself, a certain him as it were, a wild. fragment of nature; he·appears as a villain,
will that manifested his intrinsically criminal character. Gradually, ii monster,a rnad,manp, erhaps,a sick· and, before long, 'abnormal'
as criminality, rather than crime, became the object of penal inter individual. Ir is as.such that, one day, he will belong to a scientific
vention, the opposition between first dffender and recidivist tended objectification and to the 'treatment' that•is correlative 10 it. On the
to become more important. And on the basis of this opposition, other hand, the need to measure, from within, the effects of the
reinforcing it on severa1p oints, one sees at the same period the punitivep ower prescribest acticso f interventiono ver all criminals,
formationo f 1he notion o( the 'crimep lmian,l' - an involunwy, actuale r potential:t he organiza1ioonf a fieldo f prevention,c he
unpremeditated crime, bound up with extraordinary circumstances, calculation of interests, the circulation of representations and signs,
which, while not offering the same excuse as madness, nevertheless ,he constitution ofa horizon of certainty and proof, the adjµstment
prevenied it from being regarded as an ordinary crime. As early as of penalties to ever more subtle variables; all this also leads 10 an
,,bjectification of criminals and crimes. In either case, one sees that
1:791, I.e Peletier remarked that the subtle gradation of penalties
that he had presented to ,he Constituent Assembly might dissuade the power relation that underlies the exercise of punishment begins
from crime 'the evil-doer who plans a wicked action ln cold blood' , 10 be duplicated by an object relation in which are caught up not
.
only the crime as a fact to be established according to common
and who may be restrained by thoughts.of the penalty; but, on the
101
100

Punishment Generalized punishment
norms, bur the criminal as an individual to be known according thefr own ideas; it is at the stable point of reason that he secures the
to specific criteria. One also sees that this object relation is not end of the chain; this link is all the stronger in that we do not know
superimpo,;ed, from the outside, on the punitive practice, as would of what it is made and we believe it 10 be our own work; despair
be a prohibition laid on the fury of the public execution by the and time cat away the bonds of iron and steel, but they are power
limits of the sensibility, or as would be a rational or 'scientific' less against the habirual union of ideas, they can only tighten it still
interrogation as to what this man that one is punishing really is. The more; and on the sofr fibres of the brain is founded the unshakable
processes of objectification originate in the very tactics of;p ower and base of the soundest of Empires' (Servan, Jj).
of the arrangement of its exercise. It is this semio-technique of punishments, ,his 'ideological
However, ,he two types of objectification that emerge with the power' which, partly at least, ,.,ill remain iri suspense and will be
project of penal reform are very different from one another: both in superseded by a ne'/,' i)Oliticala natbmy, in which the body, once
their chronology and in their effects. 'The objectification of the again, but in a new form, will be the principal character. And this
criminal as outside the law, as narural man, is still only a potentiality, new political ~na,omy will permit 1he intersection of the two
a vanishing trace, in which are enrangled the themes of political divergenr lines of objectifica1ion that are 10 be seen emerging in the
criticism and the figures of 1he imaginatiol). One will have to wait a eighteenth century: ihat which rejects tl1e criminal 'from the .other
long time before homo criminal,'.,b ecomes a definite object in the side' - from the side of a narure against narure; and that which seeks
field of knowledge. The other, on the contrary, has had much more to control delinquency by a calculated economy of punishments. A
rapid and decisive effects in so far as it was linked more directly glance a1 the new art of punishing clearly reveals the supersession
to the reorganization of the power to punish: codification, definition of d1e punitive semio-rechnique by a new polities of the body.
of offences, 1he fixing of a scale of penalties, ruies of procedure,
definition of the role of magistrates. And also because it made use
of the discourse already constiruted by the ldiologu,s. This discourse
provided, in effect, by means of the theory of interests, representa
tions and signs, by the series and geneses that it reconstituted, a son
of general recipe for the exercise of power over men: the 'mind' as
a surface of inscription for power, with seniiology as its tool; the
submission of bodies through the control of ldeas; the analysis of
representations as a principle in a politics of bodies that was mu.ch
more effective than the rirual anatomy of 1orrure and execution. The
tl1ought of the ldiologues was not only. a theory of the individual
and society; it developed as a technology .of subtle, effective,
cconomi~ powers, in opposilion to the 5Umptuous expenditure of
the power of the sovereign. Let us hear once more what Servan has
10 say: the ideas of crime and punlshment musr be strongly linked
and 'follow one another witl1ouc interruption ... When you h.ave
thus formed the chain of ideas in the heads of your citizens, you will
then be able to pride yourselves on guiding ,hem and being their
masters. A stupid desp·ot may constrain his slaves witl1 iron chains;
but a rrue politician binds 1hem even more strongly by the chain of
103

The gentle way in punishment
crime that it punishes; thus, for him who contemplates it, it will be
The.gentle w.ay m punishment
2.. infallibly the sign of the crime that it punishes; and for him who
dreams of the crime, the idea of the offence will be enough to arouse
,he sign ()f the punishment. This is an advantage for the stability of
1he Jin\<,a n advantage for the calculation of the proportions between
crime and punishment and the quantitativer eadiog of interests; it
also has the advanrage thar, by assuming the form of a natural
seguence, pur\ishmenL does not app.ear as the arbitrary effect of a
human power: 'To derive the qffence from the punishment is the
The an of punishing, ,hen, must rest on a "'hole technology of best means of proportioning punishm,ent t9 crime. If this is the
represenr•tion. The undertaking can succeed only ifi, forms part of triumph ofjustice, it is also the triumph oflibcrty, for ,hen penalties
a natural mechanics. 'Like the gravfmion of bodi~, a secret force no longer proceed from the will of the legislator, but from the nature
compels us ever cowards our well-being. This impulsion is affected of things; one no longer sees man commining violence on man'
only by ,he obstacles ,hat laws oppose ,o ir. All the diverse actions (Marat, 33). Tn analogical punishment, the power that punishes is
of man are the effec1so f this interior tendency.' To find che suitable hidden.
punishment for a crime is 10 find Ll1ed isadv3nt..1gwe hose idea is The reformers proposed a whole panoply of penalties that were
such thar it robs for ever the idea of a crime of any a1traction. It natural by institution and which represented in their form the
is an art ofconAicting ,energies, an an of images linked by associa content of ihe crime. Take Vermeil, for example: those who abuse
tion, the forging of stable:c onnections thin defy time: iris -a matter public liberty, will be deprived of ,heir own; those who abuse the
of establishing the representation of pairs of opposing values, of benefits of law and the privileges of p·ublic office will be deprived of
establishing quantitative differences between the opposing forces, their civil rights; speculation and usury will be punished by fines;
of setting up a complex of obsracle,signs rha, may subject the theft will be ,punished by confiscatlon; 'vainglory' by humiliation;
movement of the forces 10 a power relation. ~Lett he idea of mrcure murder by, d~th; fire-raising by the stake. In the case of rhe poi
and execution be ever present in t.he h'ean of the weak man and .soner,' the executioner will preseht him with a goblet the contents
dominate the feeling that drives him t0 crime' (Beccaria, 119). These of which will be thrown into his face; thus he will be made to Seel
obstacle. .s igns musec onstitutet he ne-o.a•r senalo f penalties,j u.sta s che the horror of his crime by being offered an image of it; he will then
old public executions were organized around a system of retaliatory be thrown into a cauldron of boiling,water' (Vermeil, 68-141; cf.
marks. But in order m function, they mus, obey several condirions. also Dufriche de Valaie, 349) Mere day-dreaming? Perhaps. But
r. They must be as una:rbitrary as possible. Ir is rrue 1hat it is ,he principle of a symbolic communication was clearly formulated
sociery rhar defines, in terms of i1s own interests, whar must be by Le Peletier, when in 1791 he presented the new criminal legisla
regarded as a crime: it is not therefore natural. Bm, if pu~ishmertt tion:' Exact relationsa re requiredb etweent he nature of the offence
is lO present itself 10 the mind as soon as one thinks of committing a and the nature of the punishment'; he who has used violence in his
crime, as immediate a link as possiQlem ust be made betwe.ent he crime. must be subjected 10 physical pain; he who has been la:,;y
rwo; a link of resemblance, analogy, proximity. 'The penalty must must he sentenced to hard labour; he who has acted despicably will
be made to conform as closely as possible to the nature of the be subjected to infamy (Le Peletier, 321-.1).
offence, so that fear of punishment diverts the mind from the road Despite cruelties that are strongly reminiscent of the tortures of
along which the prospect of an advantageous crime was leading it' ,he Ancien Regime, a quite different mechanism is a, work in these
(Beccaria, 119). The ideal punishment would be transparent to the analogical pena)tics. Horror is not opposed to horror in a joust of
101

Punishment The gentle way in punishment
power; it is no longer the symmetry of vengeance, but the trans Let the punishment irritate it and stimulate it more than the crime
parency of lhe sign co that which it signifies; what is required is to was able 10 fla11er it. Tf pride led 10 the committing of a crime, let
establish, in the theatre of punishments, a relation that is immedi it be hurt, let the punishment disgust it. Shameful punishments are
ately i~telligible to the senses and on which a simple calculation•may effective because ~hey are based on the vanity that was at the root
be based: a sort of reas1mablea esthetic of punishment. 'Tt is not only of the crime. Fanatics glory both in their opinions and in the tor
in the fine <1rts that one must follow nar~re faithfully; political tures that they endu.re for ,hem. Let us, therefore, set against
institutions, at least those that display wisdom and permanence, are fanaticism the proud obstinacy that sustains ic 'Reduce it with
founded on nat.ure' (Beccaria, 114). The punishment must proceed ridicule and shame; if one humiliates the proud vanicy of fanatics
from the crime; the law muse appear co be a necessity of things, and before a great crowd cif spectators, one may expect happy effects
power must act while concealing itself beneath the gentle force of from this punishment.' Ir would be quite. useless, on the other hand,
nature. to impose physical pain on diem. (Beccaria, 113).
1. This complex of signs must engage with the mechanics of Reanimate the useful, virtuous imeresr that has been so weakened
forces: reduce the desire that makes the crime attractive; increase by the crime. The feeling of respect. for property - for wealth, but
the interest that makes the penalcy be feared; reverse che relation of also for honour, libercy, life - this tl1ec riminal loses when he robs,
intensities, so that the representation ·of the penalcy and its dis calumniates, abducts or kills. So he must be taught this feeling
advantages is more lively rhan that of the crime and its pleasures. once again. And one will begin by teaching it to him for his own
There is a whole mechanicst, hereforeo, f inr~restO, fi ts movement, benefit; one will show him what it is 10 lose the freedom to dispose
of the way that one represents•it 10 oneself and of the liveliness of as one wishes of one's own wealth, honour, time and body, so that
this representation. 'The legislator must be a skilful architect who he may respect it in others (Pastoret, I, 49). The penalty that forms
knows how to employ all rhe forces that may contribute to the stable and easily legible signs must also recompose the economy of
solidity of rhe building and reduce' all tlfose that might ruin it' interests and ,he dynamics of passions.
(Beccaria, 13;). 3. Consequently, one must use a temporal modu.lation. THe
There are several ways of achievfog this. 'Go straight to the penalty transforms, modifies, establishes signs, arranges obstacles.
source of evil' (Mably, 146). Smash the mainspring tharanimaies the What use would it be if it had 10 be permanent? A penalty that had
representation of the c.rime. Weaken rhe interest that brought it to no end would be contradictory: all the constrainrs that it imposes on
birth. Behind ,he offences of rhe vagabond, there is laziness; that the convict.a nd_o f ~hich, having become virtuouso nce more, he
is what one muSI fight against. 'One' will not succe<!db y locking would never be able to take advan1age, would be little better than
beggars up in filthy prisons that are more like cesspools'; they will torture; and the effort made to reform him would be so much
have to be forced to work. 'The best way of punishing them is 10 trouble and expense lost by society. If incorrigibles there be, one
employ them' (Jlrissor, 258). Against a bad passion, a good habit; inus1 be determined 10 eliminate them .. Bur, for all th,e others,
againsta force,a notherf orce,b ur it mustb e.t he forceo f sei\sibility punishmen~t an functiono nly if it comes1 0 an end. This analysis
and passion, not that of armed power. 'Must one not deduce all was accepted by the Constituent Assembly: the code of 1791 lays
penalties from this principle, which is so simple, so appropriate and down the death penalcy for traicors and murderers; all other penalties
already well known, namely, to choose them in that which is most must have an end (the m;,ximum is rwenry years).
subduing-for the passion that led to the crime committed?' '(Lacre But above all the role of duration must be integrated into the
telle, 361) . economy of the penalcy. ln its very violence, the public execution
Set the force that drove the criminal to the crime against itself. 1011detdo have che following result: the more serious the crime, the
Divide interest, use it 10 make the penalty something to h<, feared. •horter the punishment. Duration certainly fotervened in the old
io6 107

Punishment The gentle way in punishment
system of penalties; days at the pillory, years of banishment, hours For d1is, everyone must see punishment not only as natural, but
spent dying on ,he wheel. But it was a time of ordeal, not of con in his own interest; everyone muse· be able to read io it his own
certed transformation. Duration must now facilitate the proper advantage. There must be no more spectacular, but useless penalties.
action of the punishment: •A prolonged succession of painful priva There must be no secret penalties either; but punishment must be
tions, sparing mankind the horror of torture, has much more effect regarded as a retribution that the guilty man makes to each of his
on the guilty party than a passing moment of p~in. .. lt constantly fellow citizens, for the crime that has wronged them 1111- penalties
renews in the eyes of the people that witness it the memory of 1hara re constant!}' placed before citizens' eyes, and which 'bring out
vengeful laws and revives in all the moments of a salutary terror.'' the public utility of common and particular mov,mer1ts' (Dufriche
Time, operator of punishment. de Valaze, 346). The ideal would be for the convict to appear as a
Bu, the delicate mechanism of the passions must not be con son of rentable property: a slave at the service of all. Why would
society eliminate a life and a body that it could appropriate? It
strained in the same way or with rhe same insisrence when they
begin to improve; the punishment should diminish as it produces its would be more useful to m'ake him 'serve the state in a slavery
effects. It may well be fixed, in the sense that it is determined for all, that would be more or less extended according to the nature of his
crime'; France has all too many impracticable r.oads that impede
in the same way, b}1J' aw, but its internal mechanism must be variable.
In the bill put before the Constituent Assembly, Le Peletier pro trade; thieves who also obstruct ,he free circulation of goods could
posed a system of diminishing penalties: a convict condemned to be put to rebuilding the highways. Far more telling than death
the most serioufpenalty would be subjected to ,he 'cachoi' (manacles would be 1the example of a man who is ever before one's eyes, :whom
one has deprived of liberty and who is forced to spend rhe rest of
on hands and feet, darkness, solitude, bread and water) only during
the first stage of his imprisonment; he would be allowed to work his days repairing the loss that he has caused society' (Boucher
first two ihen three days a week. After two thirds of his sentence d'Argis, 1781, 139).
had been served, he could pass to the 'gene'( a cell with lighr, chain ln the old system, the body of the condemned man became the
around the waist, solitary work for five hours a day, but with other king's property, on which the sovereign left his mark and brought
prisoners on the other two days; this work would be paid and would down ihe effects of his power. Now he will be rather the property
enable him to improve his daily fare). Lastly, when he approached of society, the object of a collective and useful appropriation. This
the end' of his sentence, he could pass to the normal prison regime: explains why the reformers almost always proposed public works
'He will be allowed every day to meet mher prisoners for work in •s one of 1he best possible penalties; in this,,d ,ey were supported by
common. If he prefers, he will be able to work alone. He will pay the Ca!,i,rsd e dolianc,s: 'Let those condemned 10 penalties short of
death be put to the public works of the country for a rime propor
for his food from what he earns from his work' (Le Peletier, 329-30).
4. For the convict, the penalty is a mechanics of signs, interests tionate 10 their crime.'' Public works meant two things: the collec-
1ive interest in the punishment of the condemend man and the
and duration. But Lhe guilty person is only one of the targets of
visible, verifiable character of the punishment, Thus the convict
punishment. For punishment is directed above all at others, ac all
pays twice; by the labour he provides and by the signs that he
the potentially guilty. So these obstacle-signs that are gradually
produces. At the heart of society, on the public squares or highways,
engraved in the-representation of the condemned man must there
the convict is a focus of profit and signification. Visibly, he is
fore circulate rapidly and wi•dely;r hey must be accepted and redis
tributed by all; they must shape the discourse that each individual serving everyone; but, at the same time, he lers slip into 1he minds
uf all the crime-punishment sign: a secondary, purely moral, but
has with 01he;s and by which crime is forbidden to all by all - the
much more real utility.
true coin that rs substituted in people's minds for the false profits of
f· Hence a whole learned economy of publicity. In physical
crime.
108 '"9

Punishment The gemle way in punishment
1orture, 1he example was based on terror: physical fear, collective and the sad necessity <if a legal vengeance to the people- Let the
horror, images 1hat must be engraved on the memories of the specta• different scenes of this tragedy strike all rhe senses, stir all gentle,
1ors, like the brand on the cheek or shoulder of the condemned man. honest affections' (Dufau, 688).
The example is now based on 1hel esson, 1hed iscourse, the decipher• The meaning of this mourning must be clear 10 all; each element
able sign, 1he representation of publtc morality. It is no longer the 0£ its rimal must speak, .repeat the crime, recall the law, show the
terrifying res1oration of sovereignty that will sustain the ceremony need fo~ punishment and justify its degree. Pos1ers placards, signs,
1
of punishment, but the reactivation ofthe code, 1he collective rein• symbols must be distributed, so 1hat everyone may learn 1heir
forcements of the link between the idea of crime and 1he idea of significations. The publicity of punishment must no1 have the
punishment. In the penalty, rather than seeing the presence of the physical effect of 1error; it must open up a book 10 be read. Le
sovereign, one will read the laws 1hemselves. The laws associated Peletier suggested that, once a month, 1he people should be allowed
a par1icular crime with a particular punishment. As soon as tl1e to visir convicts, 1in ,heir mournful. eel.ls:t hey will _readw, ritten jn
crime is committed, the punishment will follow at once, enacting the bold le1ters above the door, the name of the convict, his crime and
discourse of the law and showing that che code, which links ideas, his sentence' (Le Peletier, 319-30). And in the simple, military style
also links realities. The junction,. immediate in 1he text, mus1 be of the imperial ceremonies, Bexon was 10 imagine s.omey ears later a
immediate in ~cts. •consider those firs't movements in which the whole tableau of penal heraldry: 'The prisoner co.ndemned 10 death
news of-some horrible act spread~ through our towns and country will be raken to the scaffold in a care ''hung or painted in black and
side; 1he citizens are like men who see lightning falling about 1hem; red"; if he is a traitor, he will wear a .-ed coa1 on which will be
everyone is moved by indig.nation and horror. . . That is the inscribed,i n front and behind, the word "traitor•';i f he is a parri
moment 10 punish the crime:, do not let it slip by; hasten 10 prove cide, his head will be covered with a black veil and on his shirt will
i1 and judge i1.,Set up scaffolds, stakes, drag out 1he guilty man to be embroidered daggers or whatever instrUments of death he used;
the public squares; summon the people with great cries; you, will if he is a poisoner, his red shirt will be decorated with snakes and
then hear th.ema pplaud the proclamation of ;tour judgement$, as ihe other venomous animals' (Bexon, 24-s - this project was prese11red
proclamation of peace and liberty;, you will see them run 10 these to the King of Bavaria).
terrible spectacles as to the triumph of 1he laws' (Servan, 35-6). This legible lesson, this ritual recoding, must J:,cr epeated as often
Public punishment is the ceremony of immediate recoding. as possible; the punishments musr be a school rather 1han a festival;
The law is re-formed: it takes up its place on the side of the crime an ever-open book rather than a ceremony. The duration that makes
that violated it. The criminal, on the other hand, is derached from the punishment effective for the guilry is also useful for the speota-
society, he leaves it. But not in those ambiguous festivals o( the 1ors. They must be able to consult a1 each moment the permanent
Ancien Regime in which the people inevitably took part, either in lexicon of crime and punishment- A secret punishment is a punish
1he crime or in 1he execution, but in a ceremony of mourning. The ment half wasted. Children should be allowed to come 10 the places
society that hast ed.iscovere<li ts lawsh as lost the citizen who vio where the p.en~ltiys being carried out; there theyw ill attend their
lated them. PubHc punishment mus! manifest this double affiiction: classes in civics. And grown men will periodically relearn 1he laws.
that a citizen should have been capable of ignoring the law and 1hat Le,u s conceive of places of punishment as a Garden of the Laws
one .should have. been obliged 10 sepaute oneself from a citizen. that families would visi1 on Sundays. 'I propose tha1, from time 10
'Associate the scaffold with the most lugubrious and most moving ume, after preparing people's minds wi1h a reasoned discourse on
ceremonies; lei this terrible day be a day-of mourning for the nation; 1hc preservation of 1he social order, on 1he utility of punishment,
let the general sorro·w be painted everywhere in bold leners ... Lei men as well as boys should be taken ro the mines and 10 1he work
the magistrate,w eating black, funerealc repe, announce the crime camps and conrempl~te the frightful fare of cl1eseo utlaws. Such
110 111

I ,1111,hmen, The gentle way in punishment
, lltlo)le3 would be more useful than the pilgrimages made by the these examples and will sow them around their huts, the taste of
1 " ( 111 Mecca' (Brissot). And Le Peletier considered ,ha, this vir~e will ~e r<;>oicn these coa..t'Sseo uls, whi1c the ev.il-doer, dis
ll♦illty or p unishment was one of rhe fundamental principles of the mayed at 1he public. joy,, fearful at the sight of so niany enemies,
l'"'ul code: 'Often, at certain special times, the presence of may abandon plans whose outcome will be as promp, as it is
1. . p•nplc must bring down shame upon' the heads of the guilty; and gloomy' (Servan, 37).
1111 11r,cnceo f ,he guihyperson in 1hep itiful sta,e to which his crime This, then, is how one must imagine the punitive ciry. A1 the
crossroads, in the gardens, at the side of roads being repaired or
1~ ,rd1,1ccdh im must bring useful instruction to the souls of the
"l'I•' (Le Peletier, 321). Long before he was,r egarded as an object bridges built, in workshops open to .all, in me depths of mines tl1at
may be visited, will be hundreds of tiny theatres of punishment.
11 t·lcnce, [he criminal was imagined as a source of 1nsLruction.
hi\.., '1nc made charitable visits 10 prisoners ro share in their suffer .. Each crime will have its law; each criminal his punishment, It will
1111(,1 he sevcn1een1hc en1ury had invented or revived this practice); be a visible punishment, a punishment that ,ells all, that explains,
111wit was being suggested that children sh<:luldc ome and lea,h how justifies itself, convic,s: placards, different-coloured caps bearing
lwb enefits of the law are applied to crime - a living lesson in the Inscriptions, postcr-s,s, ymbols, texts read.or primed, tirelessly repeat
1he code. Scenery, perspectives, optical effects, uomp,-l'ai/ some
m1seumo f order.
6. This will make possible in society an inversion of the tt'adi times magnify 1he scene, maklng it more fearful than it is, but also
l<>nadl iscourse of crime. How can one extinguish the dubious glory clearJ,r. from where the public is sitting, it is possible 10 believe in
1f the criminal? This was a maner of grave concern t<>t he law- the existence of ccrrain cruelties which, in fact, do not take place.
11t1kerosf the eighteenth century. How can one silence ,he adven- Out the essential point, in all these real or magnified severities, is
11reso f the grcar criminals celebrated in the almanacs, broadsheets 1hat they should all, according to a stxict economy, teach a lesson:
nd popular mies?J f the recoding of punishment is well done, if the that each punishment should be a fable. And that, io counterpoint
Cremony of mo~rning takes place as ir should, the. crime can no with -all the direct examples of virtue, one may at each moment
,nger appear as anything but a misfortune and the criminal as an cmcounter, as a living spectacle, the misfortunes of vice. Around
ncmy who must be re-educated in10 social life. Jnsread of those rach of these moral ''representations', schoolchildren will gather
ongs of praise 1hat rurn che criminal inro a hero, only those witl1t heir masters and adults will learn what lessons 10 teach their
bsmcle-signs ,hat arrest the desire m commit the crime by the ufTspring.T he great terrifying ritual of ,he public execution gives
alculated fear of punishment will circulate in men·s discourse. The way, day after day, street after street, to this serious thearre,w ith·.its
ositive mechanics will operate to rhe full in the language of every multifarious .and persuasive scenes. And popular n1emocy will
ay, which will constantly reinforce ir wilh new accounts. Discourse reproduce in rumour the austere discourse of the law. But perhaps
,m b ecome the vehicle of ,he law: the constant principle of uni It will be necessary; above these innumerable spectacles and namt•
ersal recoding. The poets of the people will at last join those who lives, to place the major sign of punishment for the most terrible
111t hemselvesth e 'missionaries of eternal reason'; they willb ecome 11f< 1Tjmetsh: e keystone of the penal edifice. In any case, Vermeil had
10ralists. 'Filled with these terrible images and salutary i'deas, each ltMgined the scene of absolute punishment 1ha1s hould dominate all
itizen will spread 1hem through his tamily and ,here, by long tire thearres of everyday punishment: the only case in which one
:counts delivered wiil1 as much fervour as they are avidly listened had to seek to reach an infinity of punishment, something equivalent
,, his children gathered around him, will open up their young In the new penal system ro what regicide had been in 1he old. The
ttMn found guilty of this crime would have his ,eyes put out; he
1emories to receive, in imperishable lineaments, rhe notion of
rime and punishmem, the love of law and country, the respect and would be put into an iron cage,.suspended in the air, above a public
:ust of the magistrarure. Country people, too, will be witnesses of "ll••re; he·would be completely naked; he would be attached 10 the
l Ii "3

Punishment The gentle way in punishment
bars of the cage by an iron bell around his waist; to the end of his penalty-sign and discourse. It is obscurity, violence and suspicion.
days, he would be fed on bread and water. 'Thus he would be 'lt is a place of.darkness in which the citizen's eye cannot count the
exposed to all the rigours of the seasons, sometimes his head would victims, in which consequently their number is lost as an example.
be covered with snow, sometimes burnt by a scorching sun. It is ... Whereas if, without multiplying crimes, one could multiply the
in this energetic torture, presenting rather ihe extension of a painful example of punishmems, one would succeed at last in rendering
death than that of a painful life, that one would truly recognize a them less necessary; indeed, the obscurity of the prisons becomes
villain deserving of the horror of nature in its entirety, condemned a subject of defiance for the citizens; they easily suppose that great
to see no longer rhe heaven that he has outraged ancl to live no injustjces are committed there. .. There is certainly something
longer on ,he earth that he has sullied' (Vermeil, 148-9). Above ,he wrong when the law; which is made for the good of the multitude,
punitive city hangs this iron spider; and the criminal who is to be instead of arousing its gratirude, cominually arouses its discontent'
thus crucified by 1he new law is the parricide. (Dufriche de Valaze, 344-1).
The idea that imprisonment might as it does today ct>ver the
There is a whole new arsenal of picturesque punishments. 'Avoid whole middle ground of punishment, between death and light
inflicting the same punishments,' said Mably. The idea of a uniform penalties, was one that the reformers could not arrive at immediately.
penalty, modulated only according to the gravity of 1he crime is The problem is the foll9wing: within a short space of time,
banished. To be more precise: the use of imprisonment as a general detention became tl1e essential form of punishment. In the penal
form of punishment is never presented in ,hese projects for specific, cade of 1810, between death and fines, it occupies, in a number of
visible and 'telling' penalties. Imprisonment is env.isaged,b ut as one forms, almQst the whole field of possible punishments. 'What is the
among other penalties_;i t is the specific punishment for Ct?nain system of penality accepted by the new law? lt is incarceration in•a ll
offences, those that infringe ihe liberty of individuals (such as its forms. Indeed, compare the four principal penalties that remain
abduction) o• those that result from an abuse of liberty (disorder, In the penal code. Forced labour is a form of incarceration. The
violence). It is also envisaged as a condition to enable certain convict-ship, is an open-air prison. Detention, reclusion, irnpfison
punishments to be carried out (forced labour, for example). Bur it ment for a minor offence are in a sense merely different names for
does not cover the whole field of penality with its duration as the Orte and the same punishment' (Rcmusat, 185). And the Empire
sole principle of variation. Or rather, the idea of penal imprison decided at once to translate this imprisonment, envisaged by the
ment is explicitly criticized by many reformers. Because it is bw, into reality, according to a whole penal, administratiye, geo
incapable of corresponding to the specificity of crimes. Because it i,;raphical hierarchy; at the lowest degree, associated with each
has no effect on the public. Because it is useless, even harmful, to justice of the peace, municipal maisonsJ , police;1 n each arrondisse
society: it is costly, it maintainsc onvicts in idleness, it multiplies me.nt>m ai.1onsd ' arri t; in each dCpartement, a rnoiSond. e correction;
their vices (cf. Archives parle,r,entairu,X XVI, 711). Because the at the summit, several mai.sonsc entralt.ff or convicted criminals or
executiono f sucha penalcyi~ d ifficulct os upervisea nd becauiet here «1rm1i0Mlss erving ~e!l!eM~o f over one year; lastly, in a fewp orts,
is a risk of exposing prisoners to the atbitrary will of their guards. tonvict-ships. A great prison structure was planned, whose different
Because tl1ej ob of depriving a man of his liberty and of supervising levels would correspond exactly to the levels of the centtalized
him is an exercise of tyranny. 'You are demanding that there.should ,dminist{ation. The scaffold, where the body of the tortured
be monsters among you; a.nd if these odious men existed, the legisla criminal had been exposed to the ritually manifested force of the
tor ought perhaps 10 treat chem as murderers' (Mably, 338). Prison aovereign, tlie punitive theatre in which the representation of
as che universal penalty is incompatible with this whole technique punishment was permanently available to the soci')I body, was
of penalty-effect, penalty-representation, penalty-general function, •~plated by a great enclosed, complex and hierarchized struct;ure
tt4 tlj

Punishment The gentle way in punishment
that was integrated into the very body of the state apparatus. A proposed are three forms of detention: the 'cacho,', in which the
quite different materiality, a quite different physics of power, a quite penalty of imprisonment is augmented by various measures(solitude,
different way of investing men's bodies had emerged. During the a deprivation oflight, restrictions on food); the' gin,', in which these
Restoration and the July monarchy, there were, apart from a few ancillary measures are anenuated, and lastly imprisonment proper,
exceptional moments, between 40,000 and 43,000 prisoners in which is reduced to·simple 'confinement. The diversity, so solemnly
French gaols (approximately one prisoner per 6oo inhabitants). promised, is reduced in the end to this grey, uniform penalty.
The high wall, no longer ,he wall that surrounds and protects, no Indeed, at ,he time, there were deputies who expressed surprise that,
longer the wall that stands for power and wealth, but the meticu instead of establishirtg a natural ,.elation between offences and
lously sealed wall, uncrossable in either direction, closed in upon the pena1ries,a quite different plan had been adopted: 'So that ifl have
now mysterious work of punishment, will become, near at hand, betrayed my country, I go to prison; ifl have killed my father, I go
sometimes even at the very centre of the cities of the nineteenth 10 prison; every imaginable offence is punished in the same uniform
century, 1))em onotonous figure, at once material and symbolic, of way. One might as well see a physician who has the same remedy
the power to punish. Alreaqy under the Consulate, the Minister of for all ills' (Chabroud, 618).
the Interior had been appointed to investigate the different 'places This prompt substitution was not confined to France. It was 10 be
of safety' ,hat were already functioning and which could be used in foun~, to a greater or le~ser degree, in other countries. When
different towns. A few years later, sums had been allocated for the Catherine 11, in the years immediately following the treatiSl' Des
construction, in keeping with the power that they were to represent dtlits et du P,ei'nesg, ave i.nstructions to the commission entrusted
and serve, of these new castles of the new civil order. The empire with the task of drawing up a 'new code of laws', Beccaria's lesson
used them in fact, for another war (cf. Decazes). A less extravagant, on the specificity and variety of penalties was not forgotten; it was
but more obstinate economy continued 10 build them throughout repeated almost word for word: 'lt is a triumph of civil liberty when
t~e criminal laws derive each penalty from the particular nature of
the nineteenth century.
In under twenty years, in any case, the principle so clearly each crime. In this way all arbitrariness ceases; the penalty does not
formulated in the Constituent Assembly, of specific, appropriate, depend on ,he caprice of the )egislator, but on the nature of the
effective penahies, constituting, in each case, a lesson fotall, became thing; it is not man who does violence to man, but the man's own
the h1w of detention for every offence of any importance, except acrion' (article 67). A few years later, Beccaria's general principle
those requiring the death penalty. The theatre of punishment of secveda s a foundation fo, the new Tuscan Code and for the new
which the eighteenth century dreamed and which would have acted oode given by Joseph II to Austria; and yet borh legislations made
essentially on the minds of the general public was replaced by the imprisonment - modulated according to its duration and aug
mented in certain cases by branding or the use of irons - an almost
great uniform machinery of the prisons, whose network of immense
uniform penalcy: at least thirty years· detention for an attempt on
buildings was to extend across FrJnce and Europe. But twenty years
is perhaps1 00 long a chronologyf or this conjuringt rick, It may the sovereign's life, for counterfeiting and for murder with robbery;
be argued that it occurred almost instantaneously. One has only to fifteen to thirty years for voluntary homicide or armed rool:iery;o ne
,nont h 10 five years for simple theft, etc. 3
look ar the bill for the criminal code presented in the Constituent
But if this colo)lization of the penalty by the prison is surprising,
Assembly by Le Peletier. The principle stated at the outset is the
need. for 'exact relacions between the nature of the offence and the Iri s because imprisonment was n9c as one might imagine a punish
1
nature of the punishment': physical pain should be inflicted on those ment that was already securely established in the penal s;stem, just
below the death penalty, and which naturally occupied the place left
who commir crimes of violence, hard labour on the idle, shame on
vacant by the disappearance of public torture. In fact, imprisonment
those with degraded souls. But ,he stvere penalties actually
116

Punishment The gentle way in punishmenr
- and on this point many coumriesw ere in the sames iruationa s F ranee at least, was a considerable one. lmprisonment was especially
France - had only a limited and marginal position in 1he system of disqualified for this role by the fact tliat it was, in practice, directly
penalties. 'fhis is shown by the texrs themselves. The ordinance of bound up with arbitrary royal decision and the excesses of the
r 670 does not include detention among the peinu ajj/ictivu, or sovereign power. The 'maiso{ISd ef or<<,t he general hospitals, the
serious penalties. Perpetu.al or temporary imprisonment was no 'king's orders' or the orders of the police magistrates, letters under
doubt included among certain local customs and practices (cf., for rhe kfng's private seal obtained by notables or ,by families, con
example, Coquille). Bur contemporary writers maintained that it was stituted a whole repressive practice, juxtaposed with 'regular justice'
falling into disuse together with other forms of rorrure: 'There were and more usually opposed to it. An<lt his extra-judicial imprison
formerly penalties that are no longer practised in France, such as ment came 10 be r.ejected by both classical jurists and reformers.
writing a condemned man's penalty on his face or forehead and Prisons are made by princes, said a traditionalist like Serpillon, who
perpetual imprisonment, juSI as one no longer condemns a criminal sheltered behind the authority of Judge Bouhier: 'Although, for
10 be exposed 10w ild beasts or sent down the mines' (Rousseaud de reasons of state, princes are sometimes inclined to inflict this penalty,
la Combe, 3). In fact, it is certain that imprisonment had survived ordinary jus1ice makes no use of this kind of senrence' (Serpillon,
tenaciously as a punishment for less serious offences, according ro 1095). Detention was described by the refl)rmers in innumerable
local customs and practices. In this ·sense, Soulatges spoke of the statements as a figure and privileged instrument of despotism: 'What
'light penalties' that the ordinance of 1670, had not mencioned: Iso ne to say of those secret prisons conjured up by the fatal spirit of
reprimand,a dmonition,b anishmentf rom a certainp l~ce,s atisfaction monarchism, reserved in the main either for philosophers, in whose
to the injured party and a rerm of imprisonment. In certain regions, hands nature has placed her torch and who dared to enlighten their
especially those that had most preserved their legal peculiarities, the century, orJor those proud independent souls-who lack the coward
penalty of imprisonment was still widespread, but this had its Icet o keep silent on the ills of their country; prisons whose gloomy
difficulties, as in the recently annexed province of Roussillon. doors are opened by mysterious lelcers and swallow up forever its
Yet, despite these divergencies, jurists.held firmly 10 the principle unfortunate victims? What is to be said even of tl1ose letters, those
that 'imprisonment is not to be regarded as a penalty in our civil masterpieces of ingenious tyranny, which overthrow the privilege
law' (Serpillon, 1095 - however, one does find in Serpillon the idea t1f every citizen 10 be heard before he ls judged, and which are a
that the rigour of imprisonment is the beginning of a penalty). Its 1hou53:ndc imes-more dangerous men -thant he invention of
fo[j
role is rather that of holding the person and his body as security: l'hal.aris .. .'' (Brissor, 173).
ad· conciftendohs ominu, non ad punie.ndos,a s the tag has it; in Lhis No doubt these protests, coming from such diverse sources, are
sense, the imprisonment of a suspect has a role similar 10 thar of a directed not at imprisonment as a legal penalry, but at the 'illegal'
debtor. Through imprisonment, one has security for someone, one use of arbitrary, indeterminate detention. Nevertheless, imprison-
does not punish himi• This was the general principle. And although 1nen~w as se,en, generally speaking, as branded by 1he abuses of
imprisonment s9metimes served as a penalfy, even in iJt1pottan1 power,A nd many ,ahiers d~ dolea~es rejectedi t as incompatible
cases, it did so essentially as a substimte: it replaced the galleys for with good justice. Sometimes in the name of classical juridical
those - women, children, invalids - who could not serve there: 'The rrlnciples: 'Prisons were intended by the law not to punish bui to
sentence of imprisonment for a term or for life is equivalent to being ,ccure the persons of the offenders .. .' (Desjardin, 477). Sometimes
sent to the galleys.'• ln this equivalence, one can see clearly enough hi the nan\e of the effects of imprisonment, which punishes those
the emergence of a possible connection. But·, for this to take place, who have not yet been convicted, which communicates and general
the prison had to change its juridical status. l,,c.1th e evil that it ought 10 prevent, and 111hichru ns counter 10 the
It was also necessary to overcome a second Qbstade, which, for 11rincipleo f the fodividuality of pena,lties by punishing a whole
118 119

Punishment The gemle way in punishment
family; it was said thac 'imprisonment is not a penalty. Humanity beggars or young malefactors. Its functioning obeyed three great
rises up against the. frightful thought that it is not a punishment to principles: the duration of the l'enalties could, at least within
deprive a citizen of his most precious possession, to plunge him <trtain limits, be determined by il1ea dministration itself, according
ignominiously into the den of crime, to snatch him from everything in the prisoner's conduct (indeed this latitude could be given in the
that is dear m him, m bring him perhaps to ruin and to deprive not 1onrencei tself: in 1597 a prisoner was condemned to twelve years'
only him but his unfortunate family of all means of subsistence' l111prisonmentw, hich could be reduced 10 eight, if bis behaviour
(Desja.rdin, 483). A:nd, on several occasions, the cahiu, demanded woved satisfactory). Work was obligatory; it was performed in
the abolition of those 'houses of internment': 'We believe that the , ommon (inileed the individual cell was used only as an additional
maiions de force must be razed to the ground . . .'7 And the decree l,unishment; pdsonersslept rwo or chree to a bed, in cells containing
of 1 3 Ma.rch 1790 ordered the freeing of 'all persons detained in Hltween four and twelve persons); and, for the work done, the
casdes, religious houses, maison.sd e force, maisons de police.o r any 1irisonersr eceived wages. A strict time-table, a system of prohibi
other prisons, b'y orders under the king's private seal or by orders tions and obligations, continual super:vlsion, exhortations, religious
of the agenh of the executive power'. 1<adings,a whole-complex of methods 'to draw towards good' and
How then could detention, so evidently bound up with an '10 turn away from evil' held the prisollers in its grip from day to
illegality that was denounced even in the power of the princ,, J,1y.O ne may take the Rasphuis of Amsterdam as a basic figure.
become in so short a time one of the most general forms of legal lllsrorically, it forms the link between the "theory, so characteristic
-punishment? 11r the sixteenth century, of a pedagogical and spiriiual 1ransforma-
11,in of individuals brought abour by continuous exercise, and the
The explanation mos, usually given is the formation, during the r•nitentiary techniques conceived in the second half of the eighteenth
classical age, of a number of great models of punitjve imprisonment. r,ntury. And it provided the three institutions that were then set up
Their prestige, which was all the greater in that the most m:cnt witht he fundamental principles that each was to develop in its own
examples came from England and above all from America, appeari
pmicular direction.
m have made it possil)le,to overcome the double obstacle constituted The maison d, foru at Ghent organized penal labour above all
by the age-old rules of law and ihe despotic• functioning of im• arnund economic imperatives. The reason given was that idleness
prisonment. Very soon. it seems, these obstacles were swept aw:iy w• t • l) e general cause of most crimes. An investigation - no doubt
by the punitive marvels thought up by the reformers, and detentiotl 111,e of the first - carried ou, among those sentenced under the
becamea serious reality. There can be no doubtabout the importance Jurisdiction of Alost, in 1749, showed that malefactors were not
of these models. But it is, precisely these models that, before pro• 'ariisanso r labourers' (workers think only of the work that feeds
viding a solution, themselves pose problems: the problem of thclr 1hcm), but 'idlers given up to begging'.• Henoe the idea of a house
existence and the problem of their .diffusion. How were they ablo 1h.i -would in a sense provide a .universal pedagogy of work for
t0 comei mo beinga nd,a bove,allh, owd id 1heyb ecomes o generally 1l111wsler oh ad provedt o be resista.n1t0 it. This had foura dvantages:
accepted?,For it is easy to show that, although they correspond on n h r.:duced the number of criminal prosecutions, which were costly
number of points with the general principles of penal reform, ,hey 111 the state (it was esti'!'ated that this would save over 100,000
fail to do so on an even gre.arern umber; sometimes they are evtf\ ,~,unds in Flanders); ibis would make it unnecessary, 10 return
quite incompuibJe. n1,1neyp aid in taxes to ilie owners of woods ruined by vagabonds;
The oldest of these models, the one that is generally regarded a1 It would create a mass of new workers, which would help 'by com
having more or less inspired all ,he others; was the Rasphuis or )'lllltion to bring down the cost oflabour'; lastly, it would enable che
Amsterdam, opened in 1 596.• · Originally, it was intended fo1 111,e poor 10 beJJefit,t o the full, from necessary charity (Vilan, 68).
(:,,0 11.t

Punishment The gentle way in punishment
This useful pedagogy would revive for the lazy individual a liking of .interests proper 10 Aomqo «ohomicus,b ut also the imperatives of
for work, force him back into a system of interestS in which labour ,he moral subject. The cell, that technique of Christian monachism,
would be more advantageous than laziness, form around him a which had survived only 'in Catholic countries, becomes in ihis
small, miniature, simplified, coercive society in which the maxim, protestant society the instrument by which one may reconstitute
'he-who wantS to live must work', would be clearly revealed. Work both lwmo oecorwmicuasn d the religious conscience. Between the
would be compulsory, but so too would be remuneration, which crime and the return to right and virtue, the prison would constitute
enables the·prisoner to improve his lot during anil after detention. the 'space between two worlds' the place for the individual transfor
'The man who does not find ),is subsistence must be made to desire mation that would restore to the state the subject it had lost. Hanway
to procure it for himself by work; he is offered ii by supervision and called this apparatus for modifying individuals a 'reformatory' (cf.
discipline; in a sense, he is forced to acquire it; he is tlien tempted Hanway). These were the general principles that Howard and
by the bait of gain; corrected in his morals, accustomed to work, Blackstone put into operation in 1779w hen the independence of the
his anxiety aroused by the little money he has kept for nis release,' United States put an end 10 deportation and when a law was being
he has learned a trade 'that will guarantee ,a subsistence without drawn up to modify t.hes ystem of penalties. Imprisonment, with the
danger' (Vilan, 107). This reconstruction of homo oeconomicuesx pu.rpose of transforming the soul and conduct, made its entry into
duded the use of penalties that were ioo shon - ibis would prevent the system of civil laws. The preamble of the bill, written by Black
the acquisition of habits and skills of work - or too long - which stone and Howard, describes individual imprisonment in terms of
would make any apprenticeship useless-. 'The term of six months its triple function as example ,o be feared, instrUmeot of conversion
is too short 10 correct criminals, and to bring them to the spirit• of nnd condition for an apprenticeship: subjected 'to isolated detention,
work'; on the od1er hand, 'a life sentence throws them inco despair; regular work and tl1e influence of religious instrUction', certain
they become indifferent to the correction of their morals and 10 the cdminals might not only inspire terror in those who would be
spirit, of work; they become concerned only with plans to escape rempted to imitate them 'but a1so to correct themselves and to
1
and 10 rebel; and since the judgementS that were passed on them acquire die habit of work' (Preamble of the bill of 1779). Hence the
did not deprive them of life, why should one seek to render it dcciSion to build two penitentiaries, one for men, one for women,
unbearable for them~' (Vi Ian, 102-3). The du~aticin of the penalty In which the isolated prisoners would be put 'to the most servile
has meaning only in relation to possible correction, and 10 an labours, most compatible with the ignorance, negligence and
economic use of the corrected criminal. obstinacy of the criminals': walking in a wheel to move .a machine,
To the principle of work, the English models added, as an fixing a winch, polishing marble, beating hemp, rasping logwood,
essential addition to correction, isolation. The outlines had been curring up rags, rope-making and sewing sacks. In fact, only one
provided in 1775, by Hanway, who justified it first witb negative penitentiary was built, at Gloucester, and it corresponded only
reasons: promiscuity in the prison provided bad examples and possi partially to the initial plan: total confinement for the most dangerous
bilitieso f escapei n the short terma ndo f blackmaiol r complicityin criminalsf;o r the others, day work in commona nd separationa t
the long term. The prison would be too much like a factory if one night.
left the prisoners to work together. The positive reason.s followed: Then came the Philadelphia model. This was no doubt the most
isolation provides a 'terrible shock' which, while protecting cl1e famous because it was associated in people's minds with the political
prisoner frotn bad influences, enables him to go into himself and Innovations of 1he American system and also because it was nor,
rediscover in the depths-of his conscience the voice of good;.solitary like the others, doomed 10 immediate failure and abandonment; it
work would then become not onlyanapprenticeship, butals.oanexer wns continuously re-examined and transformed right up to the
cise in spiritual.conversion; it would rearrange not only the complex great debates of the 1830s on penitentiary reform. In many respects
122 123

Punishment The gentle way in punishment
the Walnut Street Prison, opened in 1790, under the direct influence WilS ro intervene neirhera s a -wimess, nor as a guarantoro f punish. .
of the Quakers, was modelled on those of Ghent and Gloucester.•• ment; the certainty that, behind the walls, the prisoner was serving
There was compulsory work in workshops; the prisoners were kept his sentence must suffice as an exampl~ rhe.rew ere to be no more
constantly occupied; the prison was financed by this work, but the of those street spectacles which the law of 1786 has given rise to by
prisoners were also rewarded individually as a way of reinserting imposing on certain prisoners public works 10 be carried out in
them morally and materially into the strict world of the economy; ,owns and on the highways. 11 The punishment and correction that
by keeping the prisoners 'constantly employed on productive it must operate are processes that unfold berween the prisoner and
works, they· were able co defray the expenses of the prison, tl1ey those who supervise him. 1'hey are processes tha1e ffect a transforma
were not left idle and they were able to save a little money for the tion of the individual as a .whole - of his body and of his-habits by
time when their captivity would cease' (La Rochefoucauld-Lian the druly work that he is forced 10 perform, of his mind and his will
coun, 9). Life was partitioned, therefore, according to an absolutely by the spiritual attentions that are paid to him: 'Bibles and other
strict time-table, u_nderc onstant supervision; each moment of the books of religious practice are provided; ~he clergy of the different
day was devoted to a particular type of activity, and brought with it obediences to l)e found in the town and suburbs perform the services
its own obligations and prohibitions: 'All prisoners rise atdaybreak, once a week a~d any other edifying person may have a.ccesst o the
so that, after making their beds, cleaning -and washing themselves prisoners at any time' (Teeters, 1935, n-4). But this transformation
and attending to other needs, they generally begin their work at is entrusted 10 1he administration itself. Solim.de and self-examina
sunrise. From that moment, no one may go into the rooms or other tion are not enough; nornre purely religious exhortations. Work on
places except 10 the workshops and places assigned for their work. the prisoner's soul must be carried out as often as possible. The
... At nightfall, a bell rings 10m ark the end of their work ... They prison, though an administrative apparatus, will at the same time be
are given half an hour ro arr.\nge their beds, after which they are nor a machine for altering minds. On first entering the· prison, the
allowed 10 converse aloud or to make the least noise' (Turnbull, 15- prisonerw ill be tead the regulations;' at the same time, the inspectors
16). As at Gloucester, solitary confinement was nottotal; it was used Je~k 10 strengthen in him the moral obligations that he now has;
for certain prisoners who would in focmer times have incurred the ,hey represent to him the offence that he has committed with regard
death penalty, and for those inside the prison who deserved special to them, the evil that has consequently resulted for the society that
punishment: 'There, without occupation, without anythng to dis protected him and 1he need 10 make compensation by his example
c..ict him, waiting in uncertainty for the moment when he would be and his amendment. They then make him promise to do his duty
delivered', the prisoner spent 'long anxious hours, with nothing but gladly, to behave decently, promising hi.m or allowing him to hope
the reflections that arc Rresenr 10 the minds of all guilty persons' 1ha1, before the expiration of the term of the sentence, he will be
(Teeters, 1931, 49). Lastly, as a1 Ghent, the leng01 0C1he imprison able 10 obtain his discharge if lie behaves well ... From time to
ment could Val):With the behaviour of the prisoner: after consulting time the inspectors make it their duty t0 converse with the criminals
the files, the prisoni nspectono; brainedf romt hea uthorities- with• one after the other, con<:i:mingt heir duties ~$ m~n and as members
out much difficulty up 10 the t 820s - pardons for prisoners who had of society' (Turnbull, 27).
shown good behaviour. Bu, no doubt the most important thing was that this control and
F urrhermore, Walnut Street had a number of characteristics 1hac transformation of behaviour were,iccompanied- both as a condition
were specific ro it, or which at least developed what was potentially and as a consequence - by the development of a knowledge of the
present in the other models. First, the principle of not publicizing indivi<luals. When the new prisoner arrived, the Walnut Street
the penalty. Though the sentence and the reasons for it should be administrationr eceived a report concerning his crime, che circum•
known to'all, the penalty should be carried out in $ecret; the public stances in which it was committed, a summaryo f the examinations

Punishment The gentle way in punishment
of the defendant, notes on his behaviour before and after sentence: 6nal cause of human punishments. This is not by way of atonement
indispensable elemenisif one wished to 'decide what step~ will have or expiation for the crime committed; for chat musr be left co the just
10 be taken to destroy his old habits'.,. And throughout his deten determination of the supreme being .. .' (Qlackstone, t1 ). And in
tion he would be observed; his conduct would be noted daily and Pennsylvania, Buxton declared, the prindples of Montesquieu and
the inspectors - twelve local worthi~ appointed in 1795 - who, two Beccarias hould now have the 'force of axioms', ihat 'the prevention
by two, visited the prison each week, would be kept informed of of crimes is the sole end of punishment' (Bradford, 3). So one
events, follow the conduct of each prisoner and decide which of punishes not 10 efface the crime, but to transform a criminal (actual
them deserved a shortening of his term. This ever-growing know Or potential); punishment must bring with it a certain corrective
ledge of the individuals made it possible to divide them up in the technique. Here, 100, Rush is•c lose to the reforming jurists - were
prison not so much according to their crimes as according to the It not, perhaps, for the metaphor he uses when he says: we have
dispositions that they revealed.T he prison became a sort of permanent inve,;,tedm achines that fociliµue labour; how much more one should
observatory that made it possible to distribute the varieties of vice praise the inventor of 'the {llOst speedy and effectual methods of
or weakness. From 1797, the prisoners were divided into four classes: n;sroringihe vicious.part of mankind to virtue and happiness, and of
the first for those who were ~licitly condemned 10 solitary con extirpating a po,rtion of vice r,om the world'. 13 Lastly, the English
finement or who had committed serious offences in the prison; the and the American models, like the projects of the legislators and
second for those who were 'well known as old offenders ... whose theoreticians, require methods 10 individualize the penalty: in itS
depraved morality, dangerous charac:ier, irregular dispositions, or duration,i ts nature,i tsinrensity, the way in which it is carriedo ut,
0
disorderly conduct' became apparent during the time they were in the punishment must be adjusted to the individual character and 10
prison; the thitd for ~hose •whose character and circumstances, ,he danger· that he bears within him for others. The system of
before and after conviction, led one 10· believe that they were not penalties must be open 10 individual variables. ln their general out
habitual offenders'; the fourth and last was a special section, a line, the models more or less inspired by the Rasphuis of Amsterdam
probationary class for chose whose character was still not known, were not in contradiction with the proposals of the reformers. It
or who, if chey were bener known, did not deserve to be pui in the might even be thought at first glance that they were merely a devel
preceding category (Teeters, 1935, 59). A whole corpus of indivi opment of them - or a sketch - at the level of concretc institutions.
dualizing knowledge was being organized that took as its field 9f Yet the disparity emerges clearly enough when one defines the,
reference not so much the crime committed (at least in isolatio.n), techniques of this individualizing correction. The difference is
but the potentiality of danger that lies hidden in an individual and 10 be found in the procedure of access to the individual, the way in
which is manifested in his observed everyday conduct. The prison which tlie punishing power gets control over him, the instruments
functions in this as an apparatus of knowledge. that -it uses in order to achieve this transformation; it is in the
technology of the penalty, not in its.theoretical foundation; in .the
Betw~nt his apparatuso f punishmenpt roposedb y the Flemish, relationt hat it establishews ith the bodya nd with the soul, and not
English and American models, between these 'reformatories' and in the way that it is inserted within the legal system.
all lhe punishmentS imagined by the reformers, one may establish That was the method of the reformers. Where exactly did tl1e
the points of convergence and the disparities. penalty apply lts pressure, gain control of the individual/ Represen
Poims of convergence. In the first instance, there is a difference tations: the representations of his interestS, the representation of his
in the temporal direction of punishment. The 'reformatories' were advantages ·and disadvantages, pleasure and displeasure; and, if the
mechanisms directed towards the future; they too were intended-not punishment happens to ~ize the body, 10 apply techniques 10 it that
to efface a cdme, but to prevent its repetition. •As to the ;nd, or are little short 1>f1orture,i t is because it is.- for the condemned !11•"
uG

Punishment The gentle way in punishment
and for the spectators - an object of representation. By what instru• an authority 1hat is exercised continually ,around him and upon
ment diclo ne act on the representations? Other representations, or him, and which he musr allow 10 function automatically in him.
rather couplings of ideas (crim,e-punishment, the imagined advan There are two quite distinct ways, therefore, of xeacting to the
tage of crime-disadvantage perceived in the punishments); these offence: one may restore the juridical subject of the social pact, or
pairings could function only in the element of publicity, punitive shape an obedien1 subject, according to the general and detailed
scenes that established them or reinforced them in 1he eyes of all, a form of some power.
discourse that circulated, brought back into currency ar --each All this would no doubt amount to little more than a speculative
moment the complex of signs. Tne role of ,he criminal in punish difference - for in each' case it is a question of forming obedient
ment was to r,eintroducei,n the face of crime and the criminalc ode, lrn;lividuals~ if' the· penality, of 'coercion' did not bring with it
the real presence of the signified - thar is to say, of the penalty certain crucial consequentes. The training of behaviour by-a full
which, according to 1he 1ermso f the code, must be infallibly a;;soci rime-table, the acquisition of habits, the constraints of the •b9(iy
ated with the offence. By producing this signified abundantly and Imply a very special relation between the individual who is punished
visibly, and therefore reactivating the signifying sys1emo f the code, nnd the individual who· punishes him. It is a relation that not only
tl)e idea of crime functioning as a sign of punishment, it is with this renders the dimension of the spectacle useless: it excludes it-" The
coin that the offender pays his debt 10 society. Individual correction agent of punishment must exercise a total power, which no third
must, therefore, assure the process of redefining the individual as party can disturb; the individual to be corrected must be entirely
subject 01 law, through rhe reinfo,:cement of the systems, of signs enveloped in the power that is being exercised over-him. Secrecy is
and representations that they circula,e. Imperative,a nd so too is autonomy, at least in relation to this
The apparatuso f corrective penality acts in a quite different way. techniqueo f punishment:-itm ust have its own functioning, its own
The point of application of th·e p'Cnalryi s not the representation, but rules, its 51wnt echniques, its own knowledge; it must fix its own
the body, time, everyday gestures and acLivities;t he 'soul, 100, hut norms, decide its own results. There is a discontinuity, or in any
in so far as it is 1he seat of habi!s. The body and the soul, as prin case a specificity, in i'elation to the legal power tl,ar declaxes' guilt
ciples of behaviour, form tile element ,ha, is now proposed for and fixes the general limits of punishment; These two consequences
punitive intervention.R ather tha[)o n·a n at1.o, f representations,t his - secrecy and autonomy in the exercise of the power to punish - are
punicive imerventiOnm ust -.resto n a studied manipulationo f rhe unacceptable for a theory and a policy of penality that has tWO aims
individual: 'I have no more doubt of every crime having its cure in In vieo;•:t o get ·all citizens to participate in the punishment of the
moral a.nd physical inRuence .. .'; so, in order co decide on punish iocial enemy and to render the exercise of the power 10 punish
ments, one 'will require some knowledge of tlie principles of sensa• cmirely adequate and transparent•1 0 the laws that publicly define it.
tion, and of 1he sympathies which occur in .the nervous system' Secret punishments and punishments not specified in the legal code,
(Rush, q). As for the instruments used, these are .no longer com • power to punish exercised in the shadows according 10 criteria and
plexeso f representationr,e inforceda nd circulatedb, ut formso f withi nstrumentsth, at.eludec ontrol- this wase nought o compro
coercion, schemata of constraint, applied and repeated. Exercises, mise the whole strategy of the reform. A:fter the sentenc,; a power
not signs: time-tables, compulsory movements, regular activities, was constituted that was reminiscent of the power exercised in rhe
solitiry meclitat-ionw, ork in common, silence, application,r espect, q(d system. The power that applied 1he penalties now threatened
good habirs. And, ultimately, what one is trying to restore in this 10b e as arbitrary, as despotic, as the power 1hat once decided them.
technique of correction is no~ so much the juridical subject; who is ln short, the divergence is the following: punitive ciry or coercive
caught up in the fundamental interests of the social pact, but the Institution? On the one hand, a functioning of penal power, dis-
obedient subject, the indivi·dual subjected to habits, rules, orders, 1ribu\ed throughout the social space; ·present everywhere as scene,
..
128 129

Punishment The gentle way in punishment
spectacle, sign, discour.;e; \egible like an open book; operating by a wimessing the scene of punishment. Lastly, in the project for a
permanent recodjfication oCt he mind of the citizens; eliminating prison institution that. was then developing, punishment was seen
crime by those obstacles placed before the idea of crime; acting 'as a technique for tbe coercion of individuals; it operated methods
invisibly and uselessly·on the 'soft fibres of the brain', as Servan put of training the body - nor signs ~ by the traces it leaves, in the form
it. A power to punish that ran the whole length of the social network of habits, in behaviour; and it presupposed the setting up of a
would acr at each of its points, and in 1he end would no longer be specific power for the administration of the penalty. We have then,
1
perceived as a power of certain individuals over others, but as an the sovereign and his force, the social body and the administrative
immediate reaction o( all in -relation 10 the'individual. On the other apparatus; mark, sign, ttace; ceremony, representation, exercise;
hand, a compact functioning of the po-wert o punish: a meticulous the vanquished enemy, the juridical subject in the process of re
·assumption of responsibility for the body and the time of 1be con qualification, the individual subjected to immediate coercion; the
vict, a regulation of his move111entsa nd behaviour by a system of tortured body, the soul with its manipulated representations, the
authority and knowledge; a concetted orthopaedy applied 10 con body,subjccted t0 training. We have here the three series of elements
victs in order to recla,m them individually; an autonomous adminis that characterize the three mechanisms that face one another in the
tration of this power that is isolated both from the social body and second half of the eighteenth century. They cannot be reduced to
from the judicial power in the strict sense. The emergence of the theories of law (though 'they overlap with such theories), nor can
prison marks the institutionalization of1he power 10 punish, or, to be they be identified with apparatuses or instirurions (though they are
more precise: .will the power to punish (with the strategic aim adop• based on them), nor can they be derived from moral choices (though
red in the late eighteenth century, the reduction·of popular illegality) they find \heir justification in morality). They are modalities accord
be better served by concealing itself beneath a general social func ing to which the power t0 punish is exercised: three technologies of
tion, in the 'punitive city', or by investfog itself in a coercive power.
institution, in the enclosed space of the 'reformatory'? The problem, then, is ihe following: how is it that, in the end,
In any case, it can be said that, in the late eigltteemh century, one 11w as the third that was adopted? How did the coercive, corporal,
is confronted by three ways of organizing the power to punish. The solitary, secret model of the power 10 punish replace the representa-
first is the one that was still functioning and which was ba:;ea on the 1ive, scenic, signifying, public, col.lective model? Why did the
old monarchical law. The other rwo both refer 10 a preventive, physical exercise of punishment (which is not torture) replace, with
urilitarian, corrective conception of a right to punish that belongs 1hep rison that is its instirutional support, the social play of the signs
to society as a whole; but they are very different from one another of punishment and .the prolix festival that circulated them?
at the level of the mechanisms they envisage. Broadly speaking, one
might say that, in monarchical law, punishmenr is a ceremonial of
sovereignty; it uses the ritual marks of the vengeance thar it applies
to the bodyo f thec ondemnedm an;a nd it deploysb <:forteh e eyes
of the spectators an effect of terror as intense as it is discontinuous,
irregular and always above its own.laws, the physical presence of the
sovereign and of his power. The reforming jurists, on the other
ba.nd, saw punishment as a procedure for requalifying indivjduals
as subjects, as juridical subjects; it uses not marks, but signs, coded
sets of representations, which would be given the most rapid
circulation and the most general acctptance possible by citizens
IJO IJI

PA.RT THREE
Discipline

Docile bodies
1.
Lei us rake the ideal figure of the soldier as it was still seen in the
early seventeenth century. To begin with, the soldier was someone
who could be recognized from afar; he bore certain signs: the natural
stgns of his strength and his courage, the marks, too, of his pride;
his body was the blazon of his strength and valour; and although it
Is que that he had 10 learn the profession of arms little by little -
generally in actual fighting-movements like marching and attitudes
like the bearing of the head belonged fo, the most part to a bodily
rhetoric of honour; 'The signs for recognizing those mos, suited 10
1his profession are a lively, alert manner, an erect head, a taut'
nomach, broad shoulders, long arms, strong fingers, a small belly,
thick thighs, slender legs and dry feet, because a man of such a
figure'could not fail to be agile and strong'; when he becomes a pike
bearer, the soldier 'will have to march in step in order 10 have as
much grace and •gravity as possible, for the pike is an honourable
weapon, worthy to be borne with gravity and boldness' (Mont
gommery, 6 and 7). By ,he late eighteenth century, the soldier has
become something that can be made; out of a formless clay, an inapt
b6dy, the machine required can be constructed; posture is gradually
corrected; a calcu.latedc onstraint runs slowly through each part of
the body, mastering it, making it pliable, ready at all times, turning
1i(~ntlyi nto the automatism of habit; in shon, one has 'got rid of
the peasant' and given him 'the air of a soldier' (ordinance of 20
March 1764). Recruirs become accustomed to 'holding their heads
high and erect; 10 standing upright, without bending lhe back, to
irtcking out the belly, throwing out the d1es1a nd throwing back the
shoulders; and, to help them acquire the habit, they are given this
position while standing.against a wall in such a way that the heels,
the thighs, ,he waist and the shoulders touch it, as also do the backs
135

Discipline Docile bodies
of the hands, as one turns rhea rms OUlwards,w ithout moving chem questionn ot of creatingt heb ody, en m(L$st, 'wholesale'a, s ifit were
away from ,he body ... Likewise, they will be taught never to fix an indissociable unity, but ·of working it 'retail', individually; of
their eyes on ,he ground, but co look straight at those they pass ... exercising upon i1 a subt\e coercion, of obtaining holds upon itat the
to remain motionless until the order is given, without movin,g the level of the mechanism itSelf - movements, gestures, attitudes,
head, ,he hands or the feet ... lasdy to march with a bold step, with rapidity: an infinitesimal power over the aclive body. Then there
knee and ham taut, on the points of the feer, which should face -wast he objec1 of ,he control: it was not or was no longer 1hes ignify
outwards' (ordinance of 10 March 1764). Ing elements of behaviour or the language of the body, bu, the
The classical age discovered 1he body as objec-t and target of economy, the efficiency of movements, thelr internal organizationj
power. 1t is easy enough 10 find signs of the attention then paid to co~scrainr bears upon the forces rather than upon the signs; the only
the body- to ,he body that is manipulated, shaped, trained, which rruly important ceremony is that of exercise. Lastly, ,here is the
obeys, responds, becomes skilful and ihcreases its forces. The great modality: it imp1ies an uninterrupted~ constant coercion, super
book of Man-the-Machine was written simultaneously. on two vising the processes of lhe acrivi,y rather than its result and it is
registers: the ana,omico-metaphysical register, of which Descartes exercised according 10 a codification tha1 partilions as closely as
wrote the first pages and which the physicians and philosophers possible time, space, movement. These methods, which made
continued, and the technico-political register, which was constituted possible me meticulous control of the operations of the body,
by a whole set of regulations and by empirical and calculated which assured the constant subjec1ion of its forces and imposed
methods relating to the army, the school and the hospital, for con upon them a relation of docili,y-urility, might be called 'disciplines'.
trolling or correcting the operations of the body. These rwo regis Many disciplinary methods had long been in existence - in monas
ters arc quite distinct, since it was a question. on the one hand, of teries, armies, work~hops. Bul in the course of the seventeenth and
submission and use and, on the other, of funCt:ioninga nd expJaoa eighteenth centuries the disciplines became general formulas of
tion: there was a useful body and an intelligible body. And yet there domination. They were different from slavery because the.y were
are points of overlap from one to the other. La Mettrie's L'Homm, not based on a relation of appropriation Of bodies; indeed, the
machi,u is both a materialist reduction of ,he soul and a general elegance of ,he discipline lay in the fact mat it could dispense wi,h
theory of dressage, al the centre of which reigns the notion of chis costly and violent relation by obtaining effects of utility at least
'docility', which joins the analysable body to ,he manipulable body. i:iS gi:eat. They were different, too, from •service\ which was a
A body is docile. ,har may be subjecled, used, tr•nsformed and constant, 1ot:al, massive, non-analytical, unlimited .relation of
imJ'roved. The celebrated automata, on 1he other hano, were not domination, established in the form of 1he individual will of the
only a way of illustrating an organism, they were also political masrer,h is 'caprice'. They were different from vassalage, which was
puppets, small-scale models of power: Frederick II, the meticulous • highly coded, buc distant relation of submission, which bore less
king of small machines, well-trained regimenis and long exercises, on ,he operations of the body ,ban on the products of labour and
was obmsed with them, 1hc ritual marks of allegiance, Again, they were different from
What was so new in lhese projects of docility that interested the ~,ceticism and from 'disciplines' of a monastic rype, whose function
eighteenth century so much? lt was certainly not the first rime that was to obtain renunciations rather than increases of utility and
the body had become the object of such imperious and pressing which, although they involved obedience to others, had as their
investments; in every society, the body was in the grip of very principal aim an increase of the mastery of each individual over his
strict powers, which imposed on it constraints, prohibitions or ,iwn body. The-his1orical moment of the disciplines was the momen1
obligations. However, there were several new things in these tech• when an ari of the human body was born, which was directed not
niques. To begin with, there was the scale of the control: it'was • unly at the growth of il'S skills, nor ac the intensification of i1s
137

Disdpline Docile bodies
subjection, but at the formationo f a relation that in the mechanism them be;ng totally inscribed in general and essential transforma
itsdf makes it more obedient a.s it becomes niore useful, and con ~ons, which we mus, now try to delin.eate.
versely. What was then being formed was a policy of coercions There ca.n be no question here of writing the history of the
that ac1 upon 1he body, a calculaied manipulation of its elemems, different disciplinary institutions, with all their individu.al differ
hs gestures, i•tsb ehaviour. The human body was emering·a machin ences. I simply intend ro map on a series of examples some of the
ery. of power 1har explores ft, breaks it down and rearranges it A essential rechniques that most easily spread from one to another.
'political ~natoi:ny', which was also a 'mechanics of power', was These were always meticulous, often minute, techniques, but they
being born; it defined how one may have a hold over others' bodies, had ,heir importance: because they defined a certain mode of
not only so that 1hey may do what one wish¢s, but so that they may detailed political investment of 1he body, a 'new micro-physics' of
opera1e as one wishes, with ,he techniques, the speed and ilie effi power; and because,, since 1\,e seventeenth century, they had con
ciency 1bat one determines. Thus disciplin,ep roduces subjecced and ,rantly reached out to ever broader domains, as if they tended to
practised bodies, 'docile' bodies. Discipline increases the for= of cover the entire social body. Small acts of cunning endowed with a
the body (in economic terms of utility) and diminishes these same great power of diffusion, sub,tkarrangemenrs, apparently innocent,
forces (in political terms ofobedience). In shorr,it dissociares power bu1p rofoundly suspicious, mechanisms that obeyed economies 100
from the body; on the one hand, i1 rums it into an 'aplirude', a shameful 10 be acknowledged, or pursued petty forms of coercion -
'capacity',w hich it seeks to increase;o n-the other hand, it reverses It was nevertheless they that hr.ought about rhe mutation of the
the course of the energy, the power ,hat might result from it, and punitive system, at the threshold of the comemporary period. De
turns it into a relation of strict subjection. If economic exploic ~cribing them will require great attention to detail: beneath every set
ation separates the force and the product of labour,. let us say of figures, ·we must seek not a meaning~ but a precaution; we must
that disciplinary coercion establishes in ,he body tbe con ,ituate. them not only in the inextricability of a functioning, but in
stricring Jink between an increased aptimde and an increased the coherence of a ca.ccicT.. hey are the acts of cunnlng, not so much
domination. of the greater reason cha,tw orks even in its sleep and gives meaning
The 'invention; of this new political ana10my must no( be see.n 10· rhe insignificant, as d.f the attentive 'malevolence' rhar turns
as a sudden discovery. lt is rather a multiplicity of often minor eve11ythingto account. Discipline is a political anatomy of derail.
processes, of diJfcrem origin and scattered locarion, which overlap, Before we lose patience we would do well to recall the words of
repe:at,o r imitate ooe -anoth~r,s upport one another, distinguish Marshal de Saxe:· 'Although th.ose who concern themselves with
themselves from ·one another according to their domain of applica details are regarded as folk of limited intelligence, it se<:ms 10 me
tion, conve.rgc and gradually produce the lilueprin1 of a general ,hat this part is essential, because jt is the foundation, and it is
method. They were at work in seconda.ry education at a very early Impossible to erect any building or establish any method without
date, later in primary schools; they slowly invested the space of the understanding its principles. It is nor enough ro have a liking for
hospital;a nd, in a few decades,t hey remucrured the military JrchitectureO. ne musta lsok nows ione-tutting(' Saxe,5 ), There i$
organization. They sometimes circulated very rapidly from one b whole history to be.w ritten about such 'srone•cutting' - a history
point ro another (between the army and the technical schools or of the utilitarian rationaliiation of de1aili n moral accountability and
secondary schools), sometimes slowly and discreetly (the insidious political control. The classical age did not initiate it; rather it
militari1,ation of the large workshops). On almost every occasion, .1ccelermedit , changed its scale, gave it precise inst:rl,!.mCnla'Sn,d
they were adopted in response ro particular needs: an industrinl perhaps found some echqes for i, in the calculation of the infinitely
innovatibn, a rrenewedo utbreako f ·cerrnine pidemic djseases, the ,mall .or in the description of the most derailed characteristics of
invention of the rifle or the victories of Prussia. This·did nor prevent notural being~. In any case, 'detail' had long been a category of
138 139

Discipline Docile bodies
rheology and asceticism: every detail is important since; in the sight the heavens and the planetary masses, but a ·Newton of 'small
of God, no ,immensity is greater than a detail, nor is anything so bodies', small movements, small ,actions; to the man who replied
small that it was not willed by one of his individual wishes. In this 10 Monge's remark, 'there was only one world 10 discover': 'What
great tradition of rhe eminence of detail, all the minutiae of Chris dQ I hear? But the world of derails, who has never dreamt of that
tian education, of scholastic or military pedagogy, all forms of other world, what of that world? I have believed in it ever since I
'training' found their place easily enough. For tl1ed isciplined man, was fifteen. I was concerned with i, then, and this memory lives
as for the true believer, no detail is unimpor\ant', bur not so much within me, as an obsession never to be abandoned ... That other
for the meaning that it conceals within it as for the hold it provides world is the most important of all that I flatter myself I have dis
for the power that wishes to seize it. Characterisricis the great hymn covered: -when I think of it, my heart aches' (tl1ese words are
to the 'little things' and to their eternal importance, sung by Jean attribµted 10 Bonaparte in the Introduction to Saint-Hilaire's
fr,,.,
Baptiste de L-a Salle, in his Tra'ires ur Its obligationsd es des No"fions.ry ntMtiquese t h1stofUJUdees, p/,if4sophin, arur,{{,).N apoleon
Eco/esc hritienn.s.T he mystique of the everyday is joined ,here with did nor discover this world; but we knowihar,he set out 10 organize
the discipline of the minute. 'How dangerous it is, to neglect little ir; and be wished to arran'ge around him a mechanism of power that
things. It is a very consoling reflection for a soul like mine, little would enable him to see thesmallcst e,vent that occur.red in the state
disposed to great actions, to think that fidelity to little things may, he governed; he intended, by mea.nso f the rigorous discipline that·he
by an imperceptible progress, raise us ro the most eminent sanctity: imposed, 'to embrace the whole of this vast machine without the
because little things lead to greater ... Little things; it will be said, slightest detail escaping his attention' (Treilhard, 14).
alas, my God, whac can we do tl1at is great for you, weak and mortal A meticulous observation of detail, and ar the same time a
creatures that we are. Little ,things; if great things presented them political awareness of these small things, for the control and use of
selves would we perform them? Would we not think them beyond men, emerge through the classical age bearing with them a whole
our strength? Little things; and,if God accepts them and wishes 10 ict of tech'niques, a whole corpus of methods and knowledge,
receive them •S-great things? Little things; has one ever felt this? dcscrjp1ions, plans and dara. And from such trifles, no dou.bt, the
Does one judge .according to experience? Little things; one is cer mano f modernh umanismw as born.1
tainly guilry, therefore, if seeing them as sudi, one refuses them?
Little things; yet it is they diat in the end have made ~rear saims!
1'1,,a rt of distrihu,ions
Yes, little things; but great motives, great feelings, great fervour,
great ardour, and consequently gTeat merits, grear treasures, great In the fir~r instance,.discipline proceeds from the distribu1i1mo f in
rewards' (La Salle, Traici ... , 218-9). The meticulousness of cllvidualsi n space. To achieve this end, it employs several techniql\eS.
th.e regulations, the fussiness of the inspections, the supervision of 1. Discipline sometimes requires eru:fosur~th, e specification of a
the smallest fragment oflife and of the body will soon provide, in tl1e pl~ce heterogeneous 10 all others a.od dosed in upon itself. It i_st he
contexto f the school,t he barracks,t he hospitalo r ,the workshop, protctted place of disciplinary monotony,T here was the gceilt
a laicized content, an economic or technical rationality for this cunfinemem' of vagabonds and paupers; there were other more
mystical calculus of tl1ei nfinitesimal and the infinite. And a History rllsoreet, but insidious and effective ones. There were the co!l;ges,
of Detail in rhe eigh1eentl1c entury, presided over by Jean-Baplisrc llr secondary schools: the monastic model was gradually imposed;
de La Salle, touching on Leibniz and Buffon, via Frederick 11 l,o~rding appeared as the most perfect, if not the most frequent,
1
covering pedagogy, medicine, military tactics and economics, •ducational regime; it became obligatory at Louis-le-Grand when,
should bring us, at the end of the century, io the man who dream, •f•er rhe departure ol the Jesuits, it~ turned inro a model school
of being anorher Newton, not the -Newton of the immensities of (uf, Aries, 308-13 and Snyders, 3i-41). There were the military

Discipline Docile bodies
barracks, the ;µ-my, that vagabond mass, bas to be held in place; that all workers be assembled under the same roof, so that the part
looting and violence must be prevented; the fears of local inhabi ner who is entrust~d with the management of the manufactory may
tal)ts, who do not care for troops passing through their towns, prevent and remedy abuses that may arise among the workers and
must be calmed; conflicts with the civil authorities must be·avoided; arrest their progress at the outset' (Dauphin, 199).
desertion must be stopped, expenditure controlled. The ordinance 2.. But -the principleo f 'en.closurei•s neither constant-n, or indis
of 1719 envisaged the consrrucrion of several hundred barracks, pensable, nor sufficient in disciplinary machinery. TMs machinery
on the model of those already set up in the south of the country; works space in a much more flexible and detailed way. Ir does this
there would be strict confinements: 'The whole will be enclosed by first of all on the principle ,;,f elementary location or partitioning.
an outer wall ten feet high,, which will surround the said houses, at Each individual has his own place; and each place its individual.
a distance of thiny feet from all the sides'; this w,ill have the effect A.void distributions in groups; break up collective dispositions;
of maintaining the troops in 'order and discipline, so that an officer •nalyse confused, massive or transient pluralities. Disciplinary space
will be in a position 10 answer for them' (L'OrdoTV1aN:mt iti,aire, tends to be divided into as many sections as there are bodies or
IXL, 11 September 1719). In '741, there were barracks in about elements to be distributed. One must eliminate th.e effects of impre
po towns; and it was estimated that the total capacity of the bar cise distributions, the, uncontrolled disappearance of individuals,
racks in 1775 was approxima1ely 100,000 men fDaisy, 1.01-9; an their diifqse circulation, their unusable and dangerous coagulation;
anonymous memoir of 1171, in Depot de la guerre, 3689, f. 116; It was a tactic of anti-desertion, anti-vagabondage, anri-concenrra
Navereau, 131-5). Side by side with 1hes pread of workshops, there tlon. Its aim was 10e stablish presences and absences, to know where
also.developed great manufacturing spaces, bo1h homogeneous-and •nd hov, 10 locate individuals, 10 set up useful communications, to
:well defined: first, the col)lbined manufactories, then, in the second lntct;TUpot thers, to be able a,. each moment to supervise the conduct
half of the eighteenth century, the works or factories proper (the of each individual, to assess it, to judge it, 10 calculate its qualities
Chaussade ironworks occupied almost the whole of the Medine ur merits.I t was a procedure,t herefore,a imeda t knowing, master
peninsula, between Nievre and Loire; in order 10 set up the Indret Ing and using. Discipline organizes an analytical space.
factory in 1777, Wilkinson, by means of embankments and dikes, And there, too, it encountered an old architectural and religious
constructed-an island on the Loire; Toufait built Le Creusot in the method: the mo11astic cell. Even if the compartments it assigns
valley of the Charbonnihc, which he transformed, and he had become purely ideal, the disciplinary space is always, basically,
workers' accommodation built in the factory itself); it was• change cellular. Solitude was necessary to both body and soul, according to
of scale, but it was also a new type of control. The factory was • certain-ascetidsmt:h eym ust, at certainm omentsa t least, confront
explicitly compared with the monastery, the fortress,. a walled town; lrmpt.1tion and perhaps the severity of God alone. 'Sleep is the
the guardian 'will open the gates only on the return of t1,e workers, h1111goef death, the dormitory is 'the 'image of the sepulchre ...
and after the bell that announces the resul'l)ption of work has been although the dormitories are shared, tlte beds are nevertheless
rung'; a quarter ofan hour later no one will~ admitted; at rhe end arrongeidn such a "'"Ya nd closed so, exactly by means of cuqains
of the day, the workshops'·heads will hand back the keys to the Swis, 1110t1h e girls may rise and retire without being seen' (Reglunentp our
guard of the factory, who will then open the gates (Ambois,, f, tO{Tlmunaudtiu ft/Jesd u Bon Pasuur, in Delamare, 107)· But this
11,1301). The aim is to derive the maximum advantages and 10 ulll a very crude form.
neutralize the inconveniences (thefts, interruptions of work, dit• 1, The rule of functionals itu would gradually, in the disciplinary
1urbances and 'cabals'), as the forces of production become more n,11tutions,c ode a space that architecture generally left at the dis-
concentrated; 10 protect ma1erialsa nd tools and 10 master the !about 11'"'-oIf several different uses: Particular places were defined 10
force: 'The order and inspection that must be maintained requiro 111'tspondn ot only to the need 10 supervise, to break dangerous

Discipline Docile bodies
communications, but also 10 create a useful space. The process producrio~ machinery and the different forms of activity in the
appeared clearly in ihe hospitals, especially in the military and naval distribution of 'pos1s' had to be linked tQgether. The Oberkampf
hospitals. In France, it seems that Rochefonserved both as experi• manufuctory at Jouy obeyed this principle. It was made up of a
ment and model. A port, and a military port is - with its circulation series of WQrkshopss pecified according to each broad type of.opera•
of goods, men signed up willingly or by force, sailors embarking tion: for the printers, the handlers, the colourists the women who
1
and disembarking, diseases and epidemics - a place of desertion, touched up the design, the engravers, the dyers. The largest of the
smuggling, contagion: il is a crossroads for dangerous mixtures, a buildings, built in 1791., by Toussaint Barre, was ., to ,netres long
meeting-place for forbidden circulations. The naval hospital must and had three storeys. The ground Roor was devoted mainly to
therefore treat, but in order 10 do this it must be a filter, a mechanism block printing; it contained 132 rabies arranged in two rows, the
that pins-down and panitions; it must provide a hold over this whole length of the workshop, which had eighty-eight windows; each
mobile, swarming mass, by dissipating the confusion of illegality printer worked at a table .with his 'puller', who prepared and spread
and evil. The medical supervision of diseases and contagions is rhe colours. There were 164 persons in all. At the end of each table
inseparable from a whole series of other controls: the military·comrol was a sort of rack. 6n which the material that had just been printed
over dese11ersf, iscalc ontrol over commodities, administrativec on. . was left to dry ~Saint-Maur). By walking up and down the central
trol over remedies, rations, disappearances, cures, deaths, simula •isle of the workshop, it was possible to carry out a supervision that
tions. Hence the need to distribute and partition off space in a wasb oth general and individual: to observe the worke.r's presence
rigorous manner. The fast .steps taken at Rochefort concerned •11da pplication,, and the quality of his work; 10 CQmparew orkers
things rather than men, precious commodities, rather than patients. with one another, to classify them according to skill and speed;
The arrangements of fiscal and economic supervision preceded the tu follow the successive srages of the production process. All these
techniques of medical observation: placing of medicines under lock 1rrializations formed a permanent grid: confusion was eliminated•:
and-key, recordfog their use; a little later, a system was worked out lhRt is 10 say, production was divided up and the labour process
to verify the real number of patients, their identity, the units 10 W•sa rticulated, on the one hand, according to its stages or elem·ent•
which they belonged; then one began to regulate their comings and tty operations, and, on the other hand, according to the individuals,
goings; they were forced 10 remain in their wards; to each bed w,i tho particular bodies, that carried it out: each variable of this force -
attached the name. of its occupant; each individual treated wM 1tt'1!ngth,p. romptness, skill, constancy - would be observed, and
entered in a register that the doctor had 10 consult during the vis1t1 tltcrefore charJcterized, assessed, computed and related to the
later came the isolation of contagious patients and separate bedi, individual who-was its particular agent. Thus, spread out in a per
Gradually, an administrative and political space was articulated upon lotrly legible way over the whole series of individual ,bodies, the
a therapeutic space; it tended 10 individualize bodies, diseaset, 'll«lrkf orce may l;,ea nalysed in individual "nits. At the emergence
symptoms, lives and deaths; it constituted a real table of juxtaposed ii large-scale industry, one finds,. bene:ith the division of the pro
and carefullyd iscinc1si ngularities0, ut of disciplinea; medically ~llijtlop process, the individualfaing fragmentation of labour power;
usefuI space was born. hr distributions of the disciplinary space often assured both.
In the factories thatappeared at the end of the eighteenth cenrury ◄• In discipline, the elements are interchangeable, since c-achi s
1
the principle of individualizing partitioning became more compll hned by the place it occupies in a series, and by the gap that
cated. It was a question of distributing individuals in a space In JMrates it from the others. The unit is, therefore, n,i1her the
which one might isolate them and map them; but also of articuladn~ rrhory (unit of domination), nor the place (unit of residence), but
this distribution on a production machinery that bad its own t1l "" ranlc: the place one occupies-in a classification, 'the point at which
,,r
quirements. The distribution of bodies, the spatial arrangement t liue and a column intersect, the interval in a series of intervals that
144 145

Discipline Docile bodies
nnu may traverseo ne after tl1eo rher. Discipline ls a~ a~t. of ra_nk, obtains from ~vee.kt o week, month 10 month, year to -year;a n
r,
1rchnique (or the transformation of arrangements. md1~1.dual12e; alignment of age groups, one after another; a,succe.ssiono f subjects
11
lmtlles b)I a location that does not give them a fixed pos1t1on, but taught and questions treated, according to an order offocreasing
,ll,tribu1es ,hem and circulates them in a network of relations. difficulty. And, in this ensemble of compulsory alignments, each
Take the example of the 'class'. Jn the Jesuit colleges, one.still pupil, according to his age, his performance, his behaviour, occupies
lwnd an organization that was at once binary and unified; ~he sometimes one Iank, sometimes another;h e moves consiandy over
classes, which· might comprise up to two or three hundred ~up•!•• a series of compa.rtmen,-ts' Someo f these are 1jdear companments,
were subdivided into groups of ten; each of these groups, wuh its marking a hierarchy of knowledge or ability, others express tbe
idccur-ion'w, as placed _ina camp, Roman or Carthaginian;e ach distribution of values or merits in material 1erms-in the space of the
'dccury' had its counterpart in the opposing camp. The general college or classroom. lt is a perpetual movement in which individuals
form was-that of war and rivalry; work, apprenticeship and classifi replace one another in a space marked off by aligned intervals.
cation were carried out in the form of.the joust, through the con The organization of a serial space was one of the great technical
frontation of two armies; the contribution of each pupil was in mutations of elementary education. It made it possible to supersede
scribed in this general duel; it contributed 10 the victory or the the traditional system (a pupil working for a few minutes with the
defeat of a whole camp; and the pupils were assigned a place tha, master, ,while the rest of the heterogeneous group remained idle and
c9rresponded to the function of each individual and to his value as unattended). By assigning individual places it made possible the
a combatant in the -unitary group of his 'decury' (Rochemonteix, supewision of each i,ndivjdual and the simultaneous work of all. It
, ff). It should be observed moreover that this Roman comedy organized a new economy of,he time of apprenticeship. fr made the
1
made it pO$$iblet o link, to the binary exercises of rivalry, a spatial educational space function like a learning machine, but also as a
disposition inspired by the legion, with rank, hierarchy, p~ramid;il machine for supervising, hierarchizing, rewarding. Jean-Baptiste de
supervision. One should not forge, that, generally speak,n~, the la Salle dreamt of a classroom in which the spatial distribution
Roman model, at the Enlightenment, played a dual role: ,n 111 might provide a whole series of distinctions at once: according to
republican -aspect, it was the very embodiment of liberty; in i,s 1hcp upHs'p rogress, worth, character, application, cleanJlnessa nd
military aspect, it was the ideal schema of discipline. The Rome of parents' fortune. Thus, the classroom would form a single great
the eighteenth cemury and of the Revolution was the Rome of me t•ble, With many different entries, under the scrupulously 'classi
Senate, but it was also ,bat of the legion; it was the Rome of the hc•rory' eye of the master: 'fn every· class there will be places
Forum but it was also that of the camps. Up 10 the empire, tl1e ~•signedf or, all the pupils of all the lessons, so that all those attending
Roma; reference transmitted, somewhat ambiguously, the juridic~! 1hcs ame lesson will always occupy the same place. Pupils attending
ideal of citizenship and ,he technique of disciplinary methods, ln the highest lessons will be placed in the benches closest to the wall,
any case, the strictly disciplinary element in the ancient fnble used by followed by the others according to the order of the lessons moving •
the Jes\\il colleges came to dominate the element of ioust and ".'ock 111wru:dtsh e middle of the classroom ... Each Qf 1he pupilsw ill
warfare. Gradually - but especially after 1762 - the educationil h•vch is place assigned to him and none of them will leave it or
space unfolds; the class becomes homogeneous, it is n9 longcr mad, h•nge it except on the order Qr with the consent of the school
up of individual elements arranged side by side under the mas1cr'1 t"pcctor.' Things must be so arranged that 'those whose parents
e'fe. In the eighteenth century, 'rank' begins to define the great form ., neglectful and verrninous must l;,es eparated from those who are
of distribution of individuals in the educational order: rows or l"dnk, t1rcful and clean; that an unruly and frivolous pupil should be
of pupils in the class, corridors, courryards; rank attributed to eacl, ,1,ced between rwo who are well behaved and serious, a libertine
pupil at the end of each task and each e.xamioation; t)1e rank h ii her alone or between two pious pupils'.•
146 147

I ll«•pline Docile bodies
1111 1rg,onlzing'c ells', 'places' and 'ranks', the disciplines create the disciplinary space of natural beings; the economic cable, the
, "'"plcx &pacest bat are at once architectural, functional and hier regulated movement of wealth.
,,,.l1lul. h is spaces thar provide fixed positions and permi.tc ircula- Bur the cable does not have the same function in tltese different
111111tl1o oyc arve out individual segments and establish operational registers. In ,he order of the economy, it makes possible tl)e
ll11k1;o hcy mark places and indicate values; they guarantee the measurement of ijuantities and the analysis of movements. In the
ohctllcncc of individuals, but also a better economy of time and 'form of taxonomy, it has the function of characterizing (and con
~tNlurc. They are mixed spaces: real because they govern the dis sequently reducing individual singularities) and constituting classes
puaitlon of buildings, rooms, furniture, but also ideal, because they (and therefore of excluding considerations o[ number). But in the
"°"
projected over this arrangement of characterizations, assessments, form of the ,disciplinary distribution, on the other hand, the cable
hierarchies. The first of the great operations of discipline is, there has. ~e•f onctio~ of treating multiplicity itself, distributing it and
(<,re, the constitution of 'tahleaux vivams\ -which transform the der,voog from It as many effects as possible. Whereas natural
confused, useless or dangerous multitudes into ordered multiplici •~xo.no_myis sl":"'ted ~n die axis that links character and category,
ties. T.he drawing up of 'tables' was one of the great problems of the d,scoplm~ry tacncs osS ituated on the axis chat links the singular and
scientific, political and economic technology of the eighteenth the multiple. Ir allows both the characterization of ,he individual
century: how one was to arrange botanical and zoological gardens, as individual ~nd die ordering of a given multiplicity. H is the first
and constructa t the same time rationalc lassificationso f living beings; condition for the control and use of an ensemble of distinct elements:
how one was to observe, supervise, regularize the circulation of the base for a micro-physics of what might be called a 'cellular'
commodities and money and thus build up an economic cable chat power.
might serve as the principleo f the increaseo f wealth; how one was
to inspect men, observe their presence and absence and constitute
Th, comrol of acri,i,y
a general and pc.nnanentr egistero f the-armedf orces; how one was
co distribute patients, separate them from one another, divide up 1. The time-,ahle is an old inheritance. The strict model was no
the hospital space and make. a systematic classification of diseases: doubt suggested by rhe monastic communities. It soon spread. Its
these were all twin opc,Jtions in which the two elements - distribu three great methods - establish rhythms, impose particular occupa
tion and analysis, supervision and intelligibility - are inextricably oions, regulate the cycles of repetition - were soon to be found in
bound up. Jn the eighteenth century, the cable was both a technique schools, workshops and hospitals. The new disciplines had no dil!i
of power and a procedure of knowledge. It was a question of culty in raking up their place in.the old forms; the schools and poor
qrganizing the multiple, of providing oneself with an instrument to houses extended the life and the regularity of the monastic com
cover it and to master it; it was a question of imposing upon jr an '."unities to ":'hich they were often attached. The rigours of the
'order'. Like the army general of whom Guibert spoke, the natural ondustrml period long retained a religious air; in the seventeenth
ise, the physician, the economist was 'blinded by the immensity, century, the regulations of the great manufactories laid down tbe
dawd by the multitude ... the innumerable combinations char result txercises that wouliJ djvide up the working day: 'On arrival in the
from the multiplicity of objects, so many concerns together form a morning, before beginning their work, all persons shall wash their
burden above his strength. In perfecting itself, in approaching true han_dso, ffer up, ~heir work to God and make the sign of the cross'
principles, the science of modern warfare might become simpler and (Saont-Maur,a rrocle 1); but even in rhe _nineteenthc entu~y, when the
less difficult'; armies 'with simple, similar tactics, capable of being ':'""'I po_pulations were needed fa industry, they were sometimes
adapted co every movement ... would be easier to move and lead' IQrmed into 'congregations', in an attempt to inure chem co work
(Guibert, xxxvi). Tactics, tlJe spatial ordering .of men; taxonomy, In the workshops; the framework of the 'factory-monastery' was
149

Discipline Docile bodies
imposed upon the workers. In the Protestant armies of Maurice of at any game wharsoever, to eat, 10s leep, 10 tell stories and comedies'
Orange and Gustavus Adolphus, military discipline was achieved (Qppenheim, article 16); and eyen during the meal-break, 'there will
through a rhythmics of time punctuated by pious exercises; army be no telling of stories, adventures or other such talk that distracts
life, 13oussanellcw as later to say, sho<1ldh ave some of the 'perfec• the workers from their work'; 'it is expressly forbidden for any
tipns of the cloister itself' (Boussanclle, 2; on the religious character worker, under any pretext, to bring wine iMo the manufactory and
of discipline in ibe Swedish army, cf. TA, Swedish Duciplin<, 10 drink in the workshops' (Amboise,a rticle 4), Time measured and
London, 1632). For centuries, ,he religiow orders.had .been masrers paid must also be a time without impurities or defects; a rjme of
of discipline: they were the specialists of time, the great technicians good quality, throughout which the body is conscantly applied to
of rhythm and regular activities. But ihe disciplines altered these its exercise. Precision and application are, with regularity, the funda
methods of temporal regulation from which they derived. They mental virtues of disciplinary time. Bur \his is not the ne,vest rhing
altered them first by refining them. One began to count in quarter about it. Other methods are more characteristic of the disciplines.
hours, in minutes, in seconds. This happened in the army, of course: 2. Tk temporal elaborationo f t!r, acr. There are, for e.~ample,t wo
Guibert systematically implemented the chronometric measurement ways of controlling marching troops. In cl1e early seventeenth
of shooting that had been suggested earlier by Vauban. In the ele century, we have: 'Accustomed soldiers marching in file or in
mentary schools, the division of time became increasingly minute; battalion 10 march to the rhythm of the drum. And to do this, one
activities were governed in detail by orders that had to be obeyed must begin with the right foot so that the whole troop raises the
immediately: 'At the last stroke of the hour,. a pupil wi.11r ing the same foot at the same rime' (Monigommery, 86). In the mid
bell, and at the first sound of the bell all the pupils will kneel, with cighteench century, there are four sorts of steps: 'The length of the
their arms crossed and their ey,esl owered. When the prayer has been the .short step will be a foot, that of the ordinary step, the double
said, the 1eache1w ill strike the signal once 10 indicate chat the pupils step and the marching step will be cwo feet, thewhole measured from
should get up, a second time as a sign that they should salute Christ, One heel to the next; as for the duration, that of the small step and
and a third that they should sit down' (La Salle, Conduire. . . , 27-8), the ordinary step will last one second, during which two double
In the early nineteenth century, the following time-table was sug stepsw o<1ldb e performed; rhe duration of che marching step will be
gested for the Eco/es mumellu, or 'murual improvement schools': • little longer than one second. The oblique step will rake one
8.45 emrance of the monitor, 8,j2 the monitor's summons, 8.56 second; it will be at most eighteen inches from one heel to the next
entrance of the children and prayer, 9.00 the children go to the.ir ... The ordinary step will be executed forwards, holding the head
benches, 9.04 first slate, 9.08 end of dictation, 9. u second slate, etc. up high and the body erect, holding oneself in balance successively
(J'ronchot, nt). The grad<1ale xtension of the wage 0 earning class tin a single leg, and bringing-the other forwards, the ham taut, che
brought with it a more detailed partitioning of time: 'If workers point of the foot a little rumed outwards and low, so that one may
arrive later than a quarter of an hour after the ringing of the bell . , .' without affectation brush the ground on which one must walk and
(Amboise, article :i.); 'if ;my on~ 6f the companions is asked for p!Qcoen e'sf oot,i n sucha wayr llal eachp art may come co rest there
during work and loses more than five minutes .. .', 'anyone who is oc the same rime without striking the ground' ('Ordonnance du t.,
nor at his work at the correct time .. .' (Oppenheim, article 7-8). janvier 1766, pour regler !'exercise de l'infamerie'). Between these
Bue an attempt is also made to assure the quality of the time u~: 1woi nstructions, a new set of restraints had been brought into play,
constant supervision, the pressure of supervisors, the elimination o( •nother degree of precision in che breakdown of gestures and move-
anything 1hat mightdisrurb or distrac1; it is a question of constitut• 1nents,a nother way of adjusting the body to temporal imperatives.
ing a 1ocallyu seful time: 'Ir is expressly forbidden during work co What the ordinance of 1766 defines is not a time-table - the
amuse o,ne's companions by gestures or in any otbec way, 10 play "cnt!ral framework for an activity; it is rather a collective and
I j J

Discipline Docile bodies
obligatory rhythm, imposed from the outside; it is a 'programme'; relations that the body must have with the object that it manipulates.
it assures the elaboration of the ace itself; it controls its developmenc Between them, it outlines a meticulous meshing. 'Bring the weapon
and its stages from the inside. We have passed from a form of forward. In three stages. Raise the rifle with the righrhand, bringing
injunction that measured or punctuated gestures to.a web that con it close to the body so as to hold •it perpendicular with the right
strains them or sustains them throughout their entire succession. A knee, the end of the barrel at eye level, grasping itby striking it with
son of anatomo-chronological schema of behaviour is,defined. The the right hand, the arm held close 10 the body at waist height. At the
act is broken down into its elemems; the position of the body, limbs, second stage, bring the rifle in front of yqu with the left hand, the
articulations is defined; 10 each movement are assigned a direction, barrel in the middle between the two eyes, vertical, the right hand
an aptitude, a duration; their order of~uccession is prescribed. Time grasping it at the small of the butt, the arm outsttetched, the trigger
penetrates the body and with it.all the meticulous controls of power. guard resting on the first finger, tl\e left hand ac the height of the
3. Hence th, correlationo f the body and the gmure. Disciplinary notch, the thumb lying along the barrel against the moulding. At
control does not consist simply in reaching or imposing a series of tqe 1hird stage, lee go of the rifle with the left hand, which falls along
particular gestures; it imposes the best relation berween a gesture the thigh, raising the rifle with the right hand, the lock ourwards
and 1he overall position of the body, which is its condition of effi and opposite the chest, the right arm half flexed, the elbow close to
ciency and speed. In rhe correct use of the body, which makes the body, the thumb lying against the lock, resting against the first
possible a correct use of time, nothing must remain idle or useless: «:rew, the hammer resting on the lirsc linger, tbe barrel perpendicu
everything must be called upon to form the support of the act htr' ('Ordonnance du 1« janvier 1766 ... , titre XI, article 1'). This
required. A well-disciplined body forms the operational context of is an example of what might be called the instrumental coding of the
the slightest gesture. Good handwriting, for example, presupposes body. Ir consists of a breakdown of the total gesture into two parallel
a gymnastics - a whole routine whose rigorous cod~ fovests the body 11eriest:h at of the parts of the body to be used (rigbt hand, left hand,
in its entirety, from the points of the feet 10 ,he tip of the index ,llfferent fingers of the hand, knee, eye, elbow, etc.) and that of the
finger. The pupils must always 'hold their bodies erect, somewhat parts of ,he object manipulare<)( barrel, notch, hammer, screw, ~,c.);
turned and free on the lefrside, slightly inclined, so that, with d,c then the rwo sets of pans are correlated together according 10 a
elbow placed on the table, the chin can be rested upon the hand, number of simple gestures (resc, bend); lastly, it fixes the canonical
unless this were tQ interfere witli the view; the left leg must be some• 1uccession in which each of these co.rreJatiooso ccupies a particular
what more forward under the table than the right. A distance of rwo place. This obligatory syntax is what the military theoreticians of
fingers must be left berween the body and the table; for not only rhe eighteenth century called 'manoewr,'. The traditional recipe
does one write with more alertness, but nothing is more ham,ful v.1vesp lace m explicit anc,lo bligatory prescriptions. Over the whole
co the health than to acquire the habit of pressing one's stomach -urface of contact between d1eb ody and the object it handles, power
against the table; the pan of the left arm from the elbow ro the hand 1, introduced, fastening them to one another. It constitutes a body
must be placed on the table.T he right arm must be at a distanco wcaponb, ody-toolb, ody-machinceo mplexO. ne•isa s fara s possible
from the body of about three fingecs and l>ea bout five fingers from from d1ose forms of subjection chat demanded of rhe body only
the table, on which it must rest lightly. The teachec will place ,he •111,nosr products, forms of expression or. the result of lobour.
pupils in the posture that they should maintain when writing, and "l'hc regulation imposed by power is at the same time the law of
will correct it e.ither by sign or otherwise, when they change thl, construction of the operatiim. Thus· disciplinary power appear.no
position' (La Salle, Conduiu .. ., 63-4). A disciplined body is the l,ave the function not so much qf deduction as of synthesis, not so
prerequisite of an efficient gesture. 1n11cho f exploitation· of the product as of coercive link witb the
4. The hody--ohjecta rdculation. Discipline defines each of tl1r •(>pararuso f production.
151 153

Discipline Docile bodies
; , Exhaustive use. The principle that underlay the time-table in Through this technique of subjection a new object was being
its traditiona1f orm was essentiaHyn egative_i;t was the princif'leo f formed; slowly, it superseded the mechanical body- the body com
non-idleness: it. was forbidden to waste ,time, which was counted by posed of solids and assigned movements, the image of ,yhich had
God and paid for by men; the time-table was to eliminate the danger for so long haunted those who dreamt .of disciplinary perfection.
of wasting it- a moral offence and economicdishonesry. Discipline, This new objec, is the natural body, the bearei of forces and the seat
on the other hand, arranges,a. positive economy; it poses the prin of duratioJJ; it is the body susceptible to specified operations, which
ciple of a theoretically ever-growing use of ,ime: exhaustion rather hav.et heir order, their stages, their internal conditions, their con
'than use; it is a question of ex1r.1cting,f rom rime, ever more available ~tituent elements. In becoming the target for new, mechanisms
moments and, from each moment, ever more useful forces. This nf power, the body is offered up to new forms of knowledge. It is
means tha1 one must Seel; tQ intensify the use of the slightest the body· of exercise, rather than of speculative physics; a body
moment,a s if time, in lts very fragmentationw, ere inexhaustibleo r manipulated by authority, ra01er than imbued with animal spirits;
as if, at least by an ever more detailed internal arrangement, one 11b ody of useful training and not of rational mechanics, but one in
could 1end towards an ideal point at which one maintained maximum which, by virtue of that very fact, a number of natural requirements
speed and maximum efficiency. It was precisely this that-was imple ~nd functional constraints are beginning to emerge. This is the body
mented in the celebrated regulations of the Prussian infantry that ,hat Guibert discovered in his critique of excessively artificial move
the whole of Europe imitated after the victories of Frederick II:4 the menrs.I n rbe exercise that is imposed upon it and which it resists,
more time is broken down, the more itS subdivisions multiply, 1ht body brings out its essential correlations and spontaneously
the better one disaniculates it by-deploying its internal elements tcjecfs the incompatible: 'On entering most of our iraining schools,
under a, gaze that supervises ·them, the mote one can acce1erate :in une sees all those unfortunate so.ldiers in constricting and forced
operation, or ac. leas( regulatej t accordingt o an optimum speed; attitudes, one sees all their muscles contracted, the circulation of their
hence this regulation of the time of an action rhat was so important hlood interrupted ... If we studied the intention ·of nature and the
in the army and which was to be so throughout ,he entire tecl\nology rnnstruction of the human body, we would Jind th.e position and
of human activity: rhe Prussian regulations of 1743 laid down six the bearing that nature clearly prescribes for the soldier. The head
stages to bring the weapon to one's foot, four co extend it, thirteen must be erect, standing out from the shoulders, sitting perpendicu
lO raise it to the shoulder, etc. By other means, che 'mutual improve. . l•rly between them. It must be turned neither to left nor to right,
ment school' was also arranged as a machine to intensify the use of hcQiuse,i n view of the correspondence between the vertebrae of the
time; iLSo rganizationm ade it possible to obviate the linear, succes nrck and the shoulder-blade to which they are attached, none of them
sive character of the master's reaching: it regulated the counterpoint 11111myo ve in a circular manner without slightly br1nging with it
of operations performed, at the same moment, by different groups from the same side that it moves one of the shoulders and because,
of pupils under the direction of monitors and assistants, so that each 1heb ody no longer being placed squarely, the soldier can no longer
passingm omenwt asf illedw ith manyd ifferentb, ur ordereda ctivi• wulk straight in from of him or serve as a point of alignmen.t. .
ties; and, on the other hand, the rhythm imposed by signals, whistles, \Ince the hip-bone, ,yhich the ordinance indicates as the point
orders imposed on everyone temporal norms that were intepded both 11<11lnwsht ich the butt end should rest, is not situated the same in all
to accelerate the process of learning and to teach. speed as a virtue;• mon, the rifle must be placed more to the right for some, and more
'the sole aim of these commands ... is to accustom rhe children 10 tu the left for others. For the same reason of inequality of strucrure,
execuring well and quickly the same operations, tQ diminish as far ns the trigger-guard is more or less pressed against the body, depending
possible by speed the loss of time caused by moving from one opera• 1111w hether the outer parts of a man's shoulder is more or less
tion to another' (Bernard). llr,l,y' (Guibert, 2r-2).
lj4 tjl

Discipline Docile bodies
We have seen how the procedures of disciplinary distribution had roll-call was taken, from a list on the wall; the absentees were noted
their place among the contemporary techniques of classification and down in a register. The school was divided into •three classes. The
tabulation; but also how they introduced into them the specific Arst for 1hose who had no notion of drawing; rhey were made to
problem of individuals and multiplicity. Similarly, the disciplinary ttopy models, which were more or less difficult according 10 the
controls of activity belonged to a whole series of researches, theor nbilitieso f each pupil. The second 'for those who already have some
etical or •practical, into the natural machinery of bodies; bur they principles', or who had passed through the first class; they had to
began to discover in them specific processes; behaviour and its n;produce picruri,s 'at sight, without tracing', but considering only
organized requirements gradually replaced the simple physics of the drawing. ln -the third class, they learnt colouring and pastel
movement. The body, required to be docile in its minutest opera• tlrawing, and were introduced 10 rhe theory and practice of dyeing.
tions, opposes and shows the conditions of functioning proper to an The pupils performed ·individual tasks at regular intervals; each of
organism. Disciplinary power has as its correlative an individuality 1hesee xercises, signed with the name of ilS author and date of
that is not only analytical and 'cellular', but also natural and cKCcution,w as handed in 10 1he teacher; the best were rewarded;
•organic'. ,1ssembledt ogeiher ai the.end of the year and compared, they made
It possible 10 establish the progress, the present ability and rhe
relative place of each pupil; it was then decided which of them could
Th, organi;_atioonf geneses
(>assi nto the next class. A general book, kept by the teachers and
In 1667, the edict that set up th.em anufactory of the Gobelins their assistants, recorded from day 10 day 1be behaviour of the
envisaged, the organization of a school. Sixry scholarship children pupils and everything mat happened in the school; it was periodically
were ,o be chosen by the superjntendent of royal buildings, entrus• d1own to an inspector (Gerspach, 1892).
ted for a time to a master-whose task it would be to provide them The Gobelins school is only one example of an important pbeno-
with 'upbringing and instruction►, then apprenticed to the various 1henon:t he development, in 1he classical period, of a new technique
,.,r
master tapestry makers of the manufactory (who by virtue of this ~ing charge of 1he Limeo f individual e><isrencesf;o r regulating
_factr eceived compensarion deducted from the pupils' scholarships); the relations of time, bodies and forces; for assuring an accumufa. .
after six years' apprenticeship, four years of service and a qualifying 1ion of duration; and for turning 10 ever-increased profit or use the
examination, they were given the right to 'sec up and run a shop' movement of passing time. How can one capitalize the time o(
in any town of the kingdom. We find here the characteristics of individuals, accumulate it in each of them, in their bodies, in their
guild apprenticeship: the relation of dependence.on the master that forces or in their abilities, in a way that is susceptible of use and
is both individual and total; the statutory duration of the training, control? How can one organize profitable durations? The disciplines,
which is concluded by a qualifying examination, but which is not which analyse space, break up and rearrange activities, must also be
broken down according 10 a precise programme; an overall exchange un<lcrstooda s machinery for adding up and capiralizing time. This
betweent he masterw ho mustg ive his knowledgaen d the appren• wasd ooe in four ways, which emerge most dearly in military
tice who must offer his services, his assistance and often some pay organization.
ment. The form of domestic service is mixed with a transference of , . Dlvidc duration into successive or parallel segments, each of
knowledge.• In t?J7, an edict organized a school of drawing for which must end at a spec.ifict ime. For example, isolate me period
1he apprentices of the Gobelins; it was not intended to replace the .,f ,raining and the period of practice; do not mix the instruction of
,raining given by the master workers, but to complemen1 it. It recruits and the exercise of veterans; open separate military schools
involved a quite different arrangement of time. Two hours a day, for ,he armed service (in 1764, the crealion of the Ecole Militaire in
except on Sundays and feast days, the pupils met in the school. A fl~ris, in 1776 1he creation of twelve schools in the provinces);
qG 157

Discipline Docile bodies
recruit professional soldiers at the youngesc possible age, take difference involves specific exercises. At the end of each s,eries,
ch11dren, 'have chem adopted by the nation, and brought up in others begin, branel1o ff and subdivide in turn. Thus each individual
J.,
special schools' (Servan, 4~6); ,each in wrn posture, marching, is caught up [n a temporal series which,specifically defines his level
the handling of weapons, shooting, and do not pass 10 another or his rank. It is a disciplinary polyphony of exercises: 'Soldiers· of
activity until the first l1as b«n completely mastered: 'One of the the second class will be exercised every morning by sergeants,
prindpal mistakes is ro show a soldier every exercise at once' corporals, anspusade.s,l ance-corporals ... The lance-corp.orals will
0
('Reglcmenc de 1743 ... '); in short, break dqwn time into separate be e;;ercised every Sunday by the J1ead of the section ... ; the cor
and adjusted threads. 1. Organize. these thread$ according to an porals and an.rpessadisw ill be exercised every Tuesday aftentoon
analytical plan - successions of elements as simple as possible, by the sergeants an.d their company and these .in turn on the after
combining according to increasing complexity. This p,resupposes noohs of every second, rwelfih and twenty-second day of each
that instruction should abandon the principle of analogical repeti m.onrhb y senior officers' (I,;scruc1iQ,n . . ),
tion. In the sixteenth century, military exercise consisted above all It is this disciplinary time that was gi;adually imposed on peda
in copying all or part of the action, and of generally increasing the gogical practice - specializing the time of training and detaching it
soldier's skill or strength;' in the eighteenth century, the instruction from the adult time, from the time 0£ mastery; arranging different
of the 'manual' followed the principle of the 'elementary• and not of stages,.separatcd from one another by graded examinations; drawing
the. 'e.xemplary': simple gestures - the position of tbe fingers, the ~p programmes, each of which must take place ,during a particular
be.nd of the leg, the movement of the arms - basic elements for useful stagea nd which involves exercises of increasing difficulcy;q ualifying
actions that also provide a general training in strength, skill, individuals according to the way in which they progress through
docility. J· Finalize these temporal segments, decide on how long these seriei;. For the 'initiatory' time of traditional training (an over
each will lase and conch1de it with an examination, which will have •ll time, supervised by the master alone, authorized by a single
the triple function of showing whether the subject has reached the examination), disciplinary time had substituted its multiple and
level required, of guaranteeing that each subject undergoes the same progressive series. A whole,analytical ped~gogy was being formed,
apprenticeship and of differentiating the abilities of each individual. meticulous in its derail (ic broke down the subject being taught into
When ,he sergeants, .corporals, ere. 'entrusted with the task of its simplest elements, it bie1orchized each stage of development into
instructing the ochers, are of the opinion that a particular soldier is ,mail seeps) and also very precociousjn ifs history (it largely antici
ready ,o pass into the first.class, they will present hi.m first to the pated the genecic analyses of the idiologu,s,w hose technical model
officers of their company, who. will carefully examine him; if they h appears to have been). At the beginning of the eighteenth century,
do not find him sufficiently practised, they will refuse to admit him; Demi• suggested a divisiQn of the proces~ of learning to, read into
if, on the other hand, 1he man presented seems to them to be ready, scven levels: rhc first for those who are beginning to learn the let,ers,
the said ,officers will themselves· propose him 10 the commanding 1hes econd for lhose who are learning to spell, the third for those
officero f the regimenrw, ho wills ee him if he rhinksi t necessary, who are learning 1 9 join syllablest ogether 10 make words, che
and will have him examined by the senior officers. The slightest fourth for those who are reading Latin in sentences or from p~nc
mistakes will be enough to have him rejected, and no one will be tuation 10 punctuation, the fifth for those who are beginning to read
able to pass from the s~ond class to the first until he has undergone French, the sixth for the best readers, 1hes eventh for those who can
this first examin~tion' (ln.struction par l1ext1rcis~ de l'ilZfanrerie; 14 read manuscripts. But, y,here there are·a great many pupils, further
mai 1754). 4. Draw up series of seri.es;l ay down for each individual, subdivisions would have to be introduced; the first class would
according to his level, his seniority, bis rank, the exercises that are comJlrise four screams: one for those who are learning the· 'simple
suited to him; common exercises have a differing role and each l~tcers';' I second for those who are learning the 'mixed' leners; a
158 159

Discipline Docile bodies
third for those who are learning the abbreviated leners (a, € ... ); of functioning of power. No doubt it is as i( the 'history-remember
a fourth for those who arc learning the double lerters (ff, ,s, u, st). ing' of. the chronicles, genealogies, exploits, reigns and deeds had
The second class would be divided inro three streams: for Oiose who long been linked to a modality of power. With the new teehniques
'count each letter aloud before spelling the syllable, IJ.O., DO'; for of subjection, the 'dynamics' of continuous evolutions tends to Te
those 'who spell the most difficult syllables, such as banr, brand, place the 'dynasties' of solemrLe vents.
spin.x', etc. (Demia, ,9-20). Each srage in lhe combinatory of el In any case, the small tempo,:al continuum of individuality
ements mus, be inscribed within a greattemporal series, which is both genesis certainly seems to be, like tbe individualhy-cell or ,he
a natura.1p rogress of the mind and a· code for educative procedures. individuality-organism, an effect and an object of discipline. And, at
The 'seriation' of successive activi1ies .makes possible a whole the centre of this,seriation of time, one finds a procedure that is, for
investment of duration by power: the possibility of a detailed con it, what the drawing up of 'table;' was for the distribution of
trol and a regular inte.rvention ( 0£ differentiation, correction, individuals and cellular segmentation, or, again, what 'mano,uyre'
punishmenr, elimination) in e;ich moment of time; the possibility of was for the economy of activities and organic control. This proce
charac,erizing, and tlicrcfore of using individuals according to the dure is 'exercise'. E~ercise is rhac 1echnique by which one imposes
level in the series that they are moving through; the possibility of on the body tasks that are boO, repetitive and different, but always
accumulating time and acrivity, of rediscovering them, totalized and graduated. 13yb ending behayiour towards a terminal stare, exercise
usable in a final result, which is the ultimate capacity of an individual. makes possible a per]l<!tualc ha.rac,eriuuion of the individ,ual either
Temporal dispersal is brought together to produce a profit, thus in r-efationt o this term, in rel~tion to other indivjduals, or in relation
mastering a duration that would otherwise elude one's grasp. Power 10 a type of itinerary. It thus assures, in the form of continuir;y and
ls articulatedd irectlyo nro i:ime;-ia.ts suresi ts contro1. i:ndg uarantees constraint, a growth, an observation, a qualification. Before adopt•
its use- Ing this strictly discipli1>aryf orm, exercise had a long history; it is
The disciplinary methods reveal,a lin·eart ime whose moments are 10 be found in military, religious and universir;y practices eith,er as
integrated, one upon another, and which is orientated t0wards a
initiation ritual, pre_pararory ceremony, theanica) rehearsal or
terminal, stable point; ln short, ~n ~evolutive' time. But it muse be ci;,caminationI. ts linear, continuously progressive organization, its
recalled that, at rhe same momerlt, che administrative and economic genetic development in time were; at least in the army and the
techniques of control reveal a social time of a serial, orlentated, $cho6~ introduced at a later date - and were no doubt of religious
cumulative type: the discovery of an evolution in terms of 'progress', urigin. In any case, the idea of an educational 'programme' that
The disciplinary techniques reveal individual series: the discovery of would follow the child to the end of his schooling and which would
an evolution in terms of 'genesis'. These rwo great 'discoveries' involve from year to year, month to month,' exercises of increasing
of the eighteenth century- the progress of societies and the geneses eon1plexi1y, first appeared, it seems, in a religious group, the
of individuals -were ,perhaps correlative with the new techniques of Brothers of the Common Li(e (~f. Meir, , 6o IT). Strongly inspired
power, and more specificallyw, ith' a new way of administering
~Y Ruysbroek and Rhenish mysticism, th~y transpos.d eertain of
time and making it u~eful,. by segmentation, seriation, synthesis and the spiritual techniques 10 education - and 10 the education not onlil'
totalization, A macro-and a micro-physics of power made possible, of clerks, bm als<;o>f magistrate's and merchants; the theme of a per
not the invention of history (it had long had no need of that), but foction towards which the exemplary master guides the pupil became
the incegration of a temporal, unitary, contin'uous, cumulative with them that of an authoritarian perfection of the pupils by the
dimen;ion in ,.hee xercise of controls and the practice of dominations. t~cher; the ever-increasing rigorous exercises •that the ascetic life
'Evolutive' hlstoricity, as it was then constitured-and so profoundly proposed became rasks of increasing complexity that marked the
that it is still sclf-evi'dent for many today - is bound up with a mode firadual acquisition of knowledge and good b~haviour; the striving
100 16t

Discipline Docile b<>dies
of the whole community towards salvation became ,he collective, maximum efficiency. 13ut "these economic reasons could become
permanent comperition of individuals being classified in relation ,o dererminanto nly with a technical transformation: the invention of
one another. Perhaps it was these procedures of community life and 1he riAc:11 more accurate, more rapid than the musket, it gave
salvation that were ,he first nucleus of methods inrended to produce greater value to the soldier's skill; mote capable of reaching a par
individually characteriz.ed, but collectively useful aptitudes.• In its ticular target, it made it possible 10 exploit lire-power at ,an indivi
mystical or ascetic form, exercise was a way of ordering earthly cime dual level; and, convei:sely, it tumed every soldier into a possible
for the conquest of salvation. It was gradually, in the history of the targer, requiring by the same t0ken greater mobility; it involved
West, to change direction while preserving certain of its character therefore ,he disappearance of a technique of masses in favour of an
istics; it served to economize the time of life, to accumulate it in a ort th,>td istributed units and men al<>nge xt.epded, relatively flexible,
useful form and to exercise power over men through the mediation mobile-lines. Hence the need to find a w.hole calculated practice of
of time arranged in this way. Exercise, having become an element individual and cqllective dispositions, movements of groups <>r
in the political technology of the body and of duration, does no, lsalated elements, changes of position, of movement from one dis
culminate in a beyond, bui tends towards a subjection that has never position ,o another; in short, the need to invent.a machinery whose
reached its limit. principle woulcl no longer be ,he ·mobile or immobile mass, 'but a
geometry of divisible segments whose basic unity was rhe mobile
$oldier with his tifle;1' and, no doubr, below the soldier himself, the
The compositiono f forces
minimal gestures, rhe elementary stages of actions, the fragments qf
'Let us begin by destroying the old prejudice, according to which spaces occupied or traversed.
one believed one was increasing the strength of a troop by increasing The same pr6blems arose when it was a question of constituting
its depth. All the physical laws of movement become chimeras when • productive.force whose effect had to be superior to the sum of
one wishes to apapr ,hem to tactics.'• From the end of the seven elementary forces that composed it: 'The combined -working-day
teenth century, the technical problem of infantry had been freed produces, telatively to an equal sum of working-days, a gt'cater
from the physical model of mass. In an army of pikes and muskets - quantity of use-values, and, consequently, diminishes the labour
slqw, imprecise, practically incapable of selecting a ta.rgeta nd taking time necessary for the production of a given useful effect. Whether
aim - troops were used as a projectile, a wall or:~ fortress: 'rhe the combined working-day, in a given case, acquires this increased
formidable infantry of the army of Spain'; the distribution of soldiers productive power, because it heightens the mechanical force of
in this mass was carried out above all according 10 ,heir seniority labour, or extends irs sphere ·of action over a greater space, or con
and ,heir bravery; at the centre, with the task of providing weight tracts the field of production relatively to the scale-of production,
and volume, of giving density 10 the body, were ,he least experi or at the critical moment sets large masses of labour to work ... the
enced; in front, at the angles and on the flanks, were the bra~est or special productive power of the combined w<;>rking-dayi s, under
repUledly most skilful soldit!rs. In the course of the das~lcal period, -allc ircumstance1s,h es ocialp roductivep owero f labour,o r the
one passed qver to a whole set of delicate articulations. The unit - productive power of social labour. This power is due m cooperation
regiment, batt.alion,s ection and, lacer, 'division't&- became a sort itself' (Marx, Capiral,v ol. ! , Jn~12). On several oct.isions, Man:
of machine with many parts, moYing in relation tQ one anot.herin 51.ressetsh, e analogy between the problems of the division of labour
1
order to arrive at a· configurarion and to <>btaina specific result. and those of military ,accics. For example: 'Just as the offensive
What were the reasons for this mutation? Some were economic: to power of a squadron of cavalry, or the defensive power of a regi
make each individual useful and the training, maintenance, and ment of infantry, is essentially different from the sum-of the offen
arming of troops profitable; to give to each soldier, a precious unit, sive or defeosive powers of the individual cavalry or infantry
r6J

Discipline Docile bodies
soldiers taken separately, so the sum total o'f the mechanical force, , ;ch must be adjusted to the time of the others in such a way that the
exerted by isolated workmen differs from the social force that is 1111,ximuqmu antity of forces may be extracted from each and com-
developed, when many hands take part simultaneously in one and 1,lnedw ith the optimum result. Thus Servan dreamt of°a military
the same undivided operation' (Marir, Capital, vol. , , 308). umchine that would cover the whole territory of the nation and in
Thus a new demand appears to which discipline musr respond: to which each individual would be occupied without interruption but
construct a machine whose effect will be max\mized by rhe concerted 10 • different way according co ,he evolutive segment, the genetic
articulation of the element:1n'.p arts of which it is composed. Disci• ,quence in which .he finds himself. Military life would begin in
pline is no longer simply an art of distributing bodies, of extracting ,•l,lldhood, when young children. would be taught the professioh of
time from them and accumulating it, but o{ composing forces in ,umsi n "militarym anors';i l would end in theses amem anorsw hen
order to obtain an efficient machine. This demand is expressed in the veterans, right up to their last day_,w o4ld teach che children,
several -ways. rxerciset he recruits, preside over the soldiers' exercises,s upervise
1. The individual body becomes an element that may be placed, ,hem when they were carrying out works in. the. public interest, and
moved, articulated on others. Its bravery or its strength are no l,nnlly make order reign in the country, when the troops were fighr
longer the principal variables that define ir; but ,he place it occupies, ln[I ar the frontiers. There is not a single moment of life from which
the interval it covers, the regularity, the good order according m nne cannot exrract forces, providing one knows how to differentiate
which it operates ns m ovements. The soldier is above all a fragmenr Ir nnd combine it with others. Similarly, one uses che labour of
of mobile space, before be is courage or honour. Guibert describes dlildren and of old people in the grear workshops; this is because
the soldier in the following way: 'When he is under arms, ne occu they have certain elementary capacities for whichi t is not necessary
pies two (eet along his greateSt diameter, thar is 10 say, raking him ti) use workers who have many other aptitudes; furthermore, they
from one end 10 the other, and about one Coo,i n his greatest thick umstltute a cheap labour force; lastly, if they work, they are no
ness taken from the chest to the shoulders, 10 which one muse add an hinger at anyone's charge: 'Labouring mankind', said a tax collector
interval of a foot between him and the next man; th.is gives two feet tir an enterprise at Angers, 'may find in this manufactory, from the
in all direccions per soldier and indicates that a troop of infantry in •1-1o•f ten 'to old age, resources against idleness and the penury that
battle 9ecupies, eicher in its front or in its depth, as many steps as it follows from it' (Marchegay, 36o). But it was probably in primary
has ranks' (Guibert, 17). This is a functional reduction of the bodv. ,tl,tcation that this .adjustment of different chronologies was 10 be
But it is also an insertion of this body-segment in a whole ensemble ,,irried outwich most subtlety. From the seventeenth century 10 the
over which it is arriculated. The soldier whose body has been crained 1,nroduction, at the beginning of the nineteenth, of the l.ancasrer
10 function part by part for particular operations must in tum form inotho\l, the complex clockwork of the mucual improvement school
an element in a mechanism at another level. The soldiers will be w;isb uilt up cog by cog: firsc the oldest pupils were encruSted with
insrructed first 'one by one, then two by rwo, then in greater tosks involving simple supervision, then of checking work, then of
numbers ... For the handlingo f weapons,o ne will ascert3inth at, 1rJching; in the end, all the timeo f"aldl ie pupilsw as occupiede ither
when the soldiers have been separately instructed, they will carry it with teaching or with being ,aught. The school became a machine
out two by two, and then change places alternately, so cl1att he one for learning, fo which each pupil, each level and each moment, if
on the left may learn 10 adapt himself to the one on the right' ~orrectly combined, were pednanently utilized in the general pro
('Ordonnance .. .'). The body is constituted as a part of a multi• ~c:ss,oft eaching. One of the great advocaces of the mutual improve
segmenta.ry machine. n1ents chools gives us .some idea of this progress: 'In a school of 36o
1. The various chronological series lhat discipline must combine children, the master w~o would like to instruct each pupil in turn
10 form a composite time are also pieces of machinery. The rime of for a.session Of three hours would not be able to give half a minute

Docile bodies
Discipline
to each. By the new method, each of the 300 pupils writes, reads 01 once ... To make a:s ign 10 a pupil to repeat when he has read
counts for two and a half hours' (cf. Bernard). badly or mispronounced a letter, a syllable or a word, he will strike
3. This carefully measured combination of forces requires o the signal twice in rapid succession. If, after the sign had been made
precise system of command. All the activity oC the disciplined two or three times, the pupil who is reading does not find and repeat
individual must be punctuated and sustained by injunctions whose the word rhat he has badly read or misp.ronounced - because he bas
efficacity rests on brevity and clarity; the order does not need 10 be read several words beyond it before being called to order - the
explained or formulated; it must trigger off the required behaviour teacherw ill strike three times in rapid succession, as a sign to him to
and rhat is enough. From the master of discipline to him who ii begin to read fariher baclc; and he ·will continue 10 make the sign
till the pupil finds the word which he has said incorrectly' (La Salle,
subjected to it the relation is one of signalization: it is a question not
of unaemanding the injunction but of perceiving th.e ,;ignal and Conduit<.. . 137-8; cf. also Demia, 11). The mutual improvement
reacting to it immediately, according to a more or less artificial, school was to exploit still further this control of behaviour by the
prearranged.code. Place the bodies in a little world of signals to each system of signals 10 which one had tO reac1 immediately. Even
of which is attached -a single, obligatory response: it is a technique verbal orders were 10 function as elements of signalization: 'Enter
your benc,hes, At the word .,.,.,, the children bring ,heir right
of training, of drusage, that 'despotically excludes in everything
the least representation, and the smallest murtnur'; ,he dis• hands down on the table with a .re~ounding thud and· at the same
ciplined soldier 'begins 10 obey whatever he is ordered to do; his time put one leg into the bench; at the word~y our hem:/,., they put
the other leg in and sit down opposite their slates ... Take your
obedience is prompt and blind; an appearance of indocility, the leas1
s/i,.tts.A t the word rake, the children, with their right hands, take
delay would be a crime' (Boussanelle, 1). The training 9f school
hold of the string by which the slate is suspended from rhe nail
children was co be carried out in the same way: few words, no
explanation, a corals ilence interrupted only by signals - bells, clap before them, and, with their left hands, they grasp the slate in the
ping of hands, gestures, a mere glance from the teacher, or rhat little middle; at the word s~te.s,r hey unhook itand place it on tl,e cable'.13
wooden apparatus used by the Brothers of the Christian Schools; i1 To sum up, it might be said that discipline creates out of ,he
was called par excellenceth e 'Signal' and it contained in its mechanical bodies it controls four types of individuality, or rather an individual
brevity both the technique of command and the morality of obedi ity thar is endowed with four characteristics: it is cellular (by the
ence. 'The first and principal use of the signal is to attract at ont<1 play,of spatial distribution), it is organic (by the coding of activities),
the attention of all the pupils to the teacher and to make them It is genetic(by the accumulation of time), it is combinatory (by the
attentive 10 what he wishes 10 impart 10 them. Thus, whenever he composition of forces). And, in doing so, it operates ·four great
wishes to attract the attention of the children, and 10 bring the rechniques: ic draws up tables; it prescribes movementS; it imposes
cl(ercises; lastly, in order to obtain the combination of forces, it
exercise to an end, he will strike the signal once. Whenever a good
acranges 'tactics'. Tactics, the art of constructing, with located
pupil hears the noise of the signal, he will imagine that he is hearing
the voiceo f 1het eachero r rathert he voiceo f Godh imselfc alling bodies, coded activities @ndt rained aptitudes, mechanisms in .which
rhe pcoduct of the various forces is increased by their calculated
him by his name. He will then partake 'of the feelings of rhe young
combination are no doubt the highest form of disciplinary practice.
Samuel, saying with. him in the depths· of his soul: "Lord, I am
here." ' The pupil will have 10 have learnt the code of ihe signalJ In this knowledge, the eighteenth-century theoreticians saw the
and respond automatically 10 them. 'When prayer has been said, general foundation of all military practice, from ,he control and
rhe teacher will strike rhe signal at once and, turning lo rh.e child exercise of individual bodies 10 the use of forces specific to the most
complex multiplicities. The architecture, anatomy, mechanics,
whom he wi~hes to read, he will makrethc sign 10 begin. To make•
sign to stop 10 a pupil who is reading, he will strike the sign~! CCOI)omxo f the disciplinary body: 'In the eyes of most soldiers,

Docile bodies
Discipline
tactics arc only a branch of the vast science of war; for me, they art: Historians of ideas usually auribuce the dream of a perfect society to
the base of this science; they· are this science itself, because ,hey the philosophers and jurists of the eighteenth century; but there was
teach how ,o constitute troops, order them, move them, get them to ,Isa a-military dream of society; its fundamental reference was not to
fight; beca= tactics alone may make up for numbers, and handle 1hes tate of nature, but ,o the meticulously subordinated cogs of a
the multitude; lastly, it will include knowledge of men, weapons, maohine, not to the primal social contract, but to permanent coe.r
tensions, circumstances, because it is all these kinds of knowledge al0ns, not to fundamenml rights, but to indefinitely progressive
brought together tliat must determine those movemeats' {Guiher,, forms of training, not to the _generalw ill but to automatic docility.
4). Or again: 'The term tactics ... gives some idea of the respective •D iscipline must be made national,' said Guibert. 'The state that
position of the men who make up a particular troop in rela I depict will have a simple, reliable, easily controlled administration.
tion to that of tlte different troops that make up -an army, their h will resemble chose huge-machines, wbkh by quite uncomplicated
movements and their actions, ,heir relations with one another' (Joly nkans produce great effects; du, strength of this stare wiU spring
de Maizeroy, z). from irs own streng1h, its prosperity from its own prosperity. Time,
It may be that war as strategy is a continuation of politics. But it which destroys all, will increase its power. It "!ill disprove that
musr not be forgotten that 'politics' has been conceived as a con• vulgar prejudice by which we are made to imagine that empires are
tinuation, if not exactly and directly of war, at least of the military ,ubjected to an imperious law of decline and ruin' (Guiber,, xxiii
model as a fun<lamentalm eans of prevencing civil disorder. Politics, uiv; cf. what Marx says about the army and forms of bourgeois
as a technique of internal peace and order, sought 10 implement the 111cictiyn his letter to Engels, 21 September 1817). The Napoleonic
mechanism of ,he perfect army, of the disciplined mass, of the docile, ~glme was not far olf and with it the form of state that was to
useful troop, of the ~egimenc in camp and in the field, on manoeu• 1urvive it and, we must not forget, the foundations of which were
vres and on exercises. In the great eighteenth. .c enwry scates, tho laidn ot only by jW'ists, but also by soldiers, not only councillors of
army guaranteed civil peace no doubt because it was a real force:, 11.iteb, ura lso junior officers, not only die men of the courts, but also
an ever-threatening sword, but also because it was a technique and ~ lhc men of th·e camps. The Roman reference that accompanied this
body of knowledge that could project ,heir schema over the socinl formation certainly bears with it this double inde,x: dtizens and
body. If there is a politics-war series that passes through strategy lonaries, law and manoeuvres. While jurists or philosophers
1
there is an army-politics series rhat passes through tactics. It 11 \Wtre seeking in d1e pact a primal model for the construction or
strategy that makes it possible 10 understand warfare as a way ot ,er.Instruction of the social body, the soldiers and with them che
conducting politics between states; it is tactics that makes it possiblr Khnicians of discipline were elaboraiing procedures for the indivi-
to understand the army as a principle for maintaining the absence ur 4'11iajln d collective coercion of bodies.
warfare in civil society. The classical age saw the birch of the grc.11
political and military strategy by which nations confronted eaul,
other's economica nd demographicf orc~s;b ur it also saw th@b ir1l1
of meticulous military and political tactics by which the control ol
bodies and individual forces was exercised wii·hin states. Th•
'militait/ - the military inStiturion, military science, the militaill
himself, so different from what was formerly characterized by 1hr
term 'homme de giarrc' - was specified, during this period, at th!
point of junction between war and the noise of ba;de on the 0111
hand, and order and silence, subservient to peace, on the od1Qr
168

IA-• ../Sl,i,. •• N,1nurr11r'1UJNIW,.. ,. ,. . "°"""...,.,,;-.. ~• •• ,,,,~._,,!'!..I i~ .;·•-
.,,,..,.._,~,.~~-•,.• ~ J.A•- ~ ,.n,o,- ¥'·- .. - . ,. ,,
UI II 11 ii I!
fi"i
, 1\ j1 II
Jl ll l,l-.Cr.l.!l,. -B .,
i.
fl
Lll i11..
Ji 'H Lr,
....
•
•
·-·
.l J, 8enttlam. Plan of the Pan.op1lcon( T/tt Vlo1ks o!Jetemy BiJntl,am. ed. Bowri,,g.
,oL IV.1843.172-~I. Cl.o,201.
Med;alcommemorattngL ou1sXIV'-sf m.t 1'1"lll1tarv
revuem 1668 (B,N. CObmetdesm 6da1llcs).
Cf.p.188.
2 Handwnt1ng model (Collec11onsh 1storiquesde
rl.N.R.D.P~.Cf.p. 152.

I Tho Maison cemrale at Rennosi n 1877, Cf. p. 250.
4 p N r ~ H yo a r r b o e u f . o R r o e m 1 a h m ec . e P n f: m ,n 1 f 1I o n , a .s J p ) e tn c i 1 to 1 n 0to u nw a , e y 1 . . l C 84 f. O p ~ 2 s 5 m 0. s oner, in h1scell,k ncehn9 ,u t Interior of tho peni1ent1arya t Statov1ll0, United State.s 1 twentieth century. Cf. p. 250,

7 Bedume at 1he tolormatory ol Metlra~. Cf. p, 294, 8 Lecture on the evils ot alcoholism m the~ud1toovm o! Fresnesp rison

.. .
., -,, ..
- --· •- - 11 ~- * - "' - P"_ _ - _,"_,_. - ,,'. - ~-a - - - · , · • J.-," - l4tl_-k - ,.l rf- - fh\ . -___ - _-__ - 0_· 1 ~ u-i.n- -- • . - - .. - , i-,,.~ - -r - n..·t._rr_. -Jo_ _·_r_n_~ __• ,., -,:,--1,-,..r,· ► n-,•- ,,-,nt-,t,,_- -
~ . ·--· ~ · - _i...-,... . .,. . , ,_ _ . _ • _ ___ .. - -··- ._ - .__, · _ - .. ,_ ____ .._ ,_._ . ,. . ' __ _ _ _ __ ,. • .,_.., ~ ._ - ___ - -~ • - _, --
- -·--f~ --·- -~ ... ----·-- ------·- .. -- • ..,---···-
9 Steam m.ach1nef or1he ·cete,,ferous· corrccl!on of young boys and 91,rs 'fathers
and Mothers, Uncles.ind Aunls, Guardrnn Masters and Mlsitesses of boa,d1ng
schoofsilnd all those who have lazy. greedy, d1sobed1on1r.c bolhous insoleni,
quanelsome, 1ale-bear1ng.c hancnng, 111ch91ousct'uldreno,r ct,1ld1eo h:wing any
01herdefect. -a•ch o,cby informed that Mr Bogeyman and Mrs 811cabrach ave JUSIs ot
up 1ne verv ma/fie of thec11yo f Paris a machine s1m110tO, lhc one repr1:1sen1e,nd tt,15
ehgravmg and 3o~reedy to accept all nau9hty ch,fdren io need of concct1on 1n
thc1res1obhshmon1se ach day, from midday 101 wo o'clock Mr Werewolf, Coal man
ScarecroVf, Eat•w1thou1-Hunger and Mr~ W1ldca1.S 1moful Slag and Onnk,w11hou1
Th1rs1l,r 1endsand tela11onso f Mr 8ogovman .'.IndM rs Bncab,ac, will. for a small sum.
so1u p similar m~chlnes to be .sent 1n10p rovincial 1owns and will themselves su PIHV,
then opera11on The cheapness of ca,u:u:11ong iven bV thes1eam machmeand 1he
surpnsm9 elfec1s that 11p ,oduces w,11p e,suade pill Mt& 1oava1lU l«Hnse.lveosf •t ~s
ohen es the bad bohav1ou1o f them ch1ld1enw ill require u We also rnke 1ncomg1blfl
children as boa1de<s,1 he.ya re fe<Jon b,tad and w.i1e, • Engraving of tile hue
e1ghu1enthc onturv (Collecllons histortques de fl.N A,0 f>,),
10 N Andry. L •o rlluJpdd1t10 11ratt de prdvomr et de co,11gerd ans •
J11lsm fams lesd1lf01m1t6sducorps (Onhopaed1cs or tl'Jea rt
of prevel'lung and c6rrocung deformmes ol tho bodv 1n
children), 1749,

The means of correct training
.
The means of correct training
2.
make h possible to see induce effects of power ' and in which
conve:rsely 1he means of toercion make those on whom they are
1
applied clearly vis.ible. Slowly, in ,he cou,rse of the classical age, we
see the construction of those 'observatories' of human multiplicity
for which the history of the sciences has so little good to say. Side
by side wich the major ,ed1nology of the telescope, the lens and the
light beam, which were an integral part of the new ~hysics and cos
mology, there were the minor tecltniques of multiple and inte=t
~• _,he ?"~in~in,g of the sevenceenth century, Walha_usens poke of
ing observations, of eyes that muse see without being seen; using
stnct dlsc1plme as an art of correct mu0mng. The chief function of
techniques of subjection and methods of exploitation, an obscu.re
the disciplinary po"."•~i s to "train', rather than to select and to 'levy;
art of light and the visible was secretly preparing a new knowledge
or, no doubt, 10 train in order to levy and select all the more. ltdoes
of man.
not link forces together in order to reduce them; it seeks 10 bind them These "observatories· had an almost ideal model: the mili1ary
10ge1heri n such a way as 10 multiply and use them. Instead ofoend
camp - the short-lived, artificial ci,y, built and reshaped almost at
i~g all its subjects _into a single uniform mass, it separates, analyses,
will; the seat ofa power that must be-all the stronger; but also-all
dafferenuaresc, arriesi ts procedures of decomposition to the point of
the more discreet, all the more effective and on the alert in that it is
necessarya nd sufficients ingle un"itsI.t 1lrains1 tbe moving confused
exercised over armed men. In the perfect camp, all power would be
use.lessm ultitudes of bodies and forces imo a muhiplic.it; ofinclivi~
ci«:rcised solely through exact observation; each gaze would form a
~ual ~lements -· small, se_paratec ell~, ~rganic au10nomies, genetic
part of the overall functiooing of power. The old, traditional square
!dentme~ a~~ contt~u~nes, combmatory segments. Discipline
plan was considerably relined in innumerable new projects. The
makes1 ind1v1duals; n 1s the specific technique of a power ,hat
geometry of the pachs, the number and distribution of the. tents,
regards individuals both as objects and as instruments of its exercise.
1heo rjemation of their en trances, the disposition of .filesa nd ranks
It is not a triumphant power, which because of its own excess can
were exaccly defined; ,he network of gazes that supervised one
pride itself on its qmnipotence; h is a modest suspicious power
•nother was laid down: 'In the parade ground, (ive lines are drawn
which functions as a calculated, but permane~t economy. Thes:
up, the first is sixteen fee,1f rom the second; the others are eight feet
are humble modalities, minor procedures, as compared with the
from one another; and the last is eight feet from the arms depots.
majestic riiuals of sovereigory or the great apparatuses of the state.
'fhe arms depots are ,en feet from the 1en1so f the junior officers,
And it is precisely they chat were gradually to invade the major
immediately opposite the firs; tentpole. A company,srrect is fifty-one
fonns, altering their mechanisms and imposing their procedures. The
reecw ide ... All tents are rwo feet from one another. The tents of
legal apparaius v,as not to escape this scarcely secret invasion. The
the subalterns are opposite the alleys of their companies. The rear
success of disciplinarf power derives no doubt from the use of simple
l<ntpole is eight feer from the last soldiers' tent and the gate is
1051ruments; h1erarchtcal observation, normalizing judgement and
~pposite the captains' tent ... The captains' tents are erected
theircombinatie>inn a proceduret hat is specifict o it, theexamination.
opposite the streets of their companies. The entrance is opposite the
tQmpames themselves." The camp is the diagram of a power that
Hiuarchical olnervmion
ms by means of general visibility. For a long rime this model of the
The exercise of discipline presupposes a mechanism that coerces by
••mp or at least its 1,inderlyingp rinciple was found in urban develop-
means of observation;a n apparatusi n which the techniques cha1
111cnitn, chec onstruction of working-classh ousinge states,h ospitals,
.. ylums, prisons, schools: the spatial "nesting' of hierarchized

Discipline The means of correct training
surveillance. The principle was one of'et)lbedding' (',ncasmm,nr'). distributed a.long a cotrid.or like a series of small cells; at regular
The camp was to the rather shameful art of su~veillance what the intervals, an officer's qua("tersw ere situated, so that 'every te.np upils
dark room was to the great science of optics. had an officer on each side'; the pupils were confined to their cells
A whole problematic then develops: that of an architecture that throughout the night; and PSris had insisted 1:hat 'a window be
is no longer built simply to be seen (as with the ostentation of placed on the corridor wall of each room from chest-level to within
palaces), or 10 observe the external space (cf. the geomell')' of for one or two feet of the ceiling. Not only is it pleasant to have such
tresses), but to permit an 'imernal, articulated and detailed control - windows, but one would venture to say that it is useful, in several
to render visible those who are inside ft; in more general terms, an respects, nor to mention the disciplinary reasons that may deter
architecture that would operate to transform individuals: to act on mine this-arrangeme~t' (quoted in [aulan, 117-18). In the dioing
those it shelters, to provide a hold on their conduct, to car,;y the rooms was 'a slightly raised platform for the tables of the inspectors
effects of power right to them, to make it possible to know them, to of studies, so that they may see all the tables of the pupils 'of their
alter them. Stones can make people docile and knowable. The old djvisions during meals'; lattirles had been installed with half-doors,
simple schema of confinement and enclosure - thick walls, a heavy so that the supervisor on duty could see the head and legs of the
gate that prevents entering or leaving - began to be replaced by the pupils,-and also with side walls sufficienrly.h igh 't_hat those inside
calculation of openings, of filled and empty spaces, passages and cannot see one another'.• This infinitely scrupulous concern with
transparencies. In this way the hospital building was gradually surveill.ance is expressed in the architecture by innumerable petty
organized as an instrument of medical action: irwas to allow a better mechanisms. These mechanisms. can orily be seen as unimportant
observation of patients, and therefore a better calibration of their if one forgets the role of this instrumentation, minor but flawless,
ueatmcnt; the form of the buildings, by the careful separation of the in the progressive objectification and .the ever more subtle partition
patients, was to prevent contagions; lastly, the vtntilation and the ing of individual behaviour. The disciplinary institutions secreted
air. that circulated around each bed -was [O prevent the deleterious i.l rtlachinery1ofc onrrol that functioned like a microscope of conduct;
vapours &om stagnating around the patient, breaking down his the fine, analytical divisions that they created formed around men
humours and spreading the disease by their immediate effects. The an apparatus of observation, recording and training. How was one
hospital - which was to be built in the second half of the cenrury to subdivide rhe gaze iri these observation machines? How was one
and for which so many plans were drawn up after the Hotel-Dieu 10 establish a network of communications between them? How was
was burnt down for the second time - was no longer simply the one so to arrange things that a homogeneous, continuou·s power
roof under which penury and imminent death t0ok shelter; it was, would result from ,heir calculated multiplicity?
in its very materiality, a therapeutic operator. The perfect disciplinary apparatus would make it possible for a
Similarly, the school building was to bea mechanism for training. single gaze to see everything constantly. A central point would be
It was as a pedagogical machine that Paris-Duverney conceived ,he both the source of light illuminating everything, and a locus of
tcole Militaire, righrdown to the minute derails that he had imposed convergence for everything that must be known: a perfect eye that
on the architect, Gabriel. Train vigorous bodies, the imperative of nothing would escape and a centre towards which all gazes would be
health; obtain competent officers, the imperative of qualification) turned. This is what Ledoux had imagined when he built Arc-et
create obedient soldiers, the imperative of politics; prevent de• Senans; all the buildings were to be·arranged in a circle, opening on
bauchery and homosexuality, the imperative of morality. A fourfold the inside, at the centre of which a high consuuction was to house
reason for eStablishing sealed compartments between individuals, the administrative functiQns of management, the polidng functions
but also apertures for continuous surveillance. The very building , 1fs urveillance, the economic functions of control and checking, the
of the 'tcole was 10 be an apparatus for observmion; the rooms were religious functions,of encouraging obedience.and work; from here
173

Discipline The means of correct training
all orders would come, all activities would be recorded, all offences treated strictly and harshly. The clerks, who are used ~o creating
perceived and judged; and this would be-done immediately with no them with an air of superiority and command, which is really
other aid rhan an exact geometry. Among all the reasons for rhe necessary with the multitude, o:eat tbem witb severity or contempt;
prestige ihat was accorded in the second half of the eighteenth hence ihese workers eiiher cost more or leave the factory soon after
arrival' (EncycloptJie,a rticle on 'Manufacture'), But, although the
century, to circular archjtecture, one must no doubt include the fact
that it expressed a certain political utopia. workers preferred a framewotk of a guild type 10 this new regime
of surveillance, the employers saw that it was indissociable from the
Bur, the disciplinary gaze did, in fact, need relays. The pyramid
was able to fulfil, more efficiently than che circle, two requirements: system ofindusrrial production, private property and profit. Arrhe
to be complete enough to form an uninterrupted network - con $Cale of a factory, a great iron-works or a mine, 'the objects of
sequently che possibility of multiplying its levels, and of distributing expenditure are so multipli'ed, that the-slightest dishonesty on each
object would add up to an immense· fraud, wltich would not only
them over the entire surface to be supervised; and yet to be discreet
enough not 10 weigh down wiih an inert mass on ihe activity to be absorb the profits, but would lead to a loss of capital ... the slightest
disciplined,-.and not to act as a brake or an obstacle to it; 10 be incompetence, ifleft unnoticed and therefore repeated each day, may
integrated into rhe disciplinary mechanism as a function that in prove fatal to the enterprise 10 the extent of destroying it in a very
creases its possible effects. It had tQ be broken down into smaller short time'; hence the fact that only agents, directly dependent on
elements, but in order 10 increase its productive function: specify the owner, and entrusted wirh chis task alone would be able to see
the surveillance and make it functional. 'that not a sou is spent uselessly, tliat not a moment of the day is
This was ihe problem of the great workshops and factories, in lost'; their role would be 'to supervise che workers, to inspect all the
which a new rype of surveillance was organized. It was different places of wor!<, to inform the directots of everytl1ing ihat rakes
from the one practised in the regimes of the manufactorics, which place' (Coumol). Surveillance thus becomes a decisive economic
had been carried out from the outside by inspectors, entrusted with e>peratorh oth as an internal part of rhe producrion machinery and
the rask of applying ihe regulations; what was now needed was an as a specific mechanism in ibe disciplinary power. 'The work of
intense, continuous supervision; it ran right through the labour directing, superintending and adjusting becomes one of the functions
process; it did not bear - or not only - on production {the nature of capital, from the moment ihat the labour under rhe control of
and quantity of raw materials, the type of instruments used, the capital, becomes cooperati,•e. Once a function of capital, it requires
dimensions and quality of the produc1s); it also [OOki nto account special characteristics' (Marx, Capitalv, ol. ,, 313).
the activity of the men, their skill, the way they set about their tasks, The same movemept was 10 be found in the reorganization of
their promptness, their zeal, their behaviour. But it was also different elementary teaching: the details of surveillance were specified and
from the domestic superv.ision of the master present beside his tt was integrated into the teaching relationship. The development
of the parish schools, the increase in the number of their pupils, the
workers and apprentices; for it was carried out by clerks, supervisors
and foremen. As the machinery of production became larger and >bsence of methods for regulating simultaneously tl1e activity of a
more complex, as the number of workers and the division of labour whole class, and the disorder-and confusion that followed from this
increased, supervision became ever more necessary and more diffi made ii' necessary to we>rko ut a system of supervision. In order 10
help the teacher, Ba1eocour selected from among the best pupils a
cult. It became a special function, which had nevertheless to form
an integral part of the production process, to run parallel to it whole series of 1officers1 - intendants, observers, monitors, tutors,
tl1roughou1 its entire length. A specialized personnel became indis reciters of prayers, writing officers, receivers of ink, almoners and
pensable, constantly present and distinct from the workers: 'In ,he visitors. The roles thus defined were of two kinds: the first involved
large facmry, everything is regulated by the clock. The workers are 111nceritaals ks (distributing ink and paper, giving alms 10 the poor,
174 175

Discipline The means of correct training
reading spiritual texts on feast days, etc.); 1;hes econd involved sur nerwork 'holds' the whole together and traverses it in irs entirety
veillance: the 'observers muse record who lefr his bench, who was with effects of power tha,c derive from one another: supervisors,
talking, who did nor have his rosary, or Book of Hours, who did not perpetually supervised. The power in the hierarchized surveillance
comport ltimself properly at mass, who committed an impure act, of the disciplines is not possessed as a thing, or transferred as a
who indulged in idle talk or was unruly in the street'; the 'admoni property; it functions like a piece of machinery. And, although it is
ro.rs' were placed in charge of those 'who talk or hum when studying true that its pyramidal organization gives ii a 'head', it is the appara
their lessons and those who will not write and who waste their time tus as a whole that produces 'power' and distributes individuals in
in play'; the 'visitors' called on the families of pupils who had been d1isJ )('rrnanent and continuous field. Tbis enables the disciplinary
absent or who had committed serious offences. The 'intendants' power 10 be both absolutely indiscreet, since it is everywhere and
supervised all the other officers. Only the 'tutors' had a pedagogical nlways alert,.since by irs very principle it leaves no zone of shade and
role: their task was to teach the pupils reading, two by two, in low c.onsran,tlys ~pervises the very individuals who are entrusted wirh
tones (M.I.D.B., 68-83). A few decades later, Demia favoured a ,he task of supervising; aod absolut,;_ly' discreet', for it functions
hierarchy of the same type but almost all the functions of surveillance permanently and largely in silence. Discipline makes possible the
were duplicated by a pedagogical role: an assistant teacher taught the operation of a relational .power that sustains itself by its own
l,olding of rhe pen, guided the pupil's !:,and,c 9rrected mistakes and mechanism and which, for the spectacle of public evenrs, substitutes
at ,he same time 'marked down trouble-makers•; another assistant tl,e uninterrupted play of calculated gazes. Thanks 10 the techniques
teacher had ihe same tasks in the reading class; the intendant who 11f s11rveillance,t he 'physics' of power, the hold over the body,
supervised the other officers and was in charge of behaviour in pperate according to the laws of optics and mechanics, according
general a,lso had the task of 'initiatiog newcomers into the custom, 10 a whole play of spaces, lines, screens, beams, degrees a.nd without
of rhe school'; the decurions got the pupils 10 recite their lessons and 1ccourse, in principle at least, to excess, force or violence. Ir is a
'marked down' those who did not know them.• We have here,, rower ,hat seems all the less 'corporal' in that it is more subtly
sketch of an institution of the 'mutual' type in which three proco 'pl1ysical'.
dures are inregrated into a single mechanism: teaching proper, dtr,
acquisition of knowledge by the very practice of the pedagogie,tl
Nbrmali{ing judgement
activity and a reciprocal, hierarchized observation. A relation of
survenlance, defined and regulated, is inscribed at the hearr of thr I, At the orphanage of the Chevalier Paulet, the sessions of the
practice of reaching, not as an additiona1 or adjacent pan, bur as It ll'lbunal that met each morning gave rise ro a whole ceremonial:
mechanism that is inherent ro it and which increases its efficiency. 'We found all the pupils drawn up as if for battle, in perfect align-
Hierarchized, continuous and functional surveillance may not b{' 111cnti,m mobility and silence. The major, a young gentleman of
one of the great technical 'inventions' of the eighreenth century, bu1 1lx1eeny ears, stooq outside the ranks, sword in hand; at his com-
its insidious extension owed its importance to the mechanisms t11' 111,,ndrh, e troop broke ranks at the double and formed a circle. The
power that it brought with it. By means of such surveillance, di• tthmcil met in• the centre; each officer made a report of his troop
ciplinary power be<lamea n 'integrated' system; linked from 1hr lur the preceding twenty-four hours. The accused were allowed 10
inside 10 the economy and to tl1ea ims of the mechanism in which ii defend themselves; witnesses were heard; d1e council deliberated
was practised. It was also organized as a multiple, automatic a111' •11d,w hen ag·reement was reaChed, the major announced the number
anonymous power; for although surveillance rests on individuAI,, ur guilty, tl1e nature of the offences and the punishments ordered.
its functioning is that of a network of relations from top to bottoin, l'hr. troop then marched off in the greatest order' (Pieter). At the
but also to a certain extent from bottom to top and laterally; thl, li,,1rto f aU disciplinary systems functions a small penal mechanism.
177

Discipline The means of correct training
It enjoys a kind of judicial privilege with iis own laws, its specific domain of the non-conforming is punishable: the soldier commits
offences, itS particular forms of judgement. The disciplines estab an 'offenc,e'w henever he does not reach the leyel required; a pupil's
lished an 'infra-penality'; they partitioned an 3rea that the laws had 'offence' is not only a minor infraction, but also an inability ro carry
left empty; they defined and repressed a mass of behaviour that the out his tasks. The regulations for the Prussian infantry ordered that
relative indifference of the great systems of punishment had allowed a soldier wl10 had not cor...,ctly learnt to handle his rifle should be
to escape. 'On entering, the companions will greet one anoiher , , . treated with the 'greatest' ~veri~'. Similarly, 'when a pupil has not
on leaving, they must lock up the materials and tools that they have retained the catechism from the previous day, he muse be forced 10
been using and also make sure that their lamps are extinguished'; learn it, without making any mistake, a.nd repeat it the fo,llowing
'it is expressly forbidden to amuse companions by gestures or in any <lay; either he will be forced to hear it standing a; kneeling, his
ocher way'; they must 'comport themselves honestly and decently'; hands joined, or he w:iUb e given some ocher penance'.
anyone who is absent for more than five minutes without warning ·rhe order that the disciplinary punishments must enforce is of a
M. Oppenheim will be 'marked down for a half-day'; and in order mixed nature: it is an 'artificial' order, explicitly laid down by a law,
to be sure that nothing is forgotten in chis meticulous criminal ., programme, a.set of regulations. But it is also an order defined by
jusiice, it is forbidden to do 'anything that may harm M. Oppenheim llat.urala nd observable processes: the duration of an apprenticeship,
and his companions' (Oppenheim, 29 September 1809). The work the cime taken to perform an exercise, the level of aptitude refer to
shop, the school, the army were subject to a whole micro-penality ;o regularity that is also a rule. The children of the Christian Schools
of time (latenesses, absences, interruptions· of casks), of activity must never be placed in a ':lesson' of which they are not yet capable;
(inattention, negligence, lack of zeal), of behaviour (impoliteness, tor this would expose them 10 the danger of being unable to learn
disobedience), of speech (idle chatter, insolence), of the body •nything; yei the duration of each stage is fixed by regulatjon a.nd a
Cincorrect' attitudes, irregular gestures, lac.k of cleanlioess)t of pupil who at the end of tluec examinations has been unable to pass
sexuality (impurity, indecency). At the same.time, by way of punish lnt0 the higher order must be placed, well in evidence, on the bench
ment, a whole series of subtle prpcedures was used, from light pf rhe 'ignorant'. In a disciplinary regime punishment involves a
physical punishment to minor deprivation$ and petty humiliations. double juridica ..n arural reference.
It was a question both of making the slightest departures from cor• J· Disciplinary punishment has the function of reducing gaps.
rect behaviour .subject co punishment, and of giving a punitive It must therefore be essentially corrective.I n addition to punish
function to the apparently indifferent elements of the disciplinary ments borrowed directly from the judicial model (fines, flogging,
apparatus: so rhat, if necessary, everything might serve to punish ,i,litary·confinemeat), the disciplinary systems favour punishments
the slightest thing; each subject find himself caught in a punishable, thnra re exercise - intensified, multiplied forms of training, several
punishing universality. 'By the word punishment, one muse under• times repeated: the.regulations of 1766 for the infantry laid down
stand everytl1ing that is capable of making children feel the offence that lance-corporals 'who show some negligence or lack ofwilling
they have committed, everything that is capable of humiliating them, llt:SS will be reduced to the rank of private', and they will be able
w rise to their former rank only after new exercises and a new
of confusing them: . , . a certain coldness, a certain indifference, :,
question, i humiliation, a removal from office' (La Salle, Conduite ••umination. As Jea.n-Baptiste de La Salle put it: 'Of all penances,
, , ., 204-5), unpositionsare che most honest for a te.-cher, the most ~dvar,uageous
2. But discipline brought ,with it a specific way of punishing that l<1rt he parents'; they make it possible co 'derive, from the very
was not only a small-scale model of the court. What is specific to ,,ffcnces of the children, means of advancing their progress by
the disciplinary penality is non-observance, that wbich does no1 1.orrectingr heirdefects'; co those, forexa!l)ple, 'who have notwriuen
measure up 10 ,he rule, that departs from it. The whole indefinite •II that they were supposed to write or who have not applied
179

Discipline The means of correct training
themselves to doing it well, one can give some impositions to write for the first. For example, a child has an imposition from :wlticb he
out or to learn by heart' (La Salle, Con'duir.e .. , io5). Disciplinary can redeem himself with six points; he eams a privilege of ten;
punishmenti s, in rhe main, isomorphicw ith obligation itself; it is he presents it to the teacher who gives him back four points, and so
not so much the vengeance of an outraged law as its rcpetiti6n, hs on' (La Salle, Conduit<. .. , , 5GfT)W. hat we have here is a transposi
reduplicated insistence. So much so that th~ corrective effect expec tion of the system of indulgences. And by the-play of this quantifica
ted of ir involves only incidentally expiation and repenta.nce; it is tion, d1is circulation of awards and debits, tl\anks to the continuous
obtained directly through ,he mechanics of a training. To punish calculation of plus and minus points, the disciplinary apparatuses
is to exercise. hierarchized the 'good' and the 'bad' subjects in relation to one
+ In discipline, punishment is only one element of a double another. Through this micro-economy of a perpetual penality
system: gratification-punishment. And itis this system that operates operates a differentiation ,hat is not one of acts, but of individuals
in rhe process of training and correction. The reacher' must avoid, 1hemselves, of their nature; their potentialities, their level or their
as far as possihle, the use of punishment; on the contrary, he musr value. By assessing aCtSw ith precision, discipline judges individuals
endeavour to make rewards more frequent ,han penahies, the lazy 'In truth'; the penality that it implements is integrated into the cycle
being more encouraged by the desire 10 be rewarded in ,he same <>fk nowledge of individuals.
'IV•Ya s the diligent dian by ihe fear of punishment; that is why ir 5. The distribution accor<ling 10 ranks or grade has a double role:
will be very beneficial, when the reacher is obliged 10 use punish• It marks the gaps, hie,archizes qualities, skills and aptitudes; but it
mem, to win the heanof the child ifhe can before doing so' (Demia, also punishes and rewards. lt is the penal funotiorung of setdng in
17). This mechanism with rwo elements makes possible a number 11rdera nd the ordinal cha:racter of judging. Discipline rewards
of operations characteristic of disciplinary penality. First., tha 1hnply by the play of awards, thus making it possible to attain
definition of behaviour and performance on the basis of ,he rwo l1lgherr anks and places; Jt punishes by reversing this process, Rank
opposed values Clf good and evil; instead of the simple division of In itself serves as a reward or punishment. At the Ecole Militaire, a
the prohibi,ion, as practised in penal justice, we have a distribu (omplex system of 'honorary' classification was developed; this
tion between a positive pole and a negative pole; all bthaviour folll ~l.issificationw as visible to all in tbe form of slight variations in
in the field between good and bad marks, good and bad poin1A. uniform and more or less noble or ignoble punishments were
Moreover, ii is possible to quantify this field and work out o~ 1u0<:iateda,s a mark of privilege or infamy, with the ranks 1hus
arithmeticale conomy based on ir. A penal accountancy, constantly d1uributed. This classificatory, penal dis,ribution was carried out
brought up ro date, makes it possible 10 obtain the punitive balanc;o 11 ;hort intervals by the reports tha, the officers, teachers and ,heir
sheer of each individual. School 'justice', rudiments of which arc ,., mi~tants made, without consideration of age or grade, on 'the
be found in the sarmy and the workshops, carried this system very nurnl qualities of' the pupil~• and on 'their universally recognired
far. The Brothers of the Christian Schools org;mized a whole mictu !Mil,~viour'T. he first class, known as the 'very good', were dis
economy of privileges and impositions: 'Privileges may be used by hlf1Uishedb y ~ silver epaulette; they enjoyed the honour of being
pupils to gain exemption from penances which have been impost,! INted as 'purely military troops'; they therefore had a. right to
on them ... For example, a pupil may have been given four or ii ilhary punishment (arrests and, in serious cases, imprisonment).
catechism questions 10 copy out as an imposition; he will be able 11 10s econd class, 'the good', wore an epaulette ofred silk and silver;
gain exemption from this penance by accumulating a certain numMt •y could be arrested and condemned to prison, but also to the cage
of privilege points; the teacher will assign the numbe, for c•th 11to kneeling.The class of 'midiocres',h ad the right to an epaulette
question ... Since privileges·are worth a certain number of poi 01, I rrd wool; to the preceding penalties was added, if necessary, the
the teacher a.fsoh as others of less'value, whicli serve as small chanl(• .,.,,fog of sackcloth. The lase class, that of the 'bad', was marked by
180

Discipline J ·he means of correct training
an epaulette of brown wool; 'the pupils of this class.will be subjected rule: rhat the rule be made to function as a minimal thresh.old, as
10a .IIt he punishments used in t.heH otel or all those that are thought an average to be respected or as an optimum 1owards whiclt one
necessary, even solitary conlinemenr in a dark dungeon'. To this must move. Ir measures in quantitative terms and hierarchizes in
was added, for a time, the 'shameful' class, for which special regula• terms of valu~ the abilities, the level, the 'nature' of individuals. Ir
tions were drawn up 'so that ,hose-who belonged to it would always introduces, through this 'value-giving' measure, the constraint of
be separated from the others and would be dressed in sackcloth'. • conformity that must be achieved. Lastly, it traces the limit
Since merit and behaviour alone. must decide the place of the pupil, that will define diiferen~e in relation 10 all oilier differences, the
'1hose of the laSt rwo classes would be able 10 /latte< themselves that external frontier of the abnormal (the 'shameful' class of the Ecole
they would be able to rise to the fast two and bear its marks, when, Militaire). The perpetual penalit.y thar traverses all points and
by universal agrcemen1, they will be recognized as having made Jupervises.every ins1ant in the disciplinary institutions compares,
themselves worthy of iiby 1he change in their conduct and by their differentiates, hierarchizes, homogenizes, excludes. In short, it
progress; and ,hose of the top classes will similarly descend into th• nQrmali{es.
others if 1hey become slack and if ,he various reports taken together It .is opposed, the.efore, term by term, to a judicial penality
are to their disadvantage and show that they no longer deserve tbc whose essential function is to refer, not 10 a set of obser.vable
rewards and prerogatives of ,lie higher classes. . .' The penal phenomena, but to a corpus of laws and texts that must be remem
classifica1ions hould 1end to disappear. The 'shameful' class existed bered; that operates not b:; differentiating individuals, but by
only 10 disappear: 'In order to judge the kin.d of conversion specifying acts according to a number of general categories; not by
undergone by pupils of the shameful class who behave well', <hey hierarchit.ing, but quite simply by bringing into play the binar.y
were reintroduced in10 the other classes, and given back their opposition of the permitted and the forbidden; not by homogeniz
uniforms; but ihey would remain with their comrades in infamy ing, but by operating the division, acquired once and for all, of
during meals a.nd recreation; they would rem'l_inth ere if they did nOI condemnatiori. The disciplinary mechanisms secreted a 'p~nalit.y of
continue 10 behave well; ,hey 'would leave it absolutely, if their the norm', which is irreducible in itS pdnciples and functioning to
conduct was considered satisf~ctocy both in this class and in thi., the traditional penality of thelaw. The minor court mat seems 10s it
division' (Archives nationales, MM 658, 30 March 1758a nd MM 666, pcrman.ently in the buildings Qf discipline, and which sometimes
15 September 1763). This hierarchizing penality had, therefore,• •ssumes the theatrical form of the great. legal apparatus, must not
double effect: it distributed pupils according to their aptitudes and mislead us: i, does not· bring, except for a few formal remnants, the
their conduct, ,hat is, according 10 the use that could be made of mechanisms of.criminal justice to the web of everyday existence; or
,hem when <hey left the school; it exercised over them a constant at least that is nor its essential role; the disciplines created - drawing
pressure 10 conform 10 die same model, so that' they might all b~ on a whole series of very ancient procedures- a new functloning
subjected tci 'subordination, docility, attention in studies and of punishment, and it was this that gradually invested the great
exercises, and to the correct practice of duties and all the parts of external apparatus tl,at it seemed to reproduce in •either a modest or
discipline'. So that they might all be li.ke one another. on ironic way. The juridico-anthropological functioning revealed in
lnshori, the-art of punishing, in the regime of disciplinary power, the whole history of modern penality did notorigiriatein the super•
is aimed neither at expiation, nor even precisely at repression. It imposition of the human sciences on criminal justice and in the
brings five quite distinct operations inro play: it refers individual requirements pfoper to this new ratio~alit.y or to the humanism that
actions 10 a whole that is at once a field of comparison, a space or ir apl"'i'red to pring with it; it originated in die disciplinary tech
differentiation and the-principle o( a rule to be followed. It differen• nique that operated these new mechanisms of normaUzing,
tiates individuals from one another, in terms of the following overall judgemem.

JJiscipline .l tle means ot correcr ua1mng
llhe power of the Norm appears through the disciplines. Is ,hi, ,hose who are perceived as objects and the objectification of those
the new law of modern sociecy? Let us say rather that, •since the who are subjected. The superimposition of the power relations and
eighteenth century, it has joined other powers -~he Law, the Word knowledge relations assumes in the examination all its visible
(Parole) and tho Text; Tradition- imposing new delimitations upon brilliance. It is yet another innovation of the classical age that the
them. The Normal is established as a principle of coercion in teath historians of science .have left unexplored. People write the history
ing with the introduction of a standardized education and the of experiments on those born blind, on, wolf-children or. under
establishment of the icofu normales (teachers' training colleges}; it hypnosis, But who will write the more general, more fluid, but also
is established in the effort to organize a national medical profession more determinant history of the 'examination' - its rituals, its
and a hospital sys.remc apable of operating general norms of health; methods, its charaorers and their roles, its play of questions ~nd
it is established in the standardization of industrial processes and answers, its syst~lils of marking and classification? For in this
products (on this topic, one should refer to the important contribu slender technique a.e 10 be found a whole domain qf knowledge, a
tion of Canguilhem, 171-91). Like surveillance and with it, normal whole cype of power. One often speaks of tne ideology that the
ization becomes one of the great instrUments of power at the end of humani sciences'b ring with them, in either discreet or prolix mannez:.
the classical age. for the marks ,hat once indicated status, privilege But does their very technology, this tiny opcrationa.l schema that
and affiliation were increasingly replaced - or at leas, supplemented has become so widespread (from psychiatry _10 pedagogy, from th~
- by a whole range of degrees of normality indicating membership diagnosis of diseases to the hiring of labour), this familiar method
of a homogeneous social body but also playing a part in classifica of the examination, implement, within a single mechanism, power
tion, hierarchization and the distribution of rank. In a sense, the relations that make it possible 10 extract and constitute knowledge?
pow~r of normalization impos'es homogeneity; but it individualizes It is not simply at the level of consciousness, of representations and
by making it possible 10 measure gaps, 10 determine levels, to fix In what one thinks one knows, but at the level of what makes possible
specialities and to, render the differences useful by fitting them one the knowledge that is transformed into political investment.
to another. It is easy 10 understand how the power of the no.rm One of the essential conditions ior the epistemological 'thaw' of
functionsw ithin a system of forma.el quality,s ince within a homo medicine at the end of the eighteenth century was the organization
geneity rhar is the rule, the norm introduces, as a useful imperative of the hospiial as an 'examining' apparatus. The ritual of the visit
and as a result of measurement, all the shading of individuai was its most obvious form. In the seventeenth century, the physi
differences. cian, coming from the outside, added his ins~ection ro many-other
conrrols - religious, administrative, etc.; he h~rdly participated in
the everyday administration of the hospital, Gradually, r\le visit
The-exami,,arion
became more regular, more rigorous, above all ,more ex1ended: it
The examination cqmbines the techniques of an observing hierarchy became an ever more important part of the functioning of the
and those of a normalizing judgement, It is a normalfzing gaze, a hospital, In 1661, the physician of the Houil-Dieu of Paris was
• surveillance that makes it possible to qualify, to classify and to called upon lo make a dail)i visit; in 1687, an 'expectant' pl1ysician
punish. It establishes over individuals a ,;iisibillty through which was to examine, in the aftemoon, cenain seriously sick patients.
one differentiates them and judge_st hem. That is why, in all rhe The eighteenth-centu,y regulations laid down the hours of the visit
meclianis!11o5f dfacipline, the examination 1s highly rituali.zed. In it and its duration (at least two hours); they insisted on a rotation of
are combined the ceremony of power and the form of the experi physicians, whicl1w ould guarantee visits every day 'even on Easter
ment, the deployment of force and the establishment of truth. At the Sunday'; at last, in 1771, a resident physician was appointed, charged
heart of the procedures of discipline, it manifests the subjection of with 'providing all the se('Viceso f his state, at night as wel) as in the

U1sc1phne 1 ne means or correct uammg
day, in 1hei ntervals between visiis by an ouiside physician' (Regime 1radi1ion validated an acquired aptitude - the 'master-work'
des dilibtrationsd u bureaud e I' Hoie/-lJieu). The old form of inspec nu1hentica1ed a transmission of knowledge that had already been
tion, frregulara nd rapid, was transformedi nto a regularo bservation nccomplished - the examination in the school was a constant
that placed the patient in a situation of almost perpetual examina exchanger of knowledge; it guaranteed 1he movement of knowledge
tion. This had two consequences: in the internal hierarchy, the from the teacher 10 the pupil, but it extracted from the pupil a
physician, hitherto an external element, begins to gain over the knowledge destined and reserved for the teacher. The school became
religious staff and 10 relegate them to a clearly specified, but subor 1hep lace of elaboration for pedagogy. And just as the procedure of
dinate role in the technique of ,he examination; the category of the the hQspital examination made possible the epistemological 'rhaw' of
'nurse' then appears; while the hospital itself, ,vhich was once linle medicine, the age of the 'examining' school marked the beginnings
more ,han a poorhouse, was to become a place of training and Qf of a pedagogy that functions as a science. The age of inspections and
the correlation of knowledge; it represented a reversal therefore of endlessly repeated movements in the army alsd marked the develop•
the power rdations and the constitution of a c1>rpuso f knowledge. ment of an immense tactical knowledge that had irs effect in the
The 'well-disciplined' hospital became the physical counterpart of period of the Napoleonic wars.
the medical 'discipline'; this discipline could now abandon irs textual The examinarion introduced a whole mechanism that linked to a
character and take its references not so much from the tradition of cenain type of the formation of knowledge a, certain form of the
author-authorities as from a domain of objects perpetually offered exercise of power.
for examination. t. ,Th.ee xamination-transformed the econcm;ro f visibility into tlrt
Similarly, tl1e school became a sort of apparatus of uninterrupted exerciseo f power.T raditionally, power was what was seen, what was
examination that duplicated along its entire length the operati.on of shown and what was manifested and, paradoxically, found the
reaching. ~t became less and less a question of jousts in which pupils principle of its force ·in the movement by which it deployed that
pitched their forces against one another and increasingly a perpetual force. Those on whom it was exercised could remain in the shade;
comparison of each and all that made it possible both to measure and they received light 1>nly from thar portion of power that was
to judge. The Brothers 6fthe Christian Schools wanted their pupils conceded 10 them, or from the reflection of it that fora moment they
10 be examined every day of the week: on the first for spelling, on carried. Disciplinary power, on the other hand, is exercised through
rhe second for arhhrnetic, on the third for catechism in ,he morning its invisibility; at ~he•samet ime it imposes on those whom h subjecrs
and for hand\'vritinign the afternoon,e tc. Moreover,t hereW ast o be a principle of compulsory visibility. Tn discipline, ii is the subjects
an examination each month in order co pick ouc those who deserved who have 10 be seen. Their visibility assures the hold of the power
10 be submined for examination by the inspector (La Salle, Con that is exercised over them. It is the fact of being CO!lStantlys een,
dr,itt .. ., 160). From 1775, ,here existed a, 1he Ecole des Ponts et of being able always to be seen; that maintains the disciplined
Chausseess ixteen examination·sa year: rhree in mathematicsl three individual in his subjection. And the examination is the technique
in architecture,t hree in drawing, two in writing one in stone- by which power, instead of emini'ng,1he signs of its potency, instead
1,
cutting, one in style, one in surveying, one in levelling, one in of imposing its mark on ,its subjects, holds them in a mechanism of
quantity SUl'\'eying. The examination did not simply mar'k the end of objectification, In this space of domination, disciplinary power
an apprenticeship; it was one of its permanent factors; it was woven manifests its potency, essentially, by arrahging objects. The
into it through a constanrly repeated rirual of power. The examina examination is, as it were, the ceremony of this objectification.
tion enabled the teacher, while transmitting his knowledge, 10 Hitherto the role of'che poli1ical cet'ell)ony had been to give rise
1ransfom1 his pupils into a whole field of knowledge. Whereas the 10 tl1e excessive, yet regulated manifesration of power; it was a
examination with which an apprenticeship ended in the guild specracular expression of potency,·an 'expenditure', exaggerated apd
'
186

u1scapJjne 1 he means0 1 correc-rr.r:a mmg
coded, in which power renewed its vigour. It was always more or Let us rake this medal as evidence of the moment when, para
less related to the triumph. The solemn appearance of the sovereign doxically but significantly, the moSt brilliant figure of sovereign
brought with it something of the consecration, the coronation, th~ power is joined ro the emergence of the rituals proper to disciplinary
return from victory; even the funeral ceremony took place wirh all power. The scarcely sustainable visibility of the monarch is turned
the spectacle of power deployed. Discipline however, had its own Into rhc unavoidable visibility of the subjects. And it is this inversion
1
type of ceremony. lt was not the triumph, but ,be review, the of visibjlity in the functioning of the disciplines that•waHo assure the
•parade',a n ostentatiousf ormo f thee xamination.I n it rhe' subjects' exercise of power even in its lowest manifestations. We are entering
were presented as 'objects' to the observation of a power that w .. the ag~ of the infinite examination and of compulsory objectification.
manifested only by its gaze. They did not receive directly the image 2, The exaJninqtion also inrrodw:e, individuali;y into the field of
of the sovereign power; they only folt its effects - in replica, as It documentation.T he examination leaves b,ehind ita whole meticulous
were - on their bodies, which had become precisely legible and nrchive constirur~d in terms of bodies and days. The examination
docile. On 15 March 1666, Louis XIV cook his first military review; tha, places individuals in a field of surveillance also situates them in
18,000 men,' one of the-mosst pectaculara ctionso f the r:elgn'w, hich 11n etwork of writing; it engages them in a whole mass of documents
was supposed 10 have 'kept all Europe in disquiet'. Several year\ that capture ,incl fix them. The procedures of examination were
later, a medal was struck to commemorate the event (cf. fucquiot, nccompanied at the same rime by a system of intense reg;istration
50-14). It bea1S the exergue, 'Duciplina mili,aris restitua' and the and of documentary accumulation. A 'power of writing' was con
legend 'Prolusio ad victorias'. On the right, the lting, right foo1 stituted as an essential part in the mecha.nismso f discipline. On many
forward, commands the exercise itself with a stick. On the lof~ points, it was modelled on the craditional methods of adminisirative
several racks of soldiets are shown full face and aligned in depth; documentation, thougn with particular techniques and important
they have raised their right arms co,shoulder height and are holding innovations. Some concerned methods of identification, signalling
their riAes exactly vertical, their right legs are slightly forward and or description. This was ,he problem in the army, where it was
their left feet turned outwards. On the ground, lines intersect at necessary 1.0 track down deserters, avoid repeating enrolments,
right angles, to form, beneath the soldiers' feet, broad rectangles correctf ictiti6us·1informacion-'- presentedb y officers, know the ser
that serve as references for differenc phases. and positions of th~ vices and value of each individual,. establish with cerrainry
exercise. In die background is a piece of classical architecture. The ,he balance-sheet of rhose who had disappeared or died, lt was the
columns of ,he palace ~xrend those formed by the ranks of men and probl~m 'of the hospitals, where it was necessary to recognize
the erect rifles, just as the paving no doubr extends the lines of die the p~tients, expel shammers, follow the evolution of diseases,srudy
exercise. But above the balustrade that crowns the building are the effectiveness of treatments, map similar oases and che beginnings
statues representing dancing figures: sinuous lines, rounded ges of epidemics. It was the problem .of the teaching establishments,
tures, draperies. The marble is covered with movements whose where ·one had to define the aptitude of each individual, situate his
principle of unity is harmonic. The men, on the other hand, are level and his abilities, indicate the possible use chat might be made
frozen into a uniformly repeated attitude of ranks and lines: a of them: 'The register enables one, by being available in time and
tactical unity. The.order of the architecture, which frees.at its sum place, 10 know the habirs of the children, their progress in piety,
mit the figures of the dance, imposes its rules and its geometry on the in catechism, in the lenets, during the time they have bee(! at t\lc
disciplined men on the ground. The columns of power. 'Very good1, School' (M.J,D.B., 64).
Grdnd Duke Mikhail once remarked of a regiment, after having Hence the formation of a whole series of codes of disciplinary
kept it for one hour presenting arms, 'only they hr,a,h, (Kropotkin, individuality that made it possible to transcribe, by means of homo
8; I owe this reference to G. Canguilhem). genization the individual features esrablished by the examination:
188

Disdpline The means of correct training
the physical code of signalling, the medical code of sympwms, the 10 us now, were of decisive importance in the epistemological 'thaw'
e<lucational or military code of conduct or performance. These of the sciences of the individual. One is no doubt tight to pose the
codes were still very crude, both in quality and quantity, but they Aristotelean problem: is a science of the individual possible and
marked a first stage in the 'formalization' of the individual within legitimate? A great problem needs great solutions perhaps. But
power relations. there is the small historical problem of the emergence, towards the
The other innovations of disciplinary writing concerned the ond of the eighteenth century, of what might generally be termed
correlation of these elements, the accumulation of documents, their the 'clinical' sciences;'the problem of the entry of the individual (and
seriation, the organiz.ition of compa.rative fields making ir possible oo longer the species) into the field of knowledge; the problem of
to classify, 10 form categories,t o determinea verages,t o fix norms. chee ntry of the individual description, of the cross-examination, of
The hospitals of the eighteenth century, in particular, were greai ~namnesis, of the 'file' into the general functioning of scientific dis
laboratories for scriptuary and documentary methods. The keeping coulse. To this simple question of fact! one must no doubt give an
of registers,r heirs pecification,t he modes of transcriptionfr om one •nswer lacking in 'nobility': one should look into these procedures
to the other, their circulationd uring visits, theirc omparisond uring of writing and registration, one should look into the mechanisms of
regular meetings of docmrs and administrators, the transmission of examination, into the formation of the mechanisms of discipline, and
their data to centralizing bodies (either at the_ hospital or at die nf a new type of power over bodies. Is this the birth of the sciences
central office of the poorhouses), 1hea ccountancy of diseases, cures, of man? It is probably to be found in these 'ignoble' archives, where
deaths, at the level of a hospital, a ,own and even of the nation as a 1he modern play of coercion over bodies, gesrures and behaviour
whole formed an integral part of the process by which hospitals has its beginnings.
were subjected to the disciplinary regime. Among the fundamental J, The examination, surroundedh y all its documentaryt e.cltnir;ue.s,
conditions of a good medical 'discipline', in both senses of the word, makes eac/ri.n dividual a 1,asl: a case whicha t one and thes amet ime
one mu51i nclude the p.rocedures of writing that made it possible to constitu1es an object for a branch of knowle<lge and a hold for a
integrate individual data into cumulative syscems in such a way that branch of power. The case is no longer, as .in casuistry or juris
they were not lost; so 10 arrange things that an individual could be prudence, a set of circumstances defining an acr and capable of
located in the general register and that, conversely, each datum of modifying the application of a. rule; it is the individual as he may be
the individual examination might affecto verall calculations. described, judged, measure<!, compared with others, in his very
Thanks to the whole apparatus of writing that accompanied it, the Individuality; and it is also the individual who has to be trained or
examination opened up two correlative possibilities: firstly, the corrected, classified, normalized, excluded, etc.
constitution of the individual as a describable, analysable object, not For a long time ordinary individuality- ,he_e veryday individual
in order to reduce him to 'specific' fearures, as did the naturalists in ity of everybody - remained below the threshold of description.
relation to living beings, but in order 10 maintain him in his indivi To be looked at, observed, described in detail, followed from day
dual features, in his particular evolution, in his own aptitudes or ro day by an uninterrupted writing was a privilege. The chronicle of
abiliries, u.nder the gaze of a permanent corpus of knowledge; and, • man, the account of his life, his historlography, written as he lived
secondly, the constitution of a comparative system that made out his life formed part of the rituals of his power. Tbedisciplinary·
possible the measurement of overall phenomena, the dcsct'iprion of method~ reversed diis relation, lowered the 0ireshold of describable
groups, the characterization of collective facts, the calculation of the individuaUty and made of this description a means of control and a
gaps between individuals, their distribution in a given 'population'. method of domination. Tt is no longer a monumem for future
These small 1echnique_os f notation, of registra1ion, ofconstiruting memory1 but a document for possible. use. And this new describ
files, of arranging facts in columns and tables that arc so familiar ability is all the more marked in that the disciplinary framework is
I \)0

u1sapune J ne means or correcr c.rammg
a strict one: the child, ,he patient, the madman, the prisoner, weer ond the genealogy that situate one within a kinship group, che
to become, with increasing ease from -the eighteenth century. and l)Crformanceo f deeds that demonstrate superior strength and which
according to a CW'Vew hich is that of the mechanisms of discipli~r, arei mmortalized in literary accounts, the ceremonies that mark 1he
the object of individual descriptions and biographical account<. 1>owerr elations in their very ordering, the monuments or donations
This turning of real lives into writing is no }onger a procedure of that bring survival after death, the ostentation and excess.of expendi
heroization; it functions as a procedure of objectification and sub• ture, the multiple, intersecting links of allegiance and suzerainty,
jection. The ca.refully collated life of mental patients qr delinquenll ,tll these are procedures of an 'ascending' individualization. ln a
belongs, as did the chronicle of k,ings or thea dventures of the greut disciplinary regime, on the other hand, individualization is 'descend
popular bandits, t0 a certain political function of writing; but in ~ ing': as' power be<;omes more anonymous and more functional,
ql!ite different technique of powe.r. !hose on whom it is exercised tend to be more strongly individual
The e*am~oadc;ma s the fixing, at once ritual and 1scjentific1 ot lr.edi;t is exercised by surveillance ra1her than ceremonies, by obser
,
individual differences, as the pinning down of each individual in hi, vation raiher rha.n commemorative accounts, by comparative
.own partitularity (in contrast witl, the ceremony in which statu1, 111easuretsh at have the_' norm' as reference rather than genealogies
binh, privilege, function are manifested with all the spectacle ol giving ancestors as points of reference; by 'gaps' rather than by
their marks)' clearly indicates the appearance of a new modality ,,I deeds. 1n a sysrem of discipline, the child is more individualized
power in which each individual receives as his status his own indivi. than the adult, the patient more than the healthy man, the madman
duality, and in which he is linked by his status to the features, tho ;1nd the delinquent more than the normal and the non-delinquent.
measurements, the gaps, the 'marJcs' that characterize him and mak• In each case, it is towards ,he first of these pairs that all the indivi
him a 'case'. dualizing mechanisms are turned -in our civiliz.ation; and when one
Finally, the examination is at the centre of the procedures that wishes to individualize the healthy, normal and law-abiding adult,
constitute the individual as effect and object of pqwer, as ~ffect and It is always by aski11gh im how much of the child he has in him,
object of knowledge. h is the examination which, b~ com~ininfl what secrer inadi:iessl ies within him, whar fundamental crime he
hierarchical ~rveillance and normalizing judgement, assures ,hr has dreamt of committing. All the sciences, analyses or practices
great dfaciplinary f4nctions of distribution and classificacion, maxi, employing the roo, 'psycho•' have their origin in this historical
mum e,q:ractiono f forces and 1ime, continuous genetic accumul:1- reversal of the procedures of individualization. The moment chat
tion, optimum,combin~tion of aptitudes and, thereby, the fabrication 11,aw the transition from historico•rimal mechanisms for che forma
of cellular, 01ganic, genetic and combinatory individuality. With h tion o( individuality 10 the scientifico-disciplinary mechanisms,
are ritualized those disciplines that may be characterized in a word when the normal mok over from the ancestral, and measurement
by saying that they are a modality of power for which individual from status, 1hus substituting for the individuality of the memorable
difference is te1e,vant. ,nan that of the calculable man, that moment when the sciences of
man became possible is the moment when a new 1echnology of
The disciplines mark the moment when the reversal of the politicnl power and a new political anatomy of the body were implemented.
axis of individualization - as one migh, call it - takes place. 111 A11dif from the early Middle Ages to the present day the 'adventure'
certain societies, of which the feudal regime is only one example, is an account of individuality, the _passage from the epic to the
ir may be said that individualizati,;m is greatest where sovereignty novel, from the n.oble deed to the secret singularity, from long
,is exercised and in the higher echelons of power. The mo;e ono exiles to the internal search for childhood, from combats to phan-
possesses powe~ ot privilege, ihe more one is marked as an indivi 1asies,i t is also inscribed in the forma,ion of a disciplinary society.
dual, by rituals, written accounts or visual reprodl.lctions.T he 1name1 The ad.venture of our childhood no longer finds expression in 'le

JJ1sc1p11ne
honp ericB erri', l:iuti n the misfortunes of 'liule I-Jans',T he Romane,
of,"-• Rose is written tcxlay by Mary Barnes; in the.place ofLancel~,, l· Panopricism
we have Judge Schreber.
It is often said that the model of a society that has individual,
as its co,:1stituente lements is borrowed from the abstract juridic~!
forms of contract and exchange. Mercantile society, according to
this view, is represented as a contractual association of isolated
juridical subjects. Perhaps. Indeed, the political theory of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries often see1!is to follow rhi,
schema. •Buti t should not be forgotten that there existed at the same The following, according to an order published at the end of the
period a technique for constituting individuals as correlative eic• ~vemeenth century, were the measures to be taken when the plague·
ments of power and knowledge, The individual is no doubt the ippeared in a town. 1
fictitious atom of an 'ideological' representation of society; but he ill First, a strict spatial partitioning: the closing of the town and its
also a reality fabricated by this specific technology of power tha, I ouLlyingd istricts, a prohibition co leave the town on pain of death,
have called 'discipline'. We must cease once and for all to describe the killing of all stray animals; the division of the town into distinct
the effects of powet in negative terms: it "excludes',i t 'represses', quarters;esch governed by an intendant. Each street is plac:edu nder
it tcensors', it 'abstracts',i t 1masks', it "conceals'.I n fact, power the authoriry of a syndic, who keeps it under surveillance; if he
produces; it produces reality; it produces domains of objects and leaves the street, he will be condemned 10 death. On the appointed
rituals of truth. The •individual and the knowledge that may be day, everyone is ordered to stay indoors: it is forbidden to leave
gained of him belong to this production. on pain of death. The syn~ic himself comes 10 lock the door of
Is it not somewhat excessive to derive such power from the petty cnch house from the outside; he takes ,he key with him and hands
machinations of discipline? How could chey achieve effects of such h over to the intendant of the quarter;t he imendant keeps it until
scope? ,he end of the quarantine. Each family will have made its own
provisions; bur, for bread and wine, small wooden canals are set up
betW(."en the street and the interioro f the_housest, hus allowing each
person to receiVeh is ration without communica11ngw ith the sup
pliers and other residents; meat, fish and herbs will be hoisted up
into the houses with pulleys and baskets. lfit is absolutely necessary
to leave the house, it will be,done in turn, avoiding any meeting.
Only ,he intendants, sy11dks and guards will move about the
meets and also, between the infected houses, from one corpse to
another, the 'crows', who can be left to die: these are 'people oflitde
substance who carry the sick, bury the dead, clean and do many vile
and abject offices'. It.is a segmented, immobile, froien space. Each
individual is fixed in his place. And, if he moves, he does so at the
risk of his life, contagion or punishmenr.
Inspection functions ceaselessly. The gaze is alert everywhere: 'A
considerable body o( militia, commanded by good officers and men
194 195

1-'anopticism
of substance', guards at the gates, at the town hall and in eve, y ,11,casea nd,to his death passes through the representatives of power,
quarter to ensure the prompt obedience of the people and the mu,1 1hcr egistration they make of it:, the decisions they take on it.
absolute authority of the magistrates, 'as also to observe all disordor, Five or six days after the beginning of the quarantine, the process
theft and extortion'. At each of the town gates there will be •n nf purifying the houses ooe by one is·b egun. All ,he inhabitants are
observation post; at the·end of each street sentinels. Every day, the miadet o le.ave; in each room fthe furniture and goods' are raised
intendant visits the quarter in his charge, inquires whether ,I lrom the ground or suspended from the air; -perfume is poured
syndics have carried out their tasks, whether the inhabitants have ,round the· room; after carefully sealing the windows, doors and
anything to complain of; they 'observe their actions'. Every doy rv•n the keyhoJes with wax, the perfume is set -alight. Finally, the
,oo, the syndic goes into the street for which he is responsibl, ontire house is closed while the perfume is consumed; those who
stops before each house: gets all the inhabitants 10 appear at ,1,. l111vcea rried out che work ar.es earched, as they were on entry, 'in
windows (those who live overlooking the courtyard will be all11 1hcp resence of the residents of the house, to see that they did not
cated a window looking onto the streer at which no one but t.11ry hnve something on their persons as they left that they did not have
may show -themselve~); he calls each of them by name; inform on entering'. Four hours later, the residents are allowed to re-enter
himself as to the state of each and every one of them - 'in which 1heir homes.
respect the inhabitants will be compelled to speak .the truth undor This enclosed, segmented space, observed at every point, in
pain of death'; if someone does not appear at the window, the syn1h which the individuals are inserted in a fixed place, in which the
must ask why: 'In this way he will 611do ut easily enough whedi~r illgluest movements are superyised, in which all events are recorded,
dead or sic!< are being concealed.' Everyone locked up in h11 In which an uninterrupted work of wriring links the cenrre and
cag~ everyone at his window, answering co his name and showinl 1>11ripheriyn, which power is exercised without division, according
himself when asked - it is the great review of the living and rl141 10 a continuous hierarchical figure, in which each individua.1i s con-
dead. 11•ntly located, examined and disrributed among the living neings,
This surveillance is based on a system 'of permanenrregistratlon 1hes ick and the dead - all this constitutes a compact model of the
re~ons from the syndics to rhe intendan,s, from the intendants ,., tllsciplinary mechanism. The. plague is met by order; its function is
,he magistrates or mayor. At the beginning of ,he 'lock up', the rillt 10 sort out every possible confusion: that of the. disease, which is
of each of the inhabitants present _in the town is laid down, one by 1ransmitted when bodies are mixed together; that of the evil, which
one; this document J)ears' the name, age, ~x of everyon~, notwhh 11 increased when fear and death overcome prohibitions. lt lays
standing his condition': a copy is sent t0 the intend~nc of ,he quar101 down for each individual his place, his body, his disease and his
1
another to the office of the 1own hall, another to enable the syndlt death, his well-being, by means of an omnipresent and omniscient
to make h,is daily roll call. Everything that may be observed durlnK 1>owert hat subdivides itself in a regular, uninterrupted way even
the cou~se of the viSits-deaths, illnesses, complaints; irregularitits 10t he ultimate determination of the individual, of what characterizes
is noted down and transmitted to the intendants and magistrate, 1,lm,o f what belongs to him, of what happens to him. Against the
The magistrates have complete control ove, medical treatment; thny plague, which is a mixture, discipline brings into play its power,
have appointed a physician in charge; no other practitioner m•y which is one of analysis. A whole literary fiction of rhe festival grew
treatl no apothecary prepare medicine, no confessor visi1 a sic~ up a.round the plague: suspended laws, lifted prohibitions, the
personw ithouth avingr eceivedf rom hima writtenn ote 'to prevc111 frenzy of passing time, bodies mingling together without resp.ect,
anyone from concealing and dealing with those sick of the contagion, Individuals unmasked, abandoning theit statutory 1dentity and the
unknown ,o the magistrates'. The registration of the pathologic~I ligure under '1'hid1 d1ey had been recognized, allowin~ a quite
must be constantly centralized. The relation of Cilchi ndividual to hit ,lifferent truth to appear. But there was also a political dream of the
197

U1sc1p1tne c .a.uvpu1..1;:1111
plague, which was exactly its reverse: not the collective festlv•I function according 10 pure theory, tl,e jurists place themselves in
but strict divisions; not laws transgressed,b ut the penetrationn i Imagination in the state of nature; in order to see perfect disciplines
regu!•t!on into·even the smallest details of everyday Jife,tJtrough Iii' (unctioning, rulers dreamt of the state of plague. Underlying dis
med,auon of the complete hierarchy that assured the capillary fun1 olplinary projects the image of the plague stands for all fonns of
tioning of power-;n ot masks that were put on and taken off, but th, confusion and disorder; just as the image of the leper, cut off from
assignment to each individual of his 'true' name, his 'true' place hi, all humanc ontact, underHesp rojects of exclusion.
'true' body, !tis 'true' disease. The plague as -a forin, at once 1 ml They are different projects, then, but not incompatible ones. We
and imaginary, of disorder had as'its medical and political correlativo 11te them coming slowly together, and it is the peculiarity of the
discipline. Behind the disciplinary mechanisms can be read th• nineteenth century that it applied co ,he space of exclusion of which
haunting memory of 'contagions', of the plague ' of rebellion, 1hel eper was thesynibolic inhabitant (beggars, vagabonds, madmen
cn . m es, vagabondage, desertions; people who appear and disappear ' , ~nd the disorderly formed the real population) the technique of
live and die in disorder. power proper to disciplinary partitioning. Treat 'lepers' as 'plague
Ifit is true.that the leper gave rise to rituals of exclusion, which to victims', project the subtle segmentations of discipline onto the
a certain extent provided the model for and general form of tl•• confused space of imernment, combine it with the methods o( analy
great Confinement, then the plague gave rise co disciplinary pro lical distribution proper to power, individualize the excluded, but
jects. Rather than ,he massive, binary division between orie se1 of use procedures of individualization to ma.rk.eydusion - tltis is what
people and another, it called for multiple separations, individualizing was operated regularly by disciplinary power from the beginning
distributions, an organization jn depth of surveillance and control of the nineteenth century in the psychiatric asylum, the penitentiary,
an i~tensificarion ancl a ramification of power. The leper was caugh; ,he reformatory, the approved school and, to some extent, the
up in a practice of rejection, of exile-enclosur;e; he was left to hi, hospital. Generally speaking, all the authorities exercising indivJdual
dQOmf o a mass among which it was useless to differentiate; those control function according to a double mode; that of binary division
sick ,of the plague were caught up in~ meticulous tactical partition and branding· (mad/sane; dangerous/harmless; normal/abnormal);
ing in which individual differentiations were the constric1ing e/fects and that of coercive assignment,.of differential distribution (who he
~fa po":'er that multiplied, articulated and_s ubdh<ided itself; the great is; where he must be; how he is to be characterized; how· he is to be
confinement on the ol')e hf'.lndt;h e cotrcct training on the other. recognized;h ow a constants urveillance is to be exercised over him
The leper and his separation; the plague.and its segmentations. The in an individual way, etc.). On the one hand, the lepers are treated as
first is marked; the second analysed and distributed. The exile o( plague victims; the tactics of individualizing disciplines are imposed
the leper and the arrest of the plague do not bring with them the on the excluded; and, on the other hand, the universality of disci
same polilical dream. The first is that of a pure community, tne plinary controls makes it possible 10 brand the 'leper' and to bring
second that of a disciplined society. Two ways-of exe~cising power into play against him the d.ualistic m.echanisms of exclusion. The
Over men, of controlling their relations, of separating out their constant dlvision between the normal and the abnormal, to which
dangerous mixtures. The plague-stricken town, 1raversed through every individ11ali s subjected, brings us back to our own rime, by
our with hierarchy, surveillance, observation, writing; the lawn applying the binary branding and exile of the leper to quite different
immobilized by the functioning of an extensive.power that bears in objects; the existence of a whole set of techniques and instirurions
a distinct way over all individual bodies - this is the utopia of the for measuring, supervising and correcting the abnormal brings into
perfectly governed city. The plague (envisaged as a possibilit,y at play th·e disciplinary mechanisms to which the fear of the plague
least) is the trial in the course of which one may define.ideally the gave rise. All the mechanisms of power which, even today, are
exercise of disciplinary power. In order 10 make rights and laws disposed around the ab'normal individual, to brand him and 10 alter
199

.v1l>Clpune ranopuc1sm
him, are composed of ,hose two forms from which 1hey disrandy contagion; if they are madmen theae is no risk of their committing
derive. violence upon one another; if they are schoolchildren, there is no
copying, no noise, no chatter, no waste of time; if they are workers,
Bemham's Panop,i,on is the architectural figure of 1his composi 1here are no disorders, no theft, no. coalitions, none of those dis-
tion. We know 1he principle on-which ii was based: ac the periphery, 1ractions chat slow down the ra1e orwork, make it less perfect or
an annular building; at the centre, a rower; this tower is pierced with cause accidents. The crowd, a cornpact mass, a locus of multiple
wide windows that open onto the inner side of the ring; the peri exchanges, individualities merging rogerher, a collective effect, is
pheric building is divided into cells, each of which extends the whole abolished and replaced by a collection of separated individualities.
width of the building; they have-two windows, one on the inside, From the point of view of the guardian, it is replaced by a multipli
corresponding to the windows of ,he rower; 1he other, on the out city that can be numbered and supervised; from the point of view of
side, allows the light to cross the cell from one end 10 che 01her. the inma1es, by a .sequestered ~nd observed solittlde (Bentham,
All tha1 is needed, ,hen, is co place a supervisor in a central rower 00-64).
and to shut up in each cell a madman, a paiient, a condemned man, Hence the major effect of the Panopticon: 10 induce in the inmate
a worker or a schoolboy. By the effect of backli'ghting, one can a stare of conscious and permanent visibility that assutes 1he auto
observe from the 1ower, sta.nding ou1 precisely against the ligh1, maiic functioning of power. So to arrange things that the surveil
1he small captive shadows .in the cells of the periphery. They are lance is permanent in its effects, even if it is discontinuous in its
like so many cages, so many small theaires, in which each ac1or is action; that che perfection, ofpower should tend to render its actual
alone, perfectly individualized and constanily visible. The panop1ic exercise unnecessary; ,hat this architectural apparatus should be a
mechanism arranges spatial uni1iest hat make i1 possible 10 see con machine for creating and sustaining a power relation independent
stantly and to recogniz~ immediaiely. In short, it reverses che prin of the person wh9 exercise-sir; in short, that the inmates should be
ciple of the dungeon; or rather of its 1hree functions - to enclose, 10 caught up in a power situation of which they are themselves the
deprive of ligh1 and co hide - it preserves only the first•a nd elimin bearers.T o achieve this. iris at once too much and too little that the
ates the other two. Full lighting and 1he eye of a supervisor capture prisoner should be con~tantly observed by an inspector: too little,
better than darkness, which ultimately protected. Visibiliry is a trap. for what matiers is 1hat he knows himself to be observed; too much,
To begin with, this made i, possible - as a negative ,effect - co because he has no need in fact of being so. In view of this, Bentham
avoid those compact, swarming, howling masses ,hat were to be laid down the principle 1hat power shouJd be visible and unveri
found in places of confinemem, chose painted by Goya or described fiable. Visible: the inmate will constantly have before his eyes the
by Howard. Each individual, in his place, is securely confined to a tall outline of the ce-ntral tower from which he is spied upon.
cell from which he is seen from the from by 1he supervisor; but the Unverifiable: the inmate must never know whether he is being
side walls prevent him from coming inm contact wi1h his compan looked atarany one moment; bur he must be sure tha1 he may always
ions. He is seen, but he does noc see; he is the object of information, be so. In order to make ,he presence or absence of the inspector
never a subject in communication. The arrangemem of his room unverifiable, so that the prisoners, in their cells, canno, even see a
1
opposite the central tower, imposes on him an axial visibiliry; but shadow, Beothan\ envisaged not only venetian blinds on the
the divisions of the ring, those separated cells; imply a lateral window5of the central observation hall, but, on the inside, partitions
invisibiliry. And ,,his invisibility is a guarantee of order. If the in that intersected the hall at right angles and, in order to pass from
mates are convicts, there is no danger of a pl~t, an a11empt a\ one quarter LO the other, not doors but zig-zag openings; for the
collective escape, the planning of new crimes for the future, bad slighces~n oise, a ,gleam of light, a brightness in a half0opened door
reciprocal influences; if they are patients, there is no danger of would betray the presence of the guardian. 2 The Panopticon is a
200

machine for dissociating. the see/being seen dyad: in the perlplt which he simultaneously plays both roles; he beromes ·the principle
eric ring, one is totally seen, without ever seeing; in the cenu:111 of his own s.ubjection. By this very fact, the external po,wer may
10wer, one sees everything without ever being seen.• 1lirowo ff its physical weight; it tends to the non-corporal; and, the
1t is an important mechanism, for it automatizes and disindiv, more it approaches this limit, the more constant, profound and
dualizes power. Power has its principle not so much in a person •• ~k:rrnanenatr e its effects: it is a perpetual victory that avoids any
in a certain concerted distribution of bodies, surfaces, lighrs, gaz<11 physical confrontation and which is always decided in advance.
in an arrangement whose internal mechanisms produce the relatinn Bentham does not say whether he was inspired, in his project, by
in which individuals are caught up. The ceremonies, the rituals, rlt• Le Vaux's menagerie at Versailles: the first menagerie in which-the
marks by which the sovereign's surplus power was manifested arr different elements are not, as they traditionally were, distributed ln
useless. There is a machinery that assures dissymmetry, disequill l park (Loisel, 104-7). At the centre was an octagonal pavilion
brium,d iff'Cren~.C onsequemly, it does not matter who exerci!lt", which, on the first floor, consisted of only a single room, the king's
power. Any individual, taken almost at random, can operate thr 1alon;o n every side large windows looked out onto seven cages
machine: in the. absence of the director, his family, his friends_,I m (the eighth side was reserved for the entrance), containing different
visitors, even his servants (Bentham, 45}. Similarly, it doe.s n~t species of animals. By Bentham's time, this menagerie had dis
mauerw hat motive animatesh im: chec uriosity of the indiscreet, tlll' appeared, But one finds in the programme of the Panopticon a
malice of a child, the· thirst for knowledge of a philosopher whu similar concern with individuali2ing observation, with characteriza
wjshes to visit this museum of human nature, or rhe perversity ot don and classification, with the analytical arrangement of space. The
those who take pleasure in spying and punishing. The morr Panopticon is a royal menagerie; the animal is replaced by man,
numerous those anonymous and temporaryo bservers are, the grearc, Individual distribution by specific grouping and the king by the
the risk for the inmate of being surprised and tlie greater his anxiou, machinery ofa furtive power. With this exception, the Panopticon
awareness of being observed. The Panopticon is a marvellou, also does the work of a naturalist. It makes it possible to draw up
machine which, whatever use one may '\ 1 \ish to put it w, produce, differences:a mong patiencs, co observe the symptoms of each indivi
homogeneous effects.o f power. dual, without the proximity of beds, the circulation of miasmas, the
A real subjection is born mechanically from a fictitious relation. effects of contagion confusing the clinical tables; among schoel
So it is not necessary to use force to c:onstraint he convict to good childrcn, it makes it possible to observe performances (without
behav.iour, the madman 10 calm, the worker to work, the schoolboy there being any imitation or copying), to map aptitudes, to assess
to application, the patient to the observation of the regulations, characters, to draw up rigorous classifications and, in relation to
Bentham was surprised that panopric institutions could be so light: normal development, to distingu.ish 'laziness and stubbornness' from
there were no more bars,, no more chains, no more heavy locks; all 'incurable imbecility'; among workers, it makes it possible to note
that was needed was that the separations should be clear and tho the aptitudes qf each worker, compare the time he takes to perform
openings well arranged. The heaviness of the old 'houses of secu.rity', a task, and if they are paid by the day, to calculate their wages
with their fortress-like architecture, could be replaced by the·simple, (Bentham, Go4>4}.
economic geometry of a 'house of certainty'. The efficiency of So much for the question of observation. But the Panopricon was
po:wer, its constraining force have, in a sense, passed over co the also-a laboratory; it could be used as a machine to carry out experi
other side - to the side of irs surface of application. He who i, ments, to alter behaviour, to train or correct individuals. To experi
subjected to a field of visibility, and who knows it; assumes responsi ment with medicines and monitor their effects. To try out di,fferenr
bility for the constraints of power; he makes them play spontane punishments oOp risoners, according to their crimes and character,
ously upon himself; he inscribes in himself the power relation in and to seek the most effective ones. To te.ach different techniques
101 103

.. ..
,
.
,..
.....
_,, -,
simulraneously to the worJ<ers,t o decide which is the best. To liY The plague-stricken town, the panoptic establishment - the
out pedagogical experiments - and in particular co take up one• differencesa re important, They mark, at a distance of a century and
again the well-<lebated problem of secluded education, by using • half, the transformations of the disciplinary programme. In the
orphans. One would see what would happen when, in their six first case, there is an exceptional situation: against an extraordinary
reenth or eighteenth year, they were presented with other boys or ~vii, power is mobilized; it makes itself everywhere present and
girls; one could verify whether, as Helvetius thought, anyone could visible;i t invents new mechanisms;i r separates,i t immobilizes, it
learn anything; one would follow 'the genealogy of every observablr pnnitions;it constructsf or a time what is both a counter-drya nd
idea'; one could bring up different children according 10 different the perfec1 sociecy; it imposes an ideal functioning, but one that is
systems of thought, making certain children believe that two and reduced, in the final analysis, like the evil ,hat it combats, to a simple
two do not make four or that the moon is a cheese, then put then, dualism of life and death: that which moves brings,death, and one
togeth,er when they are twenty or r;weniy-fivey ears old; one woultl kills that which moves. The Panopticon, on d,e other hand, must
then have discussions that would be worth a great deal more than be understood as a generalizable model of functioning; a way of
the sermons or lectures on which so much money is spent; onr defining power relations in terms of the everyday life of men. No
would have at least an opportunity of making discoveries in th• doubt Bentham presents it as a particular institution, closed in upon
domain of metaphysics. The Panopticon is a privileged place for itself. Utopias, perfectly closed in upon rbcmselves, are common
experiments on men, and for analysing with complete cerraincy thr enough. A.so ppos"4 to the ruined prisons, littered with mechanisms
transformations that may be obtained from them. The Panopticon of torture, to be seen in Piranese's engravings, the Panopticon
may even provide an apparatus for supervising·its own mechanisms. presents a cruel, ingenious cage. The fact that it should have given
In this central rower, the director may spy on all the employees th•t rise, even in our own time, to so many variations,p rojectedo r
he has under -his orders: nurses, doctors, foremen,t eachers,w ar re:,Jized,i s evidence of the imaginary intensity that it has poss~ssed
ders; he will be able to judge them continuously, alter their be for almost cwo hundred years. But the Panopticon must not be
haviour, impose upon them the methods he thinks best; and it will understood as a dream building: it is the diagram of a mechanism of
even be possible 10 observe the director himself. An inspector power reduced ro its ideal fonn; its functioning, abstracted from any
arriving unexpectedly at the centre of the Panopticon wW be able w obstacle, resistance .or friction, must be represented as a pure archi-
judge a, a glance, without anything being concealed froll\ him, how 1ecrurala nd optical system: it is in fact a figure of political technology
the entire establishment is functioning. And, in any case, enclosed that may and must be detached from any specific use.
as he is in the middle of this architectural mechanism, is not die Tt is polyvalent in its applications; it serves 10 reform prisoners,
direccor'.s own fate entirely bound up with it? The incompetent but also to treat patients, to instruct schoolchildren, to confine the
physician who has allowe<Jc ontagion to spread, the incompetenc Insane, 10 supervise workers, 10 put beggars and idlers to work. ltis
prison governor or workshop manager will be the first victims of an a type of location of bodies in space, of distribution of individuals
epidemic or a revolt. • ''By every tie l could devise", said the master in relation ro one another, of hierarchical organization, of disposi
of the Panopticon, "my own fare had been bound up by me with tion of centres and channels of power, of definition of the insrru
theirs" ' (Bentham, 177). The Panopticon functions as a kind of mems and modes of intervention of power, which can be implc111en-
laboratory of power. Thanks to its mechanisms of observation, it 1ed in hospitals, .workshops, schools, prisons. Whenever one is
gains in efficiency and in the abiliiy to penetrate inti) men's beha dealing with a multiplicity of individuals on whom a task or a
yiour; knowledge follows the advances of power, discovering new particular form of behaviour must be imposed the panopric schema
1
objects of knowledge over all rhe surfaces on which power b may be used. Tci s - necessary modifications apart - applicable 'to
exercised. all establishments whatsoever, in which within a space nor 100 large
1
204 201

l'anopuc1sm
to be covered or commanded by buildings, a number of persons arr power relations function in a function, and of making a function
meam to be kept under inspecrion' {Bentham, 40; although Bentham (unction through these power relations. Bentham's Preface to
cakes the penitentiary house as his prime example, it is because it h•• /',moptfron opens with a list of the benefits to be obtained from his
many different functions to fulfil - safe custody, confinemen1, 'Inspection-house': 'Morals reformed - healtA preserved _!industry
solirude, forced labour and instruction). ,'n,ig't)rattd-instructwn diffused- public hurtlwu lighcend-Economy
In each of its applications, ir makes it possible to perfect the exer ,cared, as it were, upon a rock - the gordian knot of the Poor-Laws
cise of powec. It does this in several ways: because it can reduoc Ulf not cur, but untied- all by a simple idea in architecture!' (Bentham,
number of those who exercise it, while increasing the number ~, )?),
those on whom it is exercised. Because it is possible to intervene at Furthermore, the arrang,;ment of this machine is such that its
any moment and because the constanr pressure acts even before d1r enclosed nature does nor preclude a permanent presence from the
offences-,m istakes or crimes have been committed. Because, in the\or outside: we have seen that anyone may come and exercise in 1hcc en
conditions, its strength is that i1 never intervenes, it is exercised tral tower the functions of surveillance, and that, this being the case,
spontaneously and without noise, it constitures a meclianism who11r hec an gain a clearjdea of tliewayin which the surveillance is practised.
effects follow from one another. Because, without any physicnl In fact, any panoptic institution, even if it is as rigorously closed
instrument other than architecture and geometry, it acts direccly on os a penitentiary, may without difficulty be subjected to such irregu
individuals; it gives 'power of mind over mind'. The panoptic lar and constant inspections: and not only by the appointed inspec
schema makes any apparatus of power more intense: ir assures ici. tors, but also by the public; any member of society will have the
economy (in material,i n personnel, in time);,ita ssuresi ts.e fficadty
right to come and see with his own eyes how the schools, hospitals,
by its preventative character, its continuous functioning and i11 factories, prisons function. There is no risk, therefore, that the
automatic mechanisms.I t is a way or obtaining from power 'in Increase of power created by the panoptic machine may degenerate
hi1herco unexampled quantiiy', 'a greai and new instrument of
lnio tyranny; the disciplinary mechanism w,11 be democratically
government ... ; its great excellence consists in the great strength
controlled, since it will be constanily accessible 'to tl1eg reat tribunal
it is capable of giving 10 any institution it may be though, proper IQ committee of the world'.• Tlus Panopticon, subtly arranged so that
apply it to' (Bentham, 66).
an observerm ay observe, at a glance, so many different individuals,
It's a case of 'it's easy once you've thoughr of it' in the political 11lsoe nables everyone 10 come and observe any of the observers.
sphere. It can in fact be integrated into any function (education, The seeing machine was once a sore of dark rooin into which
medical treatment,- production,p unishment); it can increase.-the individuals spied; it has become a transparent building in which the
effect of 1his function, by being linked closely wi1h it; it can consti exercise of power may be supervised by society as a whole.
rute a mixed mechanism in which relations of power (and of know The panoptic schema, witl1our disappearing as such or losing any
ledge) may be precisely adjusted, in the smallest derail, 10 the pro of its properties, was destined to spread 1hroughou1 the social body;
c:$ses rhar are to be supervised; it can establish a direct prop,;,rrfon its vocation was to become a generalized function. The plague
between 'sw:plus power' and 'surplus production'. In short, it stricken town provided an exceptional disciplinary model: perfect,
arranges things in such a way that the exercise of power is not bur absolutely violent; co the disease that brought death, power
added on from the outside, like a rigid, heavy constr;,int, 10 the opposed its perperual threat of death; life inside it was reduced 10
funcdons it inyests, but is so sqbdy present in them as to increase i1ss implest expression; it was, against 1he power of death, the meti
their efficiency by itself increasing its own points of contact. The culous exercise of the right of the sword. The Panopticon, on the
panoptic mechanism is not simply a hinge, a point of exchange other band, has a role of amplification; although it arranges power,
between a mechanism of power and a fun~rion; it is a way qf making although it is intended to make it more economic and more effective,
1o6
207

.J.J1sc1pune r~nopt1c1sm
it does so not for power itself, nor for the immediate salvation"' innhiple, polyvalent way throughout the whole social body. These
threatened society: its aim is to strengthen the social fore<!s 1 ,lliclplines, which the classical age had elaborated in 'specific,
increase production, to develop the economy, spread educa1m1 ,;l01ively enclosed places - barracks, schools, workshops - and
raise the level of public morality; to increase and multiply. 111hotsoet al implementation had been imagined only at the limited
How is power to be strengthened in such a way that, far rru ind temporary scale of a plague-stricken town, Bentham· dreamt of
impeding progress, far from weighing upon it with its rules • 1rnnsformingi nto a nerwo,k o.f mechanisms that would be every-
regulations, it actually facilitates such progress? What intensific•I here and always alert, running ,through society without interrup-
of power will be able at the same time 10 be a mulriplicator of pr 1lrmi n space or in time. The panoptic arrangement prqvides the
auction? How will power, by increasing its forces, be able to in er.a 1,1,mulaf or this generalization. It programmes, at the level of an
those of society instead of confiscating 1hern or impeding them~ 'I I •lomentary and easily transferoblemechanism, the basic functioning
Panopticon's solution to this problem is that the productive incr'i"• ,if a society penetrated through and through wirh disciplinary
of power can be assured only if, on the one hand, it can be exercl◄ rncchanisms.
continuously in the very foundations of society, in the sub1I
possible way, and if, on the other hand, it functions omside 1hr There are two images, then, of discipline. At one extreme, the
•ht
sudden, violent, discontinuous forms that are bound up "ith tllscipLine-blockade, the enclosed institution, established on the
exercise ·of sovereignty. The ):,ody of the king, with its s111111 ,•dgcso f sociery, tumed inwards towards negative functions:
material and physical presence, with the force that he himselfdeplo a,·resting evil, brea~ing communications,.suspend.ing time. At the
or cransmits to some few others, is at the opposite extreme of th 111here xtreme, wfth panopticism, is the discipline-mechanism: a
new physics of power represented by panopticism; 1.hed omain fonctional _mechanismt hat must improve the exercise of pevle~aby
panopticism is-,o n the conirary, that whole lower region, that reg111 ,nnking it lighter, more rapid, more effective, a design, of subtle
of irregular bodies, with their details, their multiple movem;nl toercion for a society to come. The movement from one project
their heterogeneous forces, their spatial relations; what are requlr lo the other, from a schema of exceptional discipline t() one of
are mechanisms that analyse distributions, gaps, series, combill• • generalized surveillance, rests-on a hisrorical transformation:
tions, and which use instruments that render visible., recnnJ the gradual extension of the mechanisms of discipline throughout
differentiate and compare: a physics of a relational a,;d multiple 1hes eventeenth and eighteenth centuries, their spread throughout the
power, which has ats maximum intensity not in rhe person of tlJf whole social body, the formation of what might be called in general
king, but in the bodies that can be individualized by these relatio111 1hed isciplinary society.
At the theo.retical level, llentham defines another way of analysln• A whole disciplinary generalization - the Benthamite physics of
the social body and the power relations that traverse it; in term.• 11f power represents an acknowledgement of this - had operated
practice, he defines a procedure of subordination of bodies and foruN throughout the classical age. The spread of disciplinary institutions,
that must increase the utility of power while practising the econon1y whose network was beginning to cover an ever larger surface and
of the prince. Panopticism is the general principle of a new 'politiLA) occupying above all a less and less marginal position, testilies to
anatomy' whose object and end are not tht relations of sovereigniv 1his:, Vhat was an islet, a privileged pla~e, a circumstantial measure,
but the relations of discipline. or a singular .model, became a general formula; the regulations
The celebrated, trinsp,arent, circular cage, with its high tOWN, characteristic of the Protestant and pious armies of William of
powerful and knowing, may have been for Bentham a project ol • Orange or of Gustavus Adolphui were cransformed into regulations
perfect disciplinary institution; but he also set out to show how 011• for all the armies of Europe; the model colleges of the Jesurts, or the
may 'unlock' the disciplines and get them to function in a diffused, schools of Batencour or Demi a, following the exampleset by Sturm,
208

Discipline Panopricism
provided the outlines for 1he general forms of educational dis• rhe child 'for a future in some mechanical work', to give him 'an
cipline; the ordering of the naval and military hospitals provide<! obs<SrVanteyea, sure hand and prompt habits' (Talleyr•nd'sRepon
tlie model for 1hee ntire reorganization of hospitals in the elgh1eemh IP the Constituent Assembly, 10 September 1791, quoted by Uon,
century. 106). The disciplines function increasingly as techniques for making
Bue this extension of the disciplinary institutions was no doubt useful individuals. Hence their emergence from a marginal position
only the most visib)e aspec-to f various, more profound processes, on the confines of society, and detachment from the forms of
1. Tiref uru:lionali nversion of t!rei lisciplines.A t first, they were exclusion or expiation, confinement or retreat. Hence the slow
expected to neutraliie dangers, to fix useless or disturbed popula loosening of their kinship with religious regularities and enclosures.
tions, to avoid the inconveniences of over-large assemb1ies; now Hence also their rooting in the moS<i mportant, most central and
they were being asked 10 play a positive role, for 1hey were becom most productive secrqrs of society. They become attached to some
ing able 10 do so, 10 increase 1he possible utility of individuals, of the greai·esscntlal functions: factory production, the transmission
Military discipline is no longer a mere means of preventing looting, of knowledge, the diffusion of aptitudes and skills, the war-machine.
desertion or failure to obey orders among 1he troops; i1 has become Hence, 100, the double •tendency one sees developing throughout
a basic technique 10 enable the army to exist, no, as an assembled 1hee ighteenrh century to increase the number of disciplinary insti
crowd, but as a unity that derives from this very unity an•increasc tutions and to discipline tlte existing apparatuses.
in its forces; disciplil)e increases the skill of e.1ch individual, co 2. Th• swarmingo f disciplinaryr nech.anismsW. hile, on the one
ordinates these skills, accelerates movements, increases fire power, hand, the disciplinary establishments increase, their mechanisms
broadens the fronts of attack without reducing their vigour, in have a ceriain tendency 10 become 'de-institutionalized', to emerge
cr=s the capacity •for reslSlllr)ce,e tc. The disciplin<eo f the work from the closed fonresses in which they once functioned and to
shop, while remaining a way of enforcing respect for the regulation• circulatef o a 'free' state; the massive, compact disciplines are broken
and authorities, of preventing thefts or losses, iends to increase down into Rexible methods of ·control, which may be transferred
aptirudes, speeds, output and therefore profits; it still exerts a moral and adapted. Sometimes the closed apparatuses add to their internal
influence over behaviour, but more and more it treats actions in and specific function a role of C)(ternal surveillance, developing
terms of their results, introduces bodies.into a machinery, forces into around ihemselves a whole margin of lateral controls. Thus the
an economy. When, in the .seventeenth cenrury, the provincial Chris1ian School must not simply train docile children; it mus, also
schools or ihe Christian elementary schools were founded, tho make it possible 10.supervise the pareats, to gain information as to
justifications given for them were above all negative: those poor their way of life, their resources, their piety, their morals. The
who were unable to bring up their children left them 'in ignorance school ,ends 10 constitu1e minute social observatories that penetrate
of their obligations: given the difliculries they have in earning a even to the adults and exercise regular supervision over them: ihe
living, and themselves having been badly brought up, they arc bad behaviour of the child, or his absence, ls a legitimate pretext,
unable to communicate a sound upbringing that tliey themselves according \O Demia, for one to go and question the neighbour's,
never had'; this involves three major inconveniences: ignorance of especially if there is any reason to believe that the "fumily will not
God, idleness (with its consequent drunkenness, impurity, larceny, ,ell the truth; one can then go and question the parebts themselves,
bdgandage); and ihe formation of those gangs of beggars, always 10 find out whether they know their catechjs!ll and the prayers,
ready 10 stir up public disorder and 'virrually to exhaust the funds whether they are determined to root out the vic~s of their children,
oC the Hotel-Dieu' (Demia, 6<>-61).N ow, at the beginning of (he how many beds there are in the house and what the sleeping arrange
Revolution, 1he end laid down for primary education was ·to be, ments are; the visit may end with the giying of alms, 1hep resent of a
among other things, 10 'fortify', ro 'develop ,he body', to prepare religious picrure, or the provision of additional beds (Demia, 39-40).
2t0 2rt

Discipline Y.anopt1cIsm
Similarly, the hospital is increasingly conceived of as a ba.r I I· The state-controlo f the =chanisms of discipline.T o} ;:agland, it
the medical observation of the population outside; after ·the burol •• private. religious groups that carried out, for a long time, the
down of the Hotel-Dieu in 1771, diere were several demand, II 111ctionosf social discipline.(cf. Radzinovitz, io3-14); in FratJce,
the large buildings, so heavy and so disordered, should be repl ,!though a part of this role remained in the hands of parish guilds
by a series of smaller hospitals; their function would be 10 t•~• , ,harity associ~tions, another - and no doubt the most important
the sick of the quarter, but also to gather information, to be • 111- was very soon taken over by the police apparatus.
10 any endemic or epidemic phenomena, to open dispC!)sari~,, The organization of a centralized police had long been regarded,
give advice 10 the inhabitants and to keep the authorities infor ~•n by contemporaries, as the most direct expression of royal
of the sanitary state of the region.• h,olucism; the sovereign had wished to have 'his own magistrate 10
One also sees the spread of disciplinary procedures, not in 1 hornh e might directly entrust his orders, his c.ommissions, inren-
form of enclosed institutions, but as centres of observation di 1lons,a nd who was entrusied with the execution of orders .and
seminated throughout society. Religious groups and char0 rders under the King's private seal' (a note by Duval, first secretary
organizations had long played this role of 'disciplining' the popul •• the police mag,istrature, quoted in .Funck-Bren1ano, 1) . In effect,
tion. From the Counter-Reformation 10 the philanthropy of ti 11r1a king over a number of pre-existing functions - the search for
July monarchy, initiatives of this type continued 10 increase; 1h01 , rfminals, urban surveillance, economic and political supervision -
aims were religious (conversion and moralization), economic (al 1hep olice magistratures and the magistrature-general that presided
and encouragement to work) or political (the struggle against di HVctrh em in Paris transposedt hem into a single, strict, administra-
content or agitation). One has only ro cite by way of example r1 1tve machine: 'All the radiations of force and information that
r~ulations for the charity associations in the Paris parishes. ~11 pread from the circumference culminate in the magistrate-general.
territory to be covered was divided into quarcersa nd_c ancans and , . It is he who operates all the wheels that together produce order
the members of the associations divided themselves up along d1t ,nd harmony. The effects of his administration cannot be better
same lines. These members had to visit thei1: respective ar.~1 compared tl1an 10 ,he movement of the celestial bodies' (Des
regularly .. 'They will scrive to eradicate places of ill-repute, tobacco llssarts, 344 and p8).
shops, life-classes, gaming house, public scandals, blasphemy, i,n But, although the police as an instirurion were certainly organized
piety, and any other disorders that may come to their knowledge.' In the form of a state apparatus, and although this was certainly
T'hey will also have to make individual visits 10 the poQr; and rl11 linked directly to the centre of political sovereignty, the type of
information to'be obtained is laid down in regulations: the s1abiH1y 11owerth at it exercises, the mechanisms i, operates and the elements
of the lodging, knowledge of prayers, attendance at the sacramen11, 10 which it applies them are specific. It is an apparatus d1at must be
knowledge of a trade, morality (and 'whether they have noi fallen coextensivew ith the entire social body and not only by the extreme
into poverty through their own fault'); lastly, 'one must learn by limits that it embraces, but by the minuteness of the details it is
skilful questioningin what way they behave at home. Whether therr concerned with. Police power must Bear 'over everything': it is not
is peace between them and tl1eir neighb·ours, whether they are care• however the totality of the state nor of the kingdom as visible and
ful 10 bring up their children in die fear of God ... whether they do Invisible body of the monarch; i1 is the dust of events, acrions 1
not have their older children of different sexes sleeping together and behaviour, opinions - 'everything that happens'; 7 the police are
with them, whether they do not allow licentiousness and cajolery concerned with 'those things of every moment', those 'unimportant
things', of which Catherine II spoke in her Great Instruction
in their families, especially in their older daughters. If one·has any
doubts as to whether they are married, one must ask to see their (Supplement to the Instructionf or ,1,,. drawingu p of a new cock, 17~,
marriagec ertificace5• . article 535). With the police, one is in the indefinite world of a
211 21J

Distjpli,,.e Panopticisin
supervision that se,eks ideally to reach the most elementary particl,, disciplinary function to its role as the auxiliary of justice in the
the most passing phenomenon bf the social body: 'Tbe ministry o( 11ursuiot f criminals and as an instrument for the political supervision
the magistrates and police officers is of the greatest importance; th• nf plots, opposition movements or rev_olts.I t was a complex func
objects that it embraces are in a sense definite, one may perceivf tlon since it linked the absolute power of the monarch 10 the lowest
them only by a sufficiently detailed examination' (Delamare, un levels of power di~seminated in society; sl11ce,b etween these differ
numbered Preface): the infinitely small of political power. tnt, enclosed instirutions of discipline (workshops, armies, schools),
And, in order ,o be exercised, this power had 10 be given dit h extended an intermediary network, acting where they could not
-instrumento f permanent,e xhaustive, omnipresent surveillanco, Intervene, disciplining the non°disciplinary spaces; but it filled in
capable of making all visible, as long as it could itself remain invisl the gaps, linked them together, guaranteed with its armed force an
hie. It had to be like a faceless gaze that iransformed the wh11l1 lnrcrstitial discipline and a meta-discipline. 'By means of a wise
social body into a field of perception: thousands of eyes posted police, the sovereign accustoms the people to order and obedience'
everywhere, mobile arcentions ever on the alert, a long, hierarchiud (Vattel, 162).
network which, according to Le Maire, cbmprised for Paris thl The organization of the police apparatus in the.eighteenth century
forty-•eight commissaircs,t he twenty inspecu:urst)h en the 'observers', sanctioned a· generalization of tlte disciplines that became co-exren-
who were paid regularly, the 'buses mow:hu', or secret agents, whn 1ive with the state itself. Although it was linked in the most explicit
were pa,d by the day, then the informers, paid according 10 the job wny with everything in the TOyalp ower that exceeded the exercise
done, and finally the prostirutes. And this unceasing observation of regular justice, it is understandable. why the police offered such
hacl to be accumulated in a series of reports and regfsters; throughout !light resistance to the rearrangement of the judicial power; and why
the eighteenth century, an immense police text increasingly covere'd It has not ceased to impose irs prerogatives upon it, with ever
society by means of a comple.x documentary organization (on rht Increasing weight, right up to the p,:esent day; this is no doubt
police registers in ,he eighteenth century, cf. Chassaigne). Anti, because it is the secular arm of the judiciary; but it is also because,
unlike the methods of judicial or administrative writing,, what wat to a far greater degree lhan the _judiciali nstitution, it is identified,
registered in this way were forms of behaviour, atnrudes, possiblll by reason of its extent and mechanisms, with a society of the
ties, suspicions - a permanent account of individuals' beha_viour. disciplinary type. Yet it would be wrong to believe that the dis
Now, it should be noted that, although this p01icc supervision ciplinary functions were confiscated and absorbed once and for all
was entirely 'in ·the hands of the king', it did not function in a singll bya state apparatus.
direction. 11 was in fact a double-entry system:·it had to correspon,I, 'Discipline' may be identified neither,withan institution nor with
by manipulating the machinery of justice, to the immediate wishr• 11na. p paratus; it is a type of power, a mod1lity for its exercise' com-
,
of the king, but it was also capable of responding to solicitation, prising a whole set of instruments, techniques, procedures, levels of
from below; the, celebrated lwru dt cachet, or orders under tho application, targers; it is a 'physics' or an 'anatomy' of power, a
king's private seal, which were long the symbol of arbitrary roy,1 technology. And it may be taken over either by 'specialized' institu•
rule and which brought detention into disrepute on )lolitic•I tlons (the penitentiaries or 'houses of correction' of tile nineteenth
grounds, were in fact demanded by families, masters, local noll!bl.,., c:tntury), or by institutions that use itas an essential instrument for a
neighbours, parish priests; and their function was to punish l,y particular end (school~, hospitals), or by pre-existing authoriti.,;
confinement a whole infra-penality, that of disorder, agitation, di, that find in it a means of reinforcing or reorganizing their internal
obedience, bad conduct; those things that Ledoux wanted to exclud• mechanisms of power ( one day we should show how intra-familial
from his architecturally perfect cit¥ and which he called 'offences al relations, essentially in the parents-children cell, have become 'disci
-non-surveillance'. Tn short, the eighteenth-century police added , plined', absorbing since· the classical age external schemara, first
215

u1sc1pune
educational and military, then medical, psychiatric, psychological, 11nda ll the relations of social life, that was reserved the task of
which have made the family the privileged locus of emergence for Increasing and perfecting its guarantees, by using and directing
the disciplinary question of the normal and the abnormal); or by towards that great aim the building and distribution of buildings
apparatuses that have made discipline thei< principle of intemol Intended to observe a great multitude of men at the same time.'
functioning (the disciplinarizarion of the administrative apparatu, Julius saw as a fulfilled historical process that which Bentham had
from the Napoleonic period), ot finally by state apparatuses who,. described as a technical programme. Our society ls one not of
major, if not exclusive, function is to assure thar discipline rei~n• 1pectacle, but of surveillance; -under the surface of images, one
over society as a whole (the police). invests bodies in depth; behind the great abstraction of exchange,
On the whole, therefore, one can speak of the formation of • there continues the meticulous, concrete training of useful forces;
disciplinary society in this movement that stretches from iho cl1ec ircuits of co111mun1carioanr e the supports of an accumulation
enclosed disciplines, a sort of social 'quarantine', to an inclefinitely and a centralization of knowledge; the play of signs defines rhe
generaliz~ble mechanism of 'panopticism'. Not because the disci oncl1orages of power; it is not that rhe ooutif,d totality of rhe
plinary modality of power has replaced all the others; but because individual is amputated, represseq, akered by our social order, it is
it has infiltrated the orhers, sometimes undermining them, bu1 rather that the individual is carefully-fabricated in it, according 10 a
serving as an intermediary between them, ,linking them tog;ethtr, whole technique of forces and bodies. We are much less Greeks than
extending them and above all making it possible to bring the elfec111 we believe. We are neither in the amphitheatre, nor on the stage,
of power to the mos, minute and distant elements. l1 assures an but in the panoptic machine, invested by its.effects of power, which
infinitesimal distribution of the power relations. we bring to ourselves since -..,e are part of its mechanism. The
A few years after Bentham, Julius gave this society its birth importance, in historical mythology, of the Napoleonic character
certificate (Julius, 384-<i). Speaking of the panoptic principle, he probably derives from the fact that fr is at the pciint of junction of
said that there was much more the.re than architectural ingenuity: the monarchica~ ritual exercijiEo! f sovereignty and the hierarchical,
it was an event in the 'history of the human mind'. In appearance, permanent exercise of indefinite discipline. He.is th'e individual who
it is merely the solution of a technical problem; but, through it, a looms over everything with a single gaze wl\ich no detail, however
whole type of society emerges. Antiquity had been a civilization of minute, can escape: •y o.u may consider that no part of the Empire
spectacle. 'To render accessible to a multitude of men the inspectio,n is without surveillance, no crime, no offence, no contravention that
of a small number of objects': this was the problem to which the remains unpunished,. and thar ihe eye of the genius who. can en
architecture of temples, theatres and circuses responded. With lighten all embraces the whole of this vast machine, without, how
spectacle, there was a predominance of public life, the intensity of ever, che slightest det:ul escaping his atr.ention' (Treilhard, 14). At
festivals, sensual proximity. l,uhese rituals in which blood flowed, the moment of its full blosso111ing,t he disciplinary society still
society found new vigour and formed for a moment a single great assumes with the Emperor the old aspect of the power of spectacle.
body. The modern age poses the opposite problem: 'To procure As a monarch who is at one and the same time a usurper of the
for a small number, or even for a single individual, the instantaneo4s ancient throne and the organizer of the new state, -he combined
I'
view of a great multitude.' In a society in which the principal into a single symbolic, ulti.matef igure the whole of the long process
elements are no longer the community and public life, but, on the by which the pomp of sovereignty, the necessarily spectacular
one· hand, private individuals and, on the other, the state, relations manifestations of power, were extinguished one by one in the daily
cah be regulated only in a form that is ihe exact reverse of ihe exercise of surveillance, in a panopticism in whicl1 the vigilance of
spectacle: 'It was 10 the modem age, to the ever-growing influence intersecting gazes was soon to render useless both ihe eagle and
of the state, 10 its ever more profound intervention in all the details che sun.
it6 217

UJSCtpUnc r dJ1upu1,;1~11
The formation of the disciplinary socieiy is connected with • 1hcirn erworl<,. by ,heir often conl!icting functioning, but above all
number of broad historical processes - economic, juridico-politic•I by the 'costly' nature of the power that was exercised in them. It
and, lastly, scientific - of which it forms part. wasc ostly in several senses: because directly it cost a great deal to
1. Generally speaking, it might be said 1ha1 the disciplines ;r, 1lteT reasury; because the system of corrupt offices and farmed-out
techniques for assuring the ordering of human multiplicities. It 11 tnxes weighed indirectly, but very heavily, on the population;
true ,hat there is nothing exceptional or even characteristic in 1h11 because the resistance it encountered forced it into a cycle of per•
every system of power is presented with the same problem. But 1h~ petual reinforcement; because it proceeded essentially by levying
peculiarity of the disciplines is that ,hey try to define in relation 10 (levying on money or products by royal, seigniorial, ecclesiastical
the multiplicities a tactics of power that fulfils three criteria: firstly, 111xationle; vying on men or rime by corvies of press-ganging, by
to obtain the ex.erciseo f power at the lowest possible cost (economic locking up or banishing vagabonds). The development of the disci-
ally, by the low expenditure it involves; politically, by its discretio11, 1>linems arks the appearanc;e of elementary techniques belonging •to
its low exteriorizacioni,t s re]ativei nvisibility, the little res,isranc1e1 ~ quite different economy: mechanisms of power which, instead ,;,f
arous,,s); secondly, to bring the effects of this social power to the11 proceeding by deduction, are integrat~ into the productive effi
maximum intensity and to extend them as far as possible, without oiency of the apparatuses from '!"ithin, into the growth of this
either failure or interval; thirdly, to link this 'economic' gro.wth nl efficiencya nd into the use of what it produces. For the old principle
power with the output of the apparatuses (educational, miutary, of 'levying-violence', which governed the economy of power, the
industrial or medkal) within which it is exercised; in short, ru disciplines substitute the principle of 'mildness-production-profit'.
increase both ,he docility and the utility of all the elements of th~ These are the techniques that make it possible to adjust the multi•
system. This triple objective of the disciplines corresponds to • plicity of men and the multiplication of the apparatuses of produc•
well-known historical conjuncture. One aspect of this conjuncture don (and this -means not only 'production' in the strict sense, but
'Vas the large demographic thrust of the eighteenth century; an also the production of knowledge and skills in the school, the
increase in the floating population ( one of the primary objecls of production of health in the hospitals, the production of destructive
discipline is 10 fix; it is an anti-nomadic techni•que); a change of force in the army).
quantitative scale in the groups to be supervised or manipulated In this task of adjustment, discipline had to solve a number of
(from the beginning of the seventeenth century to the eve of the problems for which the old economy of power was not sufficiently
French Revolution, 1he school population had been increasing equipped. It could -reduce· the inefficiency of mass phenomena:
rapidly, as had no doubt the hospital population; by the end o( the reduce what, in a multiplicity, makes it much less manageable than
eighteenth century, the peace-time army exceeded 200,000 men). n unity; reduce what is opposed ro the use of each of its elements
The other aspect of the conjuncture was the growth in the apparatus and of their sum; reduce everything that may counter the advantages
of production, which was· becoming mo,e and more extended and of number. That is why discipline fixes; it arrests or regulates
complex; it was also becoming more costly and its profitability had movements; it dears up confusion; it dissipates compact groupings
to be increased. The development of the disc.iplinary method~ of individuals wandering about the country in unpredictable ways;
correspondedt o theset wo processes,o r rather,n o doubt, co the new it establishes•c alculated distributions. It must also master all the
need to adjust their correlation. Neither the residual forms of feudal forces tt,at are formed from the very co115titu1iono f an organiz~
power nor the structures of the administrative monarchy, nor the multiplicity; it must neutralize the effects of counter-power that
local mechanisms of supecvision, nor the unstable, tangled mass spring from them and which form a resistance to •the power that
they all formed together could carry out this role: they were wishest o dominatei t: ~gi.tationsr, evolts,s pontaneouso rgani:z.ations,
hindered from doing so by the irregular and inadequate extension of coalitions - anything that may establish horizontal conjunctions.
118 119

1J1sc1pune Panopticism
Hence the fact that ihe disciplines use procedures of partitioning made possible a political rake-off in relation to the traditional, ritual,
and verricaliry,t hat they introduce, between tbe differe.nte lement.$ costly, violent forms of power, whicli.soon fell into disuse-and were
at the same level, as solid separations as possible, that they define superseded by a subtle, calculated technology of subjection. In fact,
compact hierarchica.1n etworks, in short, that they oppose 10 the the two processes - the accumulation of men and the accumulation
intrinsic, adverse force of multiplicity cl1et echnique of the continu of capital - cannot be separated; it woula not have been possible
ous, individualizing pyramid. They musralso increase the particular to solve che problem of the accumulation of men without the growth
utility of each element of the multiplicity, but by .means that are ilic of an apparatus of production capable of both sustaining them and
most rapid and the least costly, that is to say, by using the mulrl using them; conversely, the techniques that made the cumulative
plicity itself as an instrument of this growth. Hence, in order 10 multiplicity of men· useful accelerated the accumulation of capital.
extract from bodies the maximum time and force, the use of thos~ Ata less.general level, the technological mura1ions of the appar,uus
bveralJm ethods known as time-tables,c o·llectiv~t raining, exercises, of production, the division of labour and the elaboration of the
total and detailed surveillance. Furthermore, the disciplines must disciplinary 1echnlquess ustained an ensemble of ve,;y close relations
increase the effect of utility proper to the multiplicities, so that each (cf. Marx, Capital, vol. 1, chapter XIll and the very interesting
is made more useful than the simple sum of its elements: it is in analysis in Guerry and Deleule). Each makes tl1eo ther possible and
order to increase the utilizable effects of the multiple rhat the disci nereasary; each provides a model for the other. The disciplinary
plines define tactics of distribution, reciprocal adjustment of bodies, pyramid' constituted the small cell of power within which the
gestures and rhythms, differentiation of capacities, reciprocal co separation, coordination and superyision of tasks was imposed and
ordination in relation 10 apparatuses or tasks. Lastly, the disciplines made efficient; an'd analytical partitioning of time, gestures and
have to bring inro play 1,hep ower relations, not·above bur inside bodily forces constituted an operational schema that could easily be
the very texture or the multiplicity, as discreetly as possible, as well transferred from the groups ro be subjec1ed to the mechanisms of
articulated on the other functions of 1hese multiplicities and also in production; the massiye projection of military methods onto indus
the least expensive way possible: 10 this correspond anonymous trial organization was an example of this modelling of the division
instruments of power, coextensive with the multiplicity that they oflabour following the model laid do\\\n by the.schemata of power.
regiment, such as hierarchica1su rveillance,c ontinuous registration_, Bur, on the other hand, the technical analysis of the process of
perpetual assessment and classification, In short, to substitute for a production, its 'mechanical' breaking-down, were projected onto
power that is manifested through the brilliance of those who exetcise the labour force whose task it was to implement it: the constitution
it, a power that insidiously objectifies those on whom it is applied; of those disciplinary machines in which the individual forces that
to form a body of knowledge about 1heseindividuals, rather than to they bring together are composed into a whole and therefore
deploy the ostentatious signs of sovereignty. In a word, the disci increased is the dfect of this projection. Let us say that 'discipline
plines are the ensemble of minute technical inventions that made it is the unitary technique by which the body is reduced a~ a 'political'
possible 10 increase ,he useful size of multiplicities by decreasing the force at the least cost and maximized as a useful force. The growth
inconvenlences of the power which, in order to make them us,iful, of a capitalist economy gave rise to the specific modality of disci
must control them, A multip!ici1y, whether in a workshop or a plinary power, whose general formulas, techniques of submitting
natio.n, an army or a school, reaches the threshold of a discipline forces and bodies, in short, 'political anatomy', could be operated
when the relation of the one to the other becomes favou,;able. in the most diverse political r~gimes, apparatuses or institinions.
If the economic take-off of the West began with the techniques .2. The panoptic modality of power - at the ,elementary, tech
that made possible the,accumularion of capital, it might perhaps be nical, merely physical level at which it is ilituated - is not under
said that the methods for administering the accumulation of men rhe immediate dependence or a direct extension of the great
110 111

l"anopnctsm
juridico-poHtical structures of a society; it is nonetheless no1 subordination of one group of people by another, 1he 'surplus'
absolutely independent. Historically, the process by which the power that is always fixed on the same side, the inequality of P?Si
bourgeoisie became in the cour11eo f the eighteenth century the politi• tion of the different 'partners' in relation to the common regula11on,
cally dominant class was masked by the escablishment of an explicit, •II these dis1inguish the disciplinary link from the contractual link,
coded and formally egalitarian juridical framework, made possible ~nd make it possible to distort the contractual link systematically
by the organization of a parliamentary, representative regime. But rrom the moment it has as its conrent a mechanism of discipline.
the development and generalization of disciplinary mechanisms Wek now, for example, how many real procedures undermine the
cons1itu1ed the other, dark side of these processes. The general legal fiction of the work contract: workshop discipline is not the
juridical form that guaranteed a system of rights that were egali• least important Moreover, whereas the juridical systems define
tarian in principle was supported by tl1ese tiny, everyday, physical juridical subjects according 10 universal norms, the disciplines
mechanisms, by all 1hoses ystems of micre-power that are essentially characterize, classify, specialize; they disiribme along a scale,
non-egaliiarian and asymmetrica.l that we call the disciplines. And ;iround a norm, hicrarchiie individuals in relation to ~me another
although, in a f9rmal way, the represen1a1iver egime makes it pos and,i f necessary, disqualify and invalidate. In any case, in the space
sible, directly or indirectly with or without relays, for the will of ~nd during the time in which they exercise their control and bring
0
all to form the fundamental authority of sovereignty, the d,isciplines lnro play the asymmetries of 1heir power, they effect a suspension
provide, .at the .base, a guarantee of the submission of forces af\d of the law that is never total, but is never annulled either, Regular
bodies. The real, corporal disciplines consliru1ed the foundation of Rnd institutional as i1 may be, the discipline, in its mechanism, is a
the formal, juridical liberties. The contract may have been regarded 'counter-law'. And, although the universal juridicism of modem
as the ideal foundation of law and political power; panopticism society seems to fix limits on the exercise of power, its universaUy
constituted the technique, universally widespread, of coercion, widespread panbpticism enables it to operate, on the underside of
It continued 10 work in depth on the juridical structures of society,
the law, a machinery ,hat is both immense and minute, which sup
in order 10 make the effective mechanisms of power function in
ports, reinforces, multiplies the asymmetry of power and under•
opposition 10 the formal framework that it had acquired. 1'he mines the limits that are traced around rhe law. The minute disci
'Enlightenment', which discovered the liberties, also inven1ed the
plines, tl1e panop1icisms of every day may well be below the level
disciplines. of emergence of tl1e great apparamses and ,he great political
In appearance, the disciplines constitu1e noshing more tl1an an
struggles. Bui, in the genealogy of modern society, they have been,
f
infra-law, They seem to extend th~ general forms defined by law to with the class domination that traverses it, the political counterpart
the infinitesimal level of individual lives; or they appear as methods of tl,e juridical norms according 10 whicl1 power was redistributed.
of iraining that enable individuals to become integrated foto these Hence, no doubt, 1he importance that has been given for so long
general demands. They seem 10 constitute the same ty!)e of law on 10t he small techniques of discipline, to those apparently insigniJicant
a different scale, thereby making it more meticulous and more tricks that it has invented, and even to d1ose 'sciences' that give it a
indulgent, Tbe disciplines should be regarded as a sprt of counter respeccable face; hence the fear of abandoning them if one cannot
law. They have the precise role of introducing insuperable asym find any substitute; hence ,he affirmation ,hat they are at the very
metries and excluding reciprocities. First, because discipline creates foundation of society, and an element in its equilibrium, whereas
between individuals a 'private' link, which is a relation of consiraints they are a series of mechanisms for ul'\balancing power relations
entirely different from contractual obligation; the acceptance of a definitively and everywhere; hence the persistence in regarding them
discipline may be underwrinen by coniract; the way in which itis as the humble, but concrete form of every morality., whereas they
imposed, the mechanisms it brings into play, ~he non-reversible are a set of physico-polirical techniques.
121 123

Discipline Panopticism
To rerurn to· the problefll of legal punishments, the prison wiJh bizarre little utopia, a perverse qream - rather as though Bentham
all the corrective technology at its disposal is to be resituated at the had been the Fourier of a police society, and cl1eP lialanstery had
point where the codified power to punish turns into a disciplinary taken on the form of the Panopticon. And yet this represented ,he
po"•er to observe; at the poi.nt where the universal punishments of absua~t formula of a very real technology, that of individuals.
the law are applied selectively to certain individuals and always the There were many reasons why it received little praise; the most
same ones; at ihe point where the redefinition of the juridfod subj~ct obvious is that rhe discouISes 10 which it gave rise rarely acquired,
by the penalty becomes a useful training of the criminal; at the point except in the.academicc lassificntions,t he status of sc.iences;b ut rhe
where the law is inverced -and passes outside itself, and where the real reason is no doubt that the power ,hat it operates and which it
counter-law becomes the effective and institutionalized content of augments is a direct, physi~al power that men exercise upon one
the juridical forms. What generalizes the power to punish, then, is another. An inglorious culmination had an origin that could be
not the universal consciousness of the law in each juridical subject; only gn.1dgingly acknowledged. But it would be unjust 10 compare
it is the regular extension, the infinitely minute web of panoptic the disciplinary techniques with such inventions as the steam engine
techniques. or 1\mici's microscope. They are much less; and yet, in a way, they
3. Taken one by one, most of these techniques have a long are much more. lf a historical equivalent or at least a point of
history behind them. Bu, what was new, in the eighteenth century, comparison had to be found for them, jc would be rather in the
was that, by being combined and generalized, they attained a level 'inquisitorial' technique.
at which the formation of kn9wledge and the increase of power The eighteenth cenrury invented the techniques of discipline and
regularly reinforce one another in a circular process. 1\t this ppint, the examination, rather as the Middle Ages invented 1he judicial
the disciplines crossed the 'technological' threshold. First the i~vestigation. But it did so by quit~.cj_/,ffcrenmt eans. The investiga
hospital, then the school, then, later, the workshop were noL sim tion procedure, an old fiscal and administrative technique, had
ply 'reordered' by ,he disciplines; ,hey became, thanks 19 ,hem, developed above all with the reo:rganization of the Church and the
apparatuses such that any mechanism of objectification could be increase of the princely st:ues in the twelfth and thirteenth cen
used in them as an instrumen~ of subjection, and any growth of turies. At this time ir permeated to a very large .degree ,he juris
power could give rise in them 10 possible branches of knowledge; prudence first of the ecclesiastical courts, tben of the lay courts.
it was this link, proper to the technological systems, that made The investigation as an authodrarian search for a truth observed
p9ssiblc_w ithin 1he disciplinary clement the formation of clinical or attesred was thus opposed 10 the old procedures of ,he oath,
medicine, psychiatry, child psychology, educational psychol~g:)', the ordeal, tbe judicial duel, the judgement of God or even of the
the rationalization of labour.1 t is a double process, ,hen: an ep1Ste transaction between private individuals. The investigation was the
mologi,cal 'thaw' through a refinemenr of power relations! a sovereign power arrogating 10 itself the right 10 establish the truth
multiplication of the effects of power through the formanon by a num?er of regulated techniques. No.w, although the investiga
and accumulation of new forms of knowledge. tion has smce·then. been an integral part of.western justice (even up
'?
The extension of the disciplinary methods is inscribed in a broad our_own da~), one must not forger either jts political origin, its
historical peo<:ess:t he development at about ,he same time of many lmk w1th tlie b_irtbo f the states a.nd of m9narchical sovereignty, or
other technologies - agronomical, industrial, economic. But it must 1ts later ex1ens1ona nd ,rs role in the formation of knowledge. 1n
be recognized ~hat, compared with tl,e mining industries, the face, thefovestigarion has been the no doubt crude, but fundamental
emerging chemical industries or methods of national accountancy, element in the consti.rution of the empirical sciences; it has been the
compared with the blast furnaces or the steam engine, panopricisrn jutidico-political matrix of this experimental knowledge, which, as
has received lirrle atten,rion. It is regarded·as.no, much more than a we know, :was very rapidly released at the end of the Middle Ages.
22\

Uiscipline .t'anopticJsm
It is perhaps true 10 say that, in Greece, mathematics were born , concentrated or formalized form, ·the schema of poweraknowledge
from techniques of measurement; the Sciences of-nature, in any case, 11roper1 0 each discipline (on this suli)ect, cf: Tort). The great
were born, to some extent, at the end of the Middle Ages, from the Investigation that gave rise to the sciences of nature has become
practices of investigatit>n. The great empirical knowledge thai ,leiached from its politico-juridical model; the examination, on the
coveted the thing$ of the wodd and transcribed them into thr a1her hand, is still caught up in disciplinary technology.
ordering of an indefinite discourse that observes, desccibes and In the Middle Ages, the procedure of investigation gradually
a
establishes the 'faces' (at a time when ·the western world was begin 111persededth e old accusatory justice, by process initiated from
ning the economic and political conquest of this same world) had ibove; the disciplinary technique, on the other hand, insidiously
its operating model no doubt in the lnquisition - that immense ind as if from below, has invaded a penal justice that is still, in
invention that our recent mildness has placed in the dark recesses principle, inquisitorial. All the great movements of extension that
of our memory. But what this politico-juridical, administrative and characterize modern penality - the problematization of the criminal
criminal, religious and lay, investigation was to the sciences of behind his crime, the concern with a punishment that is a correction,
narure, disciplinary analysis has been to the sciences of man. These a therapy, a normalization, the division of the act of judgement
sciences, which have so delighted our 'humanity' for over a century, between various authorities tha, are supposed to measure, assess,
have their technical matrix in the perty, malicious minutiae of the diagnose, cute, transform individuals - all this betrays the penetra
disciplines and theirinvestigations. Tnese investigations are perhaps tion of the disciplinary examination into the judicial inquisition.
to psychology, psychiatry, pedagogy, criminology, and so many What is now imposed on pen'!],j ustice as its point of application,
other strange sciences, what the terrible power of investigation was ils 'useful' object, will no lo.ngei;t;e·Vleb ody of the guilty man set
to the calm knowledge of the animals, the planrs or the earth. up against the body of the king; Jor will it be the juridical subject
Another power, another knowledge. On the threshold of the classi of an ideal contract; it will be the disciplinary individual. The
cal age, Bacon, lawyer and statesman, tried to develop a methodology extreme point of penal justice under the Ancien Regime was the
of investigat(on for the empirical sciences. What Great Observer infinite segmentation of the body of the regicide: a manifestation
will produce the methodology of examination for the human of the strongest power over the body of the greatest criminal,
sciences? Unless, of course, such a thing is not possible. For, whose total destruction made the crime explode into its rrurh. The.
although it is true that, in becoming a technique for the empirical ideal point of penality today would be an indefinite discipline: an
sciences, the investigation has detached itself from the inquisitorial interrogation without end, an investigation that wou.ld be extended
procedure, in which it was historically rooted, the examination has without limit to a meticulous ;ind ever n,ore analytical observation,
remained extremely close to the disciplinary ·power that shaped it. a judgement that would at the same time be the constirution of a file
It has always been and still is an intrinsic element of the tlisciplines. 1harwas never closed, the calculated leniency of a penalty that would
Of course it seems to have undergone a speculative purificacton by be interlaced with the ruthless curiosity of an examination, a proce
integrating Itself with such sciences as psychology and psychiatry. dure that would be at the same time the permanent measure of a
And, in effect, its appearance in the form of tests, int~rviews, gap in relation to an inaccessible n,;,rm and the asymptotic move
interrogacions and consultations is• apparently in order to rectify ment that strives to meet in infinity. The public execmion was the
the mechanisms of discipline: educational psychology is supposed 10 logical culmination of a procedure governed by the Inquisition. The
correct the rigours of the school, just as the medical or psychiatric practice of placing individuals under 'observation' is a natural exten
interview is supposed to rectify the effects of the discipline of work. sion of a justice imbued with disciplinary methods and examination
But we must not be misled; rhese techniques merely refer individuals procedures. Is it surp(ising that the cellular prison, with it,s regular
from one disciplinary authodty to anoiher, and they reproduce, in chronologies, forced labour, its authorities of surveillance and

.u1se1punc
registration, its experts in normality, who continue and multiply d,r
functions of the judge, should have become the modern instrument PART FOUR
of penality? Is it surprising that prisons resemble factories, schools,
l}rison
barracks, hospitals, which all resemble prisons?
218

Complete and austere institutions
1.
It would not be true to say that the ·prison was born with the new
codes. The p;ison form antedates its systematic use in the penal
system. Tt had already been constituted outside the legal apparatus
when, throughout the soda! body, procedures were being elaborated
for distributing individuals, fixing them in space, classifying them,
extracting from them the maximum in time and forces, training their
bodies, coding their continuous behaviour, maintaining them in
perfect visibility, forming around them an apparatus of observation,
registration and recordint constituting. on them a body of know
ledge that is accumulated and centralized. The general form of an
apparatus intended to render individuals docile and useful, by means
of preci5!' v,ork upon -ilieir bodies, indicated the prison institution,
before the law ever defined it as the pe.nalty par ,xcol/ince. At the
rum of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, there was, it is true,
a penality of detention; and it was a new thing. But it was really the
openingup,of penality to mechanisms·of coercion already elaborated
elsewhere. The 'models' of penal detenti6n - Ghent, Gloucester,
Walnut Street - marked the first visible points of this transition,
rather than innovations or points of departure. The prison, an
essential elementin the punitive panopoly, certainly marks an import
ant moment in the-history of penal justice: its access to 'humanity'.
But it is also an important moment in the history o( those disci
plinary mechanisms that the new class P,OWerw as developing: that
in which they colonized the legal instirution. At the turn of the
cenrury, a new legislation defined the power to pl\nish as a general
function of society that was exercised in the same manner over all its
was
members, and in which each individu~l equally represented: but
in making. detention the penalty par excellau:e,i t introduced proce
dures of domination cl:iaractcristico f a particular type of power. A
23(

rrison \...omplete ane1 austere m.sutuuons
justice thar is supposed to be 'equal', a legal machinery that is punislunents, though contrdr}' to the strict 1heory of penal la'i",
supposed to be 'autonomous', but which contains all the asymmetries that one is in prison in order to 'pay one's debt'. The prison is
of disciplinary subjection, this conjunction marked the birth of the 'natural', just as the use of time to measure exchang~s is 'natural'
prison, ''the penalty of civilired societies' (Rossi, 169). in Ours ociety.1
One can understand the self-evident character that prison punis'h But, the self-evidence of the prison is also based on its role,
ment very soon assumed. In the first years of ,he nineteenth century, supposed or demanded, as an apparatus for transforming individuals.
people were still aware of itS novelty; and yet it appeared so bound How could the prison not be immediately accepted when, by locking
up and at such a deep level with the very functioning of soci up, retraining and rendering docile, it merely reproduces, with a
ety that it banished into oblivion all the other punishmentS that little more emphasis, all the mechanisms that are to be found in the
the eighteenth-century reformers had imagined. It seemed to have social body? The prison is like a rather disciplined barracks, a strict
no alternative, as if carried along by the very movement of history: school, a dark workshop, but not qualitatively different. Tllis double
'Ir is not chance, iris not the whim of the legislator that have made foundation- juridico-economic on the one hand, technico-disciplin•
imprisonment the base and almost the entire edifice of our present ary on the other - made tlie prison seem the most immediate and
perlal scale: it is the progress of ideas and the improvement in civilized form of all penakies. And it is this double functioning that
morals' (Van Meenan, 52\)-30). And, although, in a little over a immediately gave it its solidity. One thing is dear: the prison was
century, this self-evident character has ~come transformed, it has not at first a deprivation of liberty to which a technical function of
not disappeared. We are aware of all the inconveniences of prison, correction was later added; it was from the ouiset a form of 'legal
and that it is dangerous when it is not useless. And yet one cannot detention' enr:rysted with an additional corrective task, or an enter
'see' how to replace i,. Ir is ,he de1estables olution, which one seems prise for reforming individuals that the deprivation of liberty
unable to do wi1hou1. allowed to function in the-legal system. In short, penal imprison
This 'self-evident' chardcter of ,he prison, which we find so diffi ment, from the beginning of the' nineteenth century, covered both
cult to abandon, is based first of all on the simple form of'depriva the deprivation of liberty and the technical transformation of
tion of libeny'. How could prison not be the penalty par ucellem:e individuals.
in a society in which liberty is a good that belongs ro all in the same 1.ecus remember a number of facts. In the codes of 18o8a nd 1810,
way and to which each individual is attached, as Duport put it, by and the measures that immediately preceded or followed chem,
a 'universal and constant' feeling? ItS loss has therefore the same imprisonment was never confused with mete deprivation ofliberty.
value for all; unlike the fine, i, is an 'egalitarian' punishment. The It was, or in any case had to be, a differentiated and finalizedm echan
prison is the clearest, simplest, most equitable of penalties. More ism. Differentiated because it had to have the same form, whether
over, it makes it possible to quantify the penalty exactly according the prisoner had been sentenced or was merely accused, whether he
to the variable of time. There is a wages-form of imprisonment that was a minor offender or a-criminal: the various types of prison -
constitutes, in industrial societies, its economic 'self-evidence' - and mai.ton d'a rrit, maison de correction, maison centralt - ought in
enables it 10 appear as a reparation. By levying on the time of the principle to correspond more or less to these differences and provide
prisoner, the prison seems to expres,s in concrete teems the idea that a punishment that would be nor only graduated in intensity, but
the offence has injured, beyond tlle victim, society as a whole. There diversified in its ends. For the prison has a purpose, which is laid
is an economico-moral self-evidence of a penality that metes out down at the outset: 'The law inflicting penalties, some of which are
punishments in days, months and years and draws up quantitative more serious than orhers, cannot allow the individual condemned
equivalences between offences and durations. Hence the express to light penalties to be imprisoned in the same place as the criminal
ion, so frequently heard, so consistent with t\ie functioning of condemned to more serious penalties ... although the penalty fixed
232 233

rnson Complete and austere msutuuons
by the law has as its principal aim the reparation of the crime, it al~o Instructions or laws: from the reform that the first Restoration had
desires the amendment of the guilty man' (Real, 244). And thl• envisaged in September 1814, and which was never implemented, to
transformation must be one of the inrerna1e ffects of imprisonment. the law of t 844, drawn up by Tocqueville, which ended fot a time
Prison-punishment, prison-apparatus: 'The order that must reign in 1he long debate on the means of making imprisonment effective.
the maison de fora may contribute powerfully to che regeneration There were programmes.drawn up to improve the functioning of
of the convicts; the vices of upbringing, the contagion of bad 1hem achine~prison:1 programmes for the t-reatmemo f the prisoners,
example, idleness ... have given birth to crime. Well, let us try to models for material i.mprovement, some of ~hese, like those of
close up all these sources of corruption; lee the rules-of a healthy Danjou and Harou-Romain, remaining no more than projects,
morality be practised in the mauons def orce; that, compelled to work, others becoming embodied in ins1ructions (like the circular of 9
convicts may come in the end 10 like it; when they have reaped th~ August 1841 on the buildin·g of maisons d'arrei), others becoming
reward, they will acquire •the habit, the taste, the need for occupa actua.l buildings, such as the Petite Roquerce in which cellular
tion; let them give each other the example of a laborious life; it will imprisonmenr was organited for the. first time in F ranee.
soon become a pure life; soon they will begin 10 know regret for the To these should be added the publications that sprang more or
past, the first harbinger of a Jove of duty."' The techniques of cor less directly from the prison and were drawn up either by philan
rection immediately form part of the institutional framework or thropists like Appert, or a little later by 'specialists' (such as the
penal detention. Anna/ts de la Charite)' or, again, by former prisoners; Pauvre
One should ·also recall that the movement for reforming the pri Jac9ues at t~e end of the Restoration, or the G"{em de Sainu
sons, for controlling their functioning is not a· recent phenomenon. Peiag~a t the beginning of ,he July mbnacchy. •
It does not even seem to have originated in a recognition of failure. The prison should not be seen as an inert institution, shaken at
Prison 'reform' is virtually contemporary with the prison itself: i1 intervals by refortn movements. The 'theory of the prison' waS-its
constitutes, as it were_,i ts programme. From the outset, the prison constant set of operational instructions rather than its incidental
was caught up in ,a series of accompanying mechaqisms, whose criticism - one of its conditions of functioning. The prison has
purpose was appare{ltly co correct it, but which seem to form part 31ways formed part of an active field in which projects, improve
of its very functioning, so closely have they peen bound up with its ments, experiments, theoretical statements, personal evidence and
existence throughout its long history. There was, at once, a prolix investigations• haye proliferated. The prison instituti'on has always
technology of the prison. There were inquiries: thar of Chapral in been a focus of concern and debate. ls the prison slill, then, a dark,
1801( whose task it was to discover what could be used 10 introduce abandoned region? Is the fact that one has ceased to say so for
the modem prison system into France), that of Decazes in 1819, almost 200 years sufficient proof that it is not? In becoming a legal
Villerme's work published in 1820, ihe report on the maisons cen• punishment, it weighted the old jutidico-political question of the
era/es drawn up by Martignac in t829, the inquiries carried out 'in right 10 punish with all the problems, all the agitations that have
the United States by Beaumont and Tocqueville in 1831, by Demetz surrounded ,he cor_rectivet echnologies of the individual.
and Blouet in r83 5, the questionnaires addressed by Monralivet to
the directors of the maisons etntrales and to the general councils pf Baltard called them 'complec~ and austere institutions' (Baltard,
the dlpartemerus during the debate on solitary confinement. There 1829).T ns everal respects, the prison must be an exhaustive disciplin•
were societies for supervising the functioning of the prisons and for ary apparatus: it must assume responsibility for all aspects of the
suggesting improvements: in 1818, the very official Socie,l pour individual, his physical training, his aptitude to work, his everyday
I' amelioration dts prisons, a linle laier the Societe des prisons and conduct, his moral attitude, his state of mind; the prison, much more
various philanthropic groups. Innume~able measures - orders, than the school, the-workshop or the armr, which always involved a
234 I 235

certain specialization,i s 'omni-disciplinary'M. oreover, the-prison 1l1ouldf orm from the malefactors that it gathers •together a homo
has neithere xterior nor gap; it cannQl be inter;ruprede,x cept when e,cncousa nd interdependent population: 'There exists at this moment
its tasksi s totally completed; its action on the individual must hr 111nonugs an organiud sodety 9f criminals ... They form a small
uninterrupted: an unceasing discipline. Lastly, it gives almost total notion within the greater. Almost all these men met or meet again
power over the prisoners;i t has its internalm echanismso f repression In prison. We must now disperse the members of this society'
and punishment: a despotic discipline. It carries to their grea1e,,1 (Tocqueville, Rapport a la Cltamhre des Deputes, quoted in Beau
intensity all the procedures to be found in the other disciplinary mont and Tocqueville, 391-3). Moreover, through the reflection
mechanisms. It must be the most powerful machinery for irnposinK that it gives rise to and the remorse that cannot fail to follow,
a new form on the perverted individual; its mode of action is the solitude must be a positive instrument of reform: 'Thrown into
constraint of a total education: 'In prison the government may solitude, the convict reflects. Placed alone in the presence of his
dispose of the liberty of the person and of the time of the prisoner: crime, he learns to hate it, and, if his soul is not yet blunted by evil,
from then on, one can imagine the power of the education which, Ii is in i.solation that remorse will come to assail him' (Beaumonc and
not only in a da:y, but in the succession of days and even yea~, may Tocqueville, 109). Through the face, too, that solitude assures a
regulate for man the time of waking and sleeping, of activity and rest, sort of self-regulation of the penalty and makes possible a spontane•
the number and duration of meals, the quality and ration of food, ous individualiiation of the punishment: the more the convic\ is
the nature and product of labour, the time of prayer, the use of capable of reflecting, the more capable be was of committing his
speech and even, so to speak, that of thought, that education which, crime; but, also, the more lively his remorse, the more painful his
in the short, simple journeys from refectory to workshop, from solitude; on the other hand, when he has profoundly repented and
workshop to the cell, regulates the movements of the body, and even made amends without thcleasr dissimulation, solitude will no longer
in moments of rest, determines the use of time, the time-table, this weigh upon him: 'Thus, according to this admi~ldliscipline, each
education, which, in short, rakes possession of man as a whole, of intelligence and each morality bears within itself the principle and
all the physical and moral faculties that are in him and of the time measure of a punishment whose error and human fallibility cannot
in which he is himself' (Lucas, II, 123-4). Tbis complete 'reforma alter the cenainty and invariable equity ... Is it not in truui like
tory' lays down a recoding of existence very different from the mere the seal of a divine and providential justice?' (Aylies, 131-3). Lastly,
juridical deprivation of liberty and very different, t00, from the and perhal!s above all, the isolation of tbe convicts guarantees that
simple mechanism of exempla imagined by the reform~rs at rhe time it· is possible to exei:cise over them; with maximum intensity, a
of the ideologues. power that will not be overthrown by any othe~ influence; solitude
1. The first principle· was isolation. The isolation of the convkt is the primary condition of total submission: 'Just imagine,' said
from the external world, from everything that motivated tne offence, Charles Lucas, referring to the role of the governor, the instn1CtQr,
from the complicities that facilitated it. The isolation of the prisoners the chaplain and ,other 'charitable persons' as regards the isolated
from one another. Not only must the penalty be individual, but it convict, 'just imagine the pqwer of human speech intervening in
must also be individualizing- in two ways. First, the prison must be the midst of the terrible discipline of silence to speak to the heart,
designed in such a way as to efface of itself the harmful consequences to the soul to the human person' (Lucas, I, 167). Isolation provides
1
10 which it gives rise in gathering together very di.fferent convict$ an intimare exchange bet:Ween the convict and the power that is
in th·es ame place: to stifle plots and ;,:volts, to prevent the formation exercisedo ve'rh im.
of future complicities that may give ris.e 10 blackmail (when the lt is at this point that the debate on the two Amedcan syscems of
convicts are once again ar liberty), to form an obsr,,cle 10 the im imprisonment, that of Auburn and that of Philadelphia, was situated.
morality of so many 'mysterious associations'. In short, the prison Tnf act, this debate, which was so wide-ranging and long drawn out,•
237

\....ompJetaen a austere msutuuons
concerned only tl1e way in which isolation should be used, it bel11M flclnlt raining; a change of 'morality', rather than of attitude. lILt he
accepted by all. litnnsylvanian prison, the only operations of correction were the
The Auburn model prescribed 1he individual cell during Ji,. , t)nsciencca nd the silent architecture that confronted it. At Cherry
night, work and meals in common, but under the rule of absoh111 I 1111't,h e walls are the punishment of the crime; the cell confronts
silence, t!Je convicts being allowed to speak only to the wardcr1, rhc convict with himself; he· is forced m listen tb his conscience'.
with their permission and in a low voice. It was a,clear reference 10 JJ enee work there is more in the nature of a consolation than an
1he monastic model; a reference, too, co the discipline of the work r1bliga1ions;u pervisors do not have to exert force - tbis is assured
sho11.T he prison must be the microcosm of a perfect society In 1y rJ,em ateriality of things -and consequently, their authority ma_Y
1
which individuals are isolated in tlieir moral existence, but in which he accepted: 'At each visit,. a few benevolent words ffow from this
they come together in a stric1 hierarchical framework, with 1111 honest mouth and bring to the lieart of the inmate gratitude, hope
lateral relalion, communication being possible oc,ly in a vertlo,I ,,od consolation; he loves his warder; and he loves him because he
direction. The advantage of the Auburnian system, according to ii• 11 gentle and sympathetic. Walls are terrible, but man is good'
advocaies, was that it formed a duplication of society itself. Con (Dlouet). In this closed cell, this temporary sepulchre, tl1em yths of
straint was assured by material means, but above all by a rule tlmr resurrection arise easily enough. After night and silence, the regener
one had to learn to respect and which was guaranteed by surveillance ~ted life. . Auburn .was society itself Ieduccd to its bare essemials.
and punishment. Rather than keep the convicts 'under lock and key Cherry Hill was life annihilated and begun again. Catholicism soon
like wild beasts in their cages', they must be brought together, 11bsorbedtl 1is,Q uaker tc>chniquei nio its discourses. 'I see your cell
'made to join together in useful exercises, forced together to adopt 11s no more· than a frighrful sepulchre where, instead of worms,
good habits, preventing moral conragion by active surveillance, remorse and despair come to gmLWa t you and to turn your existence
maintaining reffection by the rule of silence'; this rule accustoms tl1e Into a hell in ant;cipation. But ... what is for 110 irreligious prisoner
convict 'to regard rhdaw as a sacred precept whose violation brings merely a tomb, a repulsive ossuary, becomes, for tlie sincerely
just and legitimate ham11 (Mittermaier, in Rtvu.efram;.aiseu. ,ftrangerf Christian convict, the very cradle oi blessed immortalicy.'8
<k. /igislatinn, 1836). Thus rhis operation of isolation, assembly A whole sedes of different conflicts stemmed from the opposition
without communication and law guaranteed by uninterrupted between these two models: religious (must conversion be the princi
supervision, must rehabilitate1 hec rimina)a s a social individual:i t pal element of correction?), medical {does total isolation drive
trains him to a 'useful and resigned activity' (Gasparin); it restores conviccs insane?), economic (which method costs less?), architec
for him 'habits 9[ sociability' (Beaumont and Tocque.ville, 1 u). tural and administrative (which form guarantees the best surveil
In absolute isolation - as at Philadelphia - the rehabilitarion of lance?). This, no doubt, was why the argument las,ed so long. Bur,
the criminal is expected not of the applica1ion of a common law, ar the heart of the debate, and making it possible, was this p,rimary
but of the relarion of the individual to his own conscience and 10 objective of carceral action: coercive individualization, by the
what may enlighten him from wirhin. 7 'Alone in his cell, the convict termination of any relation that is not supervised by autl1ority or
is handed over to himself; in the silence of his passions aod o~ the arranged according to hierarchy.
world that surrounds him, he descends into his conscience, he 2. 'Work alternating wi,h meals accompanies the convict to
questions it and feels awakening within him the moral feeling that evening pray.er; then a new sleep gives him an agreeable rest that is
never entirely perishes in the hean of man' (journal des iconomisces, not disrurned by the phantoms of an u11regulatedi magination. Thus
II, 1842). It is not, thereforei an external respect for the law or fear 1he six weekdays 11assb y. 'They are followed by -a day devoted
of punishmel)t alone that will act upon the convict but the workings exclusively to prayer, instruction and salutary meditations. Thus
of the conscience itself. A profound submission, rather than a super- the weeks, o:hem onths, the years follow one another; thl\s the
239

rn~vu l...omplete ano austere 1mmtut1ons
'
prisoner who, on entering th~ esrablishment, wa_s an .inconsi.111 1~1),T here were strikes against tlte prison workshops: when a
man, or one who was single-minded only ill his irregularity, seekl1111 I ,linumont glove-maker succeeded in organizing a workshop at
10 destroy his existence by the variety of bis vices, gradually-becom• 1: lolrvaux, the workers protested, declared that their labour was
by dint of a habit that is at first purely external, -but is soon lt"nlll ,ll~honoured, occupied the manufactory and forced the employer to
formed into a second nature, so.familiar with work and the pleasu,.. •h~ndon his project (cf. Aguet, J0-3' ). There was also a widespread
that derive from it, that, provided wise instruction has opened up 11rescs ampaign in the workers' newspapers: on ,he theme that the
his soul to repentance, he may be exposed with more confidence 11 "ovemment encouraged penal labour in Order to reduce 'free' wages;
temptations, when he finally recovers his liberty' (J~ius, 4r7-1H) t1n the theme that the inconveniences of these pcison workshops
Work is defined, with isolation, as an agent of carceral transform• weree ven more evident for women, who were thus deprived of their
tion. This is 10 be found as early as the code of 1808: 'Although 11141 l;bour, driven 10 prostitution and therefore to prison, where these
penalty irillicted by the.law has.as its' aim the reparation of a crim,, .,,me women, who could no longer work -when they were free, then
it is also intended to reform the convict, anil this double aim will competed with those who were still at work (L' Atelier, 3rd year,
be fulfilled if tl1e malefactor is snatched from that faril idlenc" 110. 4, December t842); on the theme that prisoners were-given the
which, having brought him to prison, meets him again within 111 nfest jobs - 'in warm and sheltered_c onditions thieves execute tbe
walls and, seizing hold of him, brings him 10 the ultimate degree of work of hat-making and cabinet-making', while the unemployed
depravity.'' Work is neither an addition nor a corrective 10 th• hatter is forced to go 'to the human slaughter-ltouse 10 ma_kew hite
regime of detention: whether it is a question of forced labour, lead at two francs a day' (L' Auliu, 6th year, no. 2,November 1845);
reclusion or imprisonment, ilis conceived, by the legislator himsell, on the theme that philanthropy is more concerned about the work
as necessarily accompanying it. But the necessity involved is pre. . Ing conditions of prisoners than those of free workers: 'We are sute
cisely not the necessity of which the eighteenth-century refo,mon rhat if prisoners worked with mercury, for example, science ":'ould
spoke when they wished to make imprisonment either an examplr be a great deal more ready than it is to find ways of protecting the
1
for the public or a useful reparation for society. In the carce~•I workers from the dangers of its fumes: "Those poor convicts?"
regime, the link between work and punishment is of another typo. someone would exclaim, who scarcely has a -word for the gilders.
Several polemics that took place under the Restoration 3J1d, hr But what can you expect? One has to have killed or robbed to
July Monarchy throw light on the funcdon attributed to pennl ru:ouscc ompassion or interest.' On the theme above all that:, if tbe
lab_our.F irst, there -was the debate on the subject of wages. Tho prison was tending to become a workshop, it would .not be long
labour of prisoners was remunerated in F ranee, This posed a prob before beggars and the unemployed were sent there, thus reconsti
lem: if work in prison is rcmunera1ed, that work ca.nnot really form tuting the old /r(ipitaux glnlraux of France or the workhouses of
part of the penalty; and the prisoner-may therefore refuse to perfom, England. Jn addition, there were petitions and letters, especially
it. Moreover, wages reward the skill of the worker .and not Ui< after the law of 1844 - one petition, rejected by the Chambre de
improvement of the convict: 'The worst subjects are almost every, Paris, 'found irthuman that one should propose to apply murderers
where the most skilful workers; they are the most highly remuner and thieves 10w ork tharis today the lot of a few thousand workers';
ated, consequently the most intempern1,ea nd least ready to repent' 'the Ghambre preferred Barrabas to us' (I! Ac,/ier, 4th year; no. 9,
(Marque1-Wasselo1,q uoted in Lucas, 324). The debate, which had June 1844 and 5th year, no. 7, April 1845; cf. also, of the same
never quite died down, was resumed with great liveliness in the period, La Dcm/lefati< pacijique-);t ypographical w.orkers sent a
early 184os; it was a period of economic crisis, a period of workerS' letter to the minister when they learnt that a printing-works was 10
agitation and a period, too, in which the opposition between the be set up in the prison at Melun: 'You have dedded between
worker and the delinquent was beginning to crystallize (cf. below, reprobates justly punished by the law and citizens who sacrifice

rnson L.omplete and austere msnrunons
their days, in abstinence and probity, to the lives of their familiesa111I only a 'pair of arms for any good work', one can live only 'from
to the wealth of their nation' (L'Acelier, 5th year, no. G,M arch 1,841), the product of one's labour, through the, practice of a. profession or
The answers given by the government and the administration 111 from the prol:luct of the labour of others, lly thieving'; but, although
this whole campaign changed very little. 'Penal labour canno1 b, the prison did not force offenders to work, its.ems to have reintrO•
criticized for any unemployment it may give rise to: with irs limi1rd duced into its very insrirution and, obliquely, by means of raxation,
extent, and irs low output, it cannot have a general effect on 1f1e this levying by some on the labour of others: 'The question of
economy. It is intrinsically useful;-noc as an activity of producLior, Idleness is the same as in society; it is from ,he labour of others that
1
but by virtue of the effect it has an the human mechanism. It is ~ rite convicts live, if they do not exist from their own labour' (Lucas,
principle of order and regularity; through the demands that 11 IJ, 313-14). The labour by which the convict contribuces to his
imposes, it conveys, imperceptibly, the forms of a rigorous power, own needs turns ,he ,hief into a docile worker. This is the utility
it !,ends bodies to regular movements, it excludes agitation and of remuneration for penal labour; it imposes on the convict the
distraction, it imposes a hierarchy and a surveillance that are all 1hr 'moral' form of wages as the condition of his existence. Wages
more accepted, and which will be inscribed all the more deeply In Inculcate the 'love and habit' of work (Lucas, TI, 243); they give
the behaviour of the convicts, in that they form part of its legict ,hose malefactors who do nor know the differ.ence between mine
with work 'the rule is introduced into a prison, it reigns there with• ,ind thine a sense of property - of 'what one has earned by the sweat
out effort, without the use of any repressive and violent .meani, Qf one's brow' (Danjou, 210-11; cf. also L'Atelier, Gth year, no. 2,
By occupying the convict, one gives him habits of order and oliedi November 1845); they also teach those who have lived in dissipa
ence; one. makes the idler that he was diligent and active ... with tion the virtues of thrift and foresight (Lucas; a third of the prisoner's
time, he finds i·n the r~lar: movcmenl of the prison, in the manual daily wages was set aside for the day when he left the prison); lastly,
labours to which he is subjected ... a certain remedy against the by proposing a quantity of work to be carried out, rhey make it
wanderings of his imagination' (.Berenger). Penal labour must be possible to express quantitatively the convict's zeal and the progress
=n as the very machinery (hat transforms the violent, agitated, of his improvement(Ducpetiaux, 30-31). The wages of penal labour
unreflective convict into a part chac plays its role with perfect do not reward production; they function -as a motive and measure
regularity. The prison is not a workshop; it is, i, must be of itself, of individual transformation: it is a legal fiction, since it does not
a machine whose convict-workers are both the cogs ,and the P,TO represent the 'free' granting of labour power, bur an artifice that
ducts; it 'occupies them continually, with ihe sole aim of filling their is presumed to be effective in the techniques of correction.
moments. When the body is.agitated, when the mind applies irsel~ What, then, is the use of penal labour? Not profit; nor even ·the
to a particular object, importunate ideas depart, calm is born once formation of a useful skill; but the constitution of a power relation,
again in the soul' (Danjou, 180).I f, in che final analysis, the work of an empty economic form, a schema of individual submission and of
the prison has an economic effect, lt is by producing individuals adjustment 10 a production apparatus.
mechanized according to the general norms of an industrial sociery: The perfect image of prison labour was r,he women's workshop
'Work is the providence of the modern peoples; it replaces morality, at Clairvaux; the silent precision of the human machinery is reminis
fills tl)e gap left by beliefs and is regarded as the principle of all good. cent of the regulated rigour of the convent: 'On a throne, above
Work must be the religion of the prisons. For a machine-society, which is a crucifix,a sister is sitting; before her, arra:ngedin two
purely mechanical me~ns of reform are required' (Fauche.r, G4; in rows, the ptisoners are carrying out the task imposed on them, and,
England the 'treadmill' and the pump provided a disciplinary as needlework accounrs for almost,all the work, the strictest silence
mechanizacion of the inmates, with no end product). The makiog is constantly maintained. .. It seems that, in these halls, the very
of machine-men, buL also of proletarians; in effect, when one has air breathes penitence and expiation. One is carried back, as by a

.t"nson Lomplete ano austere msunmons
spontaneous movement, co the time of the vener,ableh abits 01 thl1 11!c ircumstances, but also according 10 the penalty itself as it takes
ancient place, one remembers chose voluntary penitents who •11111 11l,,cein actual fact. This amounts to saying that, although the
t.\1emselvesu p.here in order to say farewell co the world1. Comp••• 1icnalty must be individualized, it is so not on che basis of the
this with che following; 'Go into a cotton-mill; listen to the con Individual-offender, the juridical subject of his act, the responsible
versations of the workers and the whistling of che machines. Is ti,~,.. -1,thor of the offence, bu~on the basis of the individual punished,
any contrast in the world more affiicting chan the regularity Qr1d 1hco bject of a supervised transformation, the individual in detention
predictability of these mechanicai movements, 'compared with 1he 11\sertedin the prison apparatus, modified 1/y it or reacting to it. 'It
disorder of ideas and morals, produced by the contact of so m"nf 11a question only of reforming the evil-doer. Once chis reform has
men, women and children' (Faucher 20). ,ome about, the criminal must return to society' (G. Lucas, quoted
3. But prison goes beyond che mere privation of liberty in • 111t he Ga{we des trihunaux, 6 Ap,il 1,837).
.more important way. le becomes increasingly an ihscrument for tht The quality and content of de,ention should no longer be deter
modulation of the penalcy; an apparatus which, through the execu mined by the nature of the offence alone. The juridical gravity of a
tion of the sentence wicl1w hich it is encrusted, seems 10 have tho crime does no< at all have the value of a univocal sign for the
right, in part at least, 10 assume its principle. Of course, the prison character of the convict, whether or not he is capable of reform. In
institution was not given this 'right' in the nineteenth century or particular the crime-offence distinction, which the penal code
even in che twentieth, except in a fragmentary form (through tho rcc6gnized in drawing the corresponding distinction between mere .
oblique way of release on licence, semi-release, the organization of lmprisonmenr and· imprisonment with hard labour,, is not opera
reformat9ries). Bui it should be noted that it was claimed very tional in terms of reform. This was the almost universal opinion
early on by those. responsible for p.rl$Ona dministration,a s the very expressed by the directors of the maison.cs entraler,d uring an inquiry
condition of the good functioning of a pri.son, and of i1se fficiency carried out by the ministry in 1836: 'The minor offenders are gener
in the task of ~formation that the law ilself had given it. olly die most vicious ... Among the criminals, one meecs many
The same goes for 1he duration of the punishment; it makit11It men who have given in tQ the violence of their passions a~d to the
possible to quantify the penalties exactly, 10 graduate them accord• needs of a large family..' 'The behaviour of criminals is much better
ing to circumstancesa nd 1.0 give to legal punishmenr the more or lei" than that of the minor offenders; the former are more submissive,
explicit form of-wages; but it also runs the risk of having no corrcc• harder-working chan the laiter, who, in general, are pickpockets,
tive value, if it is fixed once and for,all in the sentence. The length debauchees and idlers.'u Hence the idea that punitive rigour must
of the penalty must not be a measurement of the 'exchange value' not be in direct proportion to the penal importance of the offence -
of the offence; it muse be adjus1ed to the 'useful' transformation of nor determined once and for all.
the ·inmate during his term of imprisonment. 'lt is not a time• As an operation of correction, imprisonment has its own require
measure, but a time finalized. The form of the operation, rather ments and dangers. It is its effectS that must determine its stages, its
'J
1han the form of the w~ges. use as che prudent physician ends his temporary increases, its successive reductions, in severiry; what
medicacion or continues it according 10 whether 1he patient ha& Charles Lucas called the 'mobile classilicarion of moralities'. The
or has not arrived at a perfect cure, so, in che fir-Sto f these two progressive system applied at Geneva since 1825 was often advo
hypotheses, expiation ought to end with the complete reform of the caced fo Fr.ance (Fresnel, •9-3, ). Ir took the form, for example, of
prisoner; for, in this case, all derenrion has becorne useless, and from three areas: a trial area for prisoners in general, a punishment area
then on as inhuman to the reformed individual as it is va1nlyb urden and a reward area for those who had embarked on the way of reform
some for the Sta1e.'10 The correct duration of the penalty must be (Lucas, ll, 440). Or it took the form of four phll.';es:a pcriod of
calculated, therefore, noc only according co the particular crime and intimidation (deprivation of woek and of any internal or external
244 245

l"r1:mn Complete and aus1ere institutions
relations); a period of work (isolation, but work which, after ,I, <Omplaint' (Bonneville, s). All this 'arbitrariness' which, in the
phase of forced idleness, would be welcomed as a benefit); a regi111 11ld penal system, enabled the judges to modulate the penalty
of moralization (more or less frequent 'lectures' from the direc1<1n •nd the princes to ignore it if they so wisbed all this arbitrariness,
1
and official visitors); a period of work in common (Duras). Altho11Rh which the modern codes have withdrawn from the judicial power,
the principle of the penalty was cerrainly a legal decision, Ii. has been gradually reconstimted on the side of the power that
administration, its quality and its rigours must belong 10a n autonl► •dministers and supervises punishment. It is the sovereignty of
mous mechanism that supervises the effects of punishmentwithin iii. knowledge possessed by the warder: 'He is a veritable magistrate
very apparatus that produces them. A whole regime of punish menJ I c;nlledu pon to reign as sovereign in the prison ... wh9, in order not
and rewards that is a-way not simply of gaining respect for the prison 10 fall short in his mission, must combine the most eminent virtue
regulations, but of making the action of ,he prison on the inma1rt with a profound knowledge of mankind' (Berenger).
effective. The Jegal authority itself came to accept this: 'One should And so we arrive at a principle, clearly formu)ated by Charles
not be surprised, said the supreme court of appeal, when consultrd Lucas, which, although it marks the virtual beginning of modem
on the subject of ab illc oncerning the prisons, at the idea ·of gran1in11 11enalf unctioning, very few jurists would dare to accept today
rewards, which mig!1t consist either for 1he most part in money, "' without some hesitation; let us call it the Declaration of Carceral
in a-better diet, or even in a reduction of the duration of the penalty. Independence - in it is claimed the right to be a power that nor only
!£anything can awaken in the minds of convicts the notions of good possesses administrative autonomy, but is also a part of punitive
and evil, bring them 10 moral reflections and raise them to some $Overeignty. This affirmation of 1he rights of the prison posits as a
extent in their own eyes, it is the· possibility of obraining somr principle: that criminal judgement is an arbitrary unity; that it must
reward' (Lucas, Tl, 441-2). be broken down; that rhe writers c/f the penal codes were correct in
And it must be admined thai the legal authorities can have no distinguishing ,he legislative level (which cl'!SSifiesth eacts and attri
immediate control over all these procedures tha1 rectify the penalry bu1es penalties 10 them) and the judicial level (which passes the
as i1 proceeds. It is a question; in effect, of measures that by sentences); that Lhet ask wday is to .inalyse in turn this lacerj udicial
definition can intervene only afier the semence and can bear only on level; that one should distinguish in it what is properly judicial
·something other than the offences. Those who administer detention (assess not so much acts as agems, measure 'the intentionalities that
must thereforeh ave a.-ii,n dispensablea utonomy, when ir comes to give human acrs so many different moralities', and therefore rectify
the question ,;,f· individualizing and varying the applicatlon of the if it can the assessments of the legislator); and to give autonomy to
penalty: supervisors, a prison governor, a.chaplain or an instructor 'penilentiary judgement', which is perhaps the most important; fo
are more capable of exercising this corrective function ,han those relation to it the assessment of the court is merely a 'way of pre
who hold the penal power. I, is their judgemrnt (understood as judging', for ,he morali1y of the agent can be assessed 'only when
observation, diagnosis, characterization, informati9n, differential put tO the test. The judge, therefore, «quires in turn a compulsory
classification) and not a verdict in the form of an attribution of guilt, and rectifying supervision of his assessments; and this supervision
that must serve as a support for this internal modulation of che is that provided by ,he peni1entiary prison' (Lucas, II, 418-12).
pe,;,alty- for its mitigation or even its interruplion. When in 1846, One may speak, therefore, of an excess or a series of excesses on
Bonneville presented his project of release on licence, he defined it the part of imprisonment in te.rms of legal detention - of the 'car
as 'the righr of the a.dministration, with 1he previous approval of the ceral' in relation to the 'jµdicial'. Now this excess was observed very
legal authority, 10p lace in 1emporary liberty, after a sufficient period early on, from the very birth of the prison, either in the form of real
of expiation; rhe completely reformed convict, on condilion that he practices, or in the form of projects. It did not come later, as a
will be brought back imo prison on the slightest well-founded secondary effect. The great carce111mI achinery was bound up with
147

Knson \,,,.OIIlptete ano auscere m,tiutuuvrn»
the very functioning of the prison. The sign of this autonomy i, whole of penal justice and to imprison the judges themselves, it was
very apparent in the 'useless' ac1so f violence perpetratedb y wardW'I because it was able to introduce criminal justice into relations of
or in the despotism of an administration tbat has all the privileges QI knowledge rhat have since become its infinite labyrinth,
an enclosed community. Its roots lie elsewhere: precisely in the fac1 The prison, the place where the penalty i.s carried our, is also the
that the prison is required to be 'useful', that the deprivation of ()laceo f observation of punished individuals. This iakes two forms:
liberty - that juridical levying on an ideal property - must, fro1r\ !urveillante, of course, but also knowledge of each inmate, of his
the outset, have exercised a posirive technical role, operating rran,. . behaviour, his deeper states of mind, his gradual improvement; the
formations on individuals. And, for this operation, the .career.ii prisons must be conceived as places for the formation of clinical
apparatus has recou,rse 10 three great schemata: the politico-moral knowledge about the convicts; 'tl1e penitentiary system cannot be
schema of individual isolation and hierarchy; the economic model an a priori conception; it is an induction of the social state..T here are
of force applied to compulsory work; ,he technico-medical m,;,del moral diseases, as well as.breakdowns in health,.where die treatment
of cure and normalization. The cell, the workshop, the hospital. depends on the site and directi1:mo f the illness' (Faucher, 6). This
The margin by which the prison e.xceedsd etention is filled in fact Involves two essential mechanisms, lt must be possible ro hold the
by teclu,iques of a disciplinary type. And this disciplinary•a ddition prisoner under permanent observation; every reporc that can be
to the juridical is what, in short, is called the 'penitentiary'. ,nadc about him must be recorded and cqmputed. The theme of the
Panopticoo - at once surveillance and obset'Vation, security and
This -'dition was not accepted easily. To begin with, there Wall knowledge, individualization and totalization, isolation and trans
the question of principle: the penalty must be nothing more than parency - found in the prison its privileged locus of realization.
the deprivation of liberty; like our present rulers, but with all the Although the panoptic procedures, as concrete forms of the exercise
freshness of his language, Decaies says: 'The law must follow the of power, have become extremely widespread, at least in their less
convicl'ed man into the prison where jt has sent him' (Decazes).. Bui concentrated forms, it was really only in the penitentiary institu
very soon - ans! this is a characteristic fact - these debates were ,o dons that Bentham's utopia could be fully expressed in a materiru
bec<1mea baule for appropriating control of this additional peni form. In the , 830s, the Panopticon became the archi.tecrural pro
tentiary element; the judges were <o demand• a right of inspection gramme of most pri.son projects. Jr was the most direct way of
over the carceral mechanisms: 'The moral enlightenment of the expressing 'the intelligence of disciplinain stone' (Lucas,.T, 69); of
inmates reqwres innumerable cooperators; it is only by visits of maki.ng architecture tra.nsparent to t)ie administration of power;U
inspection, commissions of surveillance and charity associations that of making it possible to substitute for force or otlic:r violent con
this may be accomplished. Auxiliaries, ,hen, are needed and it is the straints the gentle efficiency of total surveillance; of ordering space
judges who must provide them' (Ferrus, vjii; an ordinance of 1847 according to the recent humanization of the codes and the new
had set up commissions of surveillance). From this period, the penitentiary theory: 'The authorities, on the one hand, and ilie
penitentiary order had become sufficienrly well established for there architect, on the other, must know, therefore, whether the prisons
ro be no question of dismantling it; the question was how to get are to·be based on·the principle of milder penalties or on a system
control of it. This gave rise to the figure of the judge obsessed by a of reforming convicis, in accordance witl1 legislation which, by
desire for prison, A century later, tl1is·wast o give birth ro a bastard, getting to the root cause of the people's vices, becomes a principle
yet deformed child: the magistrare·enmmed with the determination tharw.ill regenera,etlievirtues that they must practice' (Balrard, 4-5).
of penalties. ln -Short,i ts rask was l'O constirute a prison•machine13 with a cell
Bur, if d1e penitentiary, in so far as it went well beyond mere of visibility in which the ihmate will find himself caught -as' in the
detention, was able nor only to establish itself, but to entrap the glass house of the Greek philosopher' (Barou-Romain, 8) and a
249

\...omp1ett: ano ..tui:;u:re J111:>utuuvn::.
central point from which a permanent gaze may control priso11tt ,1ft he established regulations: it has to extract unceasingly from the
and staff. Around these two requirementss, everal variatiohs-wtr Inmate a body of knowledge that will make it possible t.o transform
possible: the Benchamite Panopticon in its strict form, the s01111 1hcp enal measure into a penitentiary operation; which will make of
. circle, the cross-plan, the star shape. In the •midst of all these di, 1hep enalty required by the offence a modification of the inmate that
cussions, the Minister of the Interior in 184, sums up the fund~ willb e of use to society. The autonomy of the carceral regime and
mental principles: 'The central inspection hall is the pivot of th• rho knowledge that it creates make it p,ossiblet o increase the utilir:y
system. Without a central point of inspection, surveillance cea,.., M the penalty, which the code bad made the vecy principle of its
to be gual'3nteed, continuous and gene ... !; for it is impossible cu punitive philosophy: 'The governor must not lose sight of a single
have complete rnist in the activity, zeal and intelligence of 1h, Inmate, because in whatever part of the prison the inmate is to be
warder who immediately supervises ,he cells. .. The architect m1111 round, whether he is entering or le.aving, or whether he is staying
therefore bring all his attention 10 bear on this object; it is a question chere, the governor must also justify the motives for his staying in
both of discipline and economy. The more accurate and easy ,ht • particu)ar classification or for his movement from one 10 another.
surveillance, the less need will there be to seek in the strength of 1hr He is a veritable accountant. Each inmate is for him, in the sphere
building guarantees against attempted escape and comomnicaclon of individual education, a capita.Ii nvest.ed with penitentiary interest'
between the inmates. Bur surveillance will be perfect if from a central (Lucas, II, 449-50). As a highly efficient technology, penitentiary
hall the director or head-warder sees, without moving and withom practice produces a return on the capital invested in the penal system
being seen, not only the entrances of all the cells and even the inside and in the building of heavy prisons.
of most o( them when the unglazed door is open, but alsp thr Similarly, the offender becomes an individual to know. This
warders guarding the prisoners on every floor. .. Wirh the formula demand for knowledge was not, in the first instance, inserted into
of circular or semi-ci.rcular prisons, jt would be possible to sec from the legislation itself, in order to provide substance for the sentence
a single centre all the prisoners in their cells and the warders in ihc and to determine the true c!egreeo f guilt. It is as a convict, as a point
inspection galleries' (Ducatel, 9), of appliCJ1tionf or punitive mechanisms, that the offender is con
Bu\ the penitentiary Panopticon was also a system of individual stituted himself as the object of possible knowledge.
izing and permanent documentation. The same year in which But this implies that the penitentiary apparatus, with i],e whole
variants of the Bcnthamite schema were recommended for the technological ,programme that accompanies it, brings about a
building of prisons, the system of 'moral accounting' was made curious substitution: from the hand~ of justice, it certainly receives
compulsory:.an individual report of a uniform kind in every prison, a convicted person; but what it must apply itself to is not, of course,
on which the governor or head-warder, the chaplain and che the offence, nor even exactly the offender, but a rather diffetem
instructor had 10 fill in their observations on each inmate: 'Ir is in a object, one defined by variables which at the outset at least were not
way the ,,aJe m,cum of prison administration, making it possible to taken into account in the sentence, for tl1ey were relevanr only for
assess each case, each circumstancea nd, consequently,t p know a corrective technology. This other character, whom the peniten
what treatment to apply to each prisoner individually' (Ducpeciaui<, tiary apparatus substitutes for the convicted offender, is the
56-7~. Many other, much more complete, systems of recording were d,lill'fUCnt.
planned or tried out (cf., for example, Gregory, 199ff; Grellet The delinquent is to be disiinguished from the offender by the
Wammy, 23-5 and t99-203). The overall aim was to make the fact that it is not so much his act as his life that is relevant in char
prison a place for ihe constitution of a body of knowledge that acterizing him. The penitehtiary operation, if it is to be a genuine
would regulate the exercise of penitentiary practice. The prison has re-education, must become the sum total existence of the delinquent,
not only to know ihc decision of the judges and 10a pply it in terms making of the prison a sort of artificial and coercive theatre fa which
250 251

t'{IS:Oll
his life will be examined from top 10 bottom. The legal punishmen1 that he is not only the author ofl,is acts (the author responsible in
bears upon an act; the punitive technique on a life; it falls to this terms of certain critei;ia of free, conscious will), but is linked 10 his
punitive technique, therefore, to reconstitute all the sordid detail of offence by a whole bundle of complex threads {instincts, drives,
a life in the form of knowledge, 10 fill in the gaps of that knowledge tendencies, character). The penitentiary technique bears not on the
and 10 act upon it b_ya practice of compulsion. It is a biographkal relationb etweena uthora nd crime,b .uto n the criminal'sa ffinityw ith
l<nowledge and a rechnique for correcting individual lives. The his ctime. The delinquent, ,he strange manifestation of an overall
observation of the delinquenr 'should go back not only to the phenomenon pf criminalicy, is 10 be found in quasi-natural classes,
circumstances, bur also to the causes of his crime; ,hey must be each endowed with its own characteristics and requiring a specific
sought in the story of his life, from the triple point of view of treatment, what Marqllet-Wasselot called in 1841 the 'ethnography
psychology, social position and upbringing, in order to discover the of the p,isons'.; 'The convicts ore _. . another p_eoplew ithin 1be
dangerous proclivities of the first, the harmful predisposirions of: the same people; with its own habits, instincts, morals' (Marquet
second and the bad antecedents of the rhird. This biograp_hi_cal Wasselot, 9). We are still very close here to the 'picn;resque'
invcstigarion is an essential part of the preliminary investigation for descriptions of the world of the malefactQrs- an old ttadirion that
the classification of penaliries before i, becomes a condition for the goes back a long way and gained new vigour in the early nineteenth
classification of moralities in the penitentiary system. It must century, at a time when the perception of another form of life was
accompany the convict from the court 10 the prison, where the being articulated up9n ,haL of another class and another human
governor's cask is not only 10 receive it, but also 10 complete, soper species. A zoology of social sub-species an!'.!a n ethnology of the
vise and rectify its various factors during the petiod of detention' civilizations of malefactors, with their own rites and language, was
(Lucas, Il,-440-4,). Behind rhe offender, 10 whom the investigation beginning to emerge in a parody form. Bu, an attempt was also
of the facts may attribute responsibility for an offence, stands rhe being made to constitute a new objectivity in which the criminal
delinquent whose slow formation is shown in a biographical belongs 10 a typology that.is botb natural and deviant.Delinquency,
investigation. The introduction of the 'biograprucal' is importanr a pathologic.ii gap in the human species, may be.analysed as morbid
in the history of pcnality. Because ir. establishes Lhe 'criminal' as sy~dromes or as great ter~tological forms. Witl1 Ferrus's classifica
existing before the crime and even outside it. And, for this reason, tion, we probably have one of the first conversions of the old
a psychological causality, duplicating the ju.ridical attribution of 'e1J,nography' of crime into a sys1etnatic typology of delinquents.
responsibili,;y, confuses its ·effects. At this point one enters rhe The analysis is slender, cettainly, but it reveals quite clearly the
'criminological' labyrinth fr<;>m-w hich we have certainly nor yet principle that delinquency must be specified in rerms not so much
emerged: any determining cause, because it reduces responsibilicy, of the la)Va s of the norm. There are three types of convict; there are
marks the author of the offence with a criminality all the more for those who are endowed 'with intellectual resources above the average
midable and demands penitentiary measures that are all the more of intelligence ,hat we have established', but ,vho hav,eb een perverted
strict. As the biography of the criminal duplicates in penal practice eirher by the 'te1\dencieso f their organization' and a 'native pre
the analysis of circumstances used in gauging the crime, so one se((s disposition·, or by 'pernicious logic'_,a n ciniquitousm ora1ity',a
penal d.iscourse and psychiatric discourse crossing each other's 'dangerous atritude to social duties'.. 'fbose tbat belong 10 this cat
frontiers; and there, ar their point of junction, is formed the notion egory require isolation day at1dn ight, solitary exercise,and, when one
of the 'dangerous' individual, which makes it possible to draw up a is forced 10 bring them into contact with the others, they should
network of causality in terms of an entire biography and to present wear 'a !ight mask made of metal netting, of the kind used for stone
a verdict of punishmenr-correction1• . cutringor fencing' -The second category is madeu p of'vicious, stupid
The delinquent is also 10 be distinguished from the offender in or passive convicts, who have been led into evil by indifference to
1.SJ

t'rison complete ancta ustere msnruoons
either shame or honour, through cowardice, that is to say, laziness, appeared the body of the prisoner, duplicated by the individuality
and because of a lack of resistance 10 bad incitements'; rhe regim, of the 'delinquent', by the little soul of the criminal, which the very
suitable to them is not so much that of punishment as of education, and appararus of punishment fabricated as a point of application of the
if possible of mutual education: isolation at nighr, work in common power 10 punish and as the object of what is still called today
during the day, conversations permitted provided they are conducted penitentiary science. It is said that the prison fabricated delinquents;
aloud, reading in common, followed by mutual questioning, for which ILi s true that it brings back, almost inevicably,before cl1ecourtsr hose
rewards may be given. Lascly, there are the 'inept or incapabl~ who have been se.nt there. Bur it also fabricates them in the sense
convicis', who are 'rendered incapable, by an incomplete organiza that it has i'ntroduced into the operation of che law and the offence,
tion, of any occupation requiring considered effort and consistent the judge and the offender, the condemned man and the executioner,
will, and who are therefore incapable of competing in wor.k with the non-corporal reality of the delinquency that links them together
intelligent workers and who, having neither enough education to and, for a cenrury and a half, has caught them i~ the same trap.
know their social duties, nor enough intelligence co understand this
fact or to struggle against their personal instincts, are led co evil by The penitentiary iechnique and the delinquent are in a sense twin
their very incapacity. For these, solitude would merely encourage brothers. It is not true that it was the discovery of the delinquent
their inertia; they must therefore live in common, but in such a way through a scientific rationality that introduced into our old prisons
as 10 form small groups, constantly stimulated by collective the refinement of penitentiary techniques. Nor is it true that the
operations, aod subjected to rigid surveillance' (Ferrus, 1 82ff and internal elaboration of penitentiary methods has finally brought to
2781T).T hus a 'positive' knowledge of the delinquents and their lighr the 'objective' existence of a 'delinquency that the abstraction
spc~ies, very different frbm the juridical definition of offences and and rigidity of the law were unable to perceive. They appeared
their circumstances, is gradually established; but this knowled~e is together, the one extending from ,he oilier, as a technological
also distinc.t from the medical knowledge that makes ir possible to ensemble that forms and fragments the object to which it applies its
introduce the insanity of the individual and, consequently, 10 eflace instruments. And it is. this de1inquency, formed .in the foundations
the criminal character of tlte act. Ferrus states the principle quite of the judicial apparatus,.a mong the I ha.sses" -uvrts',t he servile t~ks,
clearly: 'Considered as a whole, criminals are nothing less than from which justice averts its gaze, out of the shame it feels in punish
madmen; it would be unjust to the lauer to confuse them with ing those it condemns, it is this delinquency that now comes to
consciously perverted men.' The task of this new knowledge is 10 haunt the untroubled courts and the majesty of the laws; it is this
define the act 'scientifically' 9ua offence and above all the individual delinquency that must be known, assessed, measured, diagnosed,
qua delinquent. Criminology is thus made possible. treated wl1en sentences are passed. It is now this delinquency, this
The correlatiYe of penal justice may well be the offender, bur the anomaly, this deviation, this potential danger, this jllness, this form
correlative of the penitentiary appararus is someone other; this is the of existence, that muse be taken into account when the codes are
delinquent, a biographical unity, a kernel of danger, representing a rewritten. Delinquency is the vengeance of the prison on justice.
type of anomaly. And, although it is true rhat to a detention that It is a {eveage formidable enough 10 leave the judge speechless.
deprives oflibeny, as defined by law, the prison added the addi Ir is at this point that the criminologists raise their voices.
tional element of the penitentiary, this penitentiary element intro B.;'t we must not forget that 1he prison, that concentrated and
duced in rurn a third character who slipped between the individual austere figure of all the disciplines, is not an endogenous element in
condemned by the law and the individual who carries out this law. rhe penal system as defined at dte turn of the eighteenth and nine
At the point that marks the' disappearance of the branded, dis teenth centuries. The theme of a punitive society and of a general
membered, burnt, annihilated body of ,he tortured criminal, there semio-technique of punishment thar has sustained the 'ideological'
254

rnson
codes - Beccarian or Benthami1e - did 001 itself give rise 10 th•
unLversalu se of the prison. This prison came from elsewhere - fr11111 2. Illegalities and delinquency
the mechanisms prop.er to a disciplinary power. Now, despite 1h11
heterogeneity, 1be mechanisms and effects of the prison have sprca1I
right through modern criminal justice; delinquency and the delln
quenis have become parasites on it through and through. Gne m1111
seek the reason for 1his formidable 'efficiency' of the prison. But brlf
thing may be noted at the outset: the penal justice defined in rh,
eighteenth century by tl)e reformers traced two possible but diver
gent lines of objectification of the criminal: the fi11>wt as the ser1~1 From the point of view of the law, detention may be a mere depriva
of 'monsters', moral or political, who had fallen outside the social tion of liberty. But the imprisonment that pecfonns this function
pact; the second was that of 1he juridical subject rchabilltatesl by has always involved a technical project. The transition from the
punishment. Now the 'delinquent' makes it possible to join the twn public execution, with its spectacular rituals, its art mingled with the
lines and to constitute under the authority of medicine, psycholor,.y ceremony of pain, to the penah;es of prisons 'buried in architectural
or criminology, an individual in whom the offender of the law anti masses and guarded by the secrecy of administrations, is nor a
the object of a scientific technique arc superimposed - or almost transition to an·\mdiffcrentiated, abstract, confused penality; it is tb.e
one upon the other. That the grip of the prison on the penal system transition from one art of punishing to another, no less skilful one.
should not have led to a violent reaction of rejection is no doub1 It is a technical mutation. From this transition spring a symptom and
due to many reasons. One of rhesej s Ll1at,i n fabricating delinquency, a symbol: the replacement, in 1837, of the chain-gang by the police
it gave to criminal justice a unitary field of objects, authcnticattd carriage.
PY tbe 'sciences', and thus enabled ir to functjon on a general The chain-gang, a tradition that went back to the time of the
horizon of 'truth' galley slaves, was stHI surviving under the July monarchy. The
t
The prison, that darkest region in the apparatus of justice, is thr imporrance it seems to have assumed as a spectacle at the beginning
place where the power to punish, which no longer dares 10 rnanifo~, of the nineteenth century may be hound up whb the fact that it
itself openly, silently organizes a field of objectivity in which combined in a single manifest-ation the two modes of punishment:
punishment will be able to function openly as treatment and tht the way to detention unfolded as a ceremonial of torture. (Faucher
sentence be inscribed among the discourses of knowledge. lr I, remarked that the chain-gang was a popular spectacle 'especially
understandable that jus.tice should have adopted so easily a priso,, since the scaffolds were almos, entirely abolished'.) The accounts of
that was no'tthe offspring ofits own thoughts. Justice certainly owed the 'last chain-gangs' - those that crossed France in the summer of
the prison this recognition. 1836- and of its scandals allow us to rediscover this functioning,.so
alien to the rules of 'penitentiary .science'. It began with a scaffold
ritual: rhe fixing of iron collars and chains in the courtyard of
Bic<ltrep rison. The convict's neck was thrown back upon a block;
but this time the art of the executioner was to strike without crush
ing the head - an inverted skill that knew how not ti> delive, the
death blow. 'The courtyard of Bicetre displays its instruments of
torture: several rows of chainswith their iron-collars. The artoupans
(head-warders), who serve as temporary blacksmiths, ar.range the
257

rnson 1uega1mes ano aennquem;y
block and hammer. Around the bars of the wall walk are stuck all it was ,he women who were the most angry. They cri.ed: Down with
those heads, wearing a gloomy or bold expression, which the opera• 1he wicked priest! Down with the mQnster Delacollonge! The
,or is 10c ivet. Higher up, at every s,orey of ,he prison, one sees legs police inspecwrs of Montrouge and Vaugirard and several mayors
and arms dangling through the bars of the cells, as a, some bazaar and depu,y-mayors ran the gaundet 1n their attempt to enforce the
of human flesh; ,hese are the prisoners who have come to assis, ac decision of the couns. Shortly before reaching Issy, Fran~ois,
the toilet of their comrades of the day before. .. Here ,hey are in recognizing M. Allard and the officers of the brigade, threw his
,he attitude of sacrifice. They are srining on the ground, coupled a, wooden bow.I at them. Ir was then remembered ihatthe families of
random by the waist; the chains they must carry, each weighing some of the former comrades of the convict lived at Ivry. Fram that
eigh, pounds, rest heavily on their knees. The operator inspects momem the police inspectors spread out along the route and fol
them, measuring heads and adapting the enormous inch-thick lowed the convicts' cart closely. Those of the Paris gang all threw
coUars. It takes three men co rivet an iron-collar; the first holds up their wooden bowls at rhe ,heads of the police, some of whom were
the block, the second holds the two branches of the iron-collar srruck. At that moment, the crowd reacted strongly. They started 10
together and, with his two outstretched arms, secures the•p atient's fight amongst themselves' (Ga;:ette du ,,;l,w,aux, 20 July 1836).
head; ,he ,hird strikes with repeated blows and llanens the bolt Between Bicerre and S~vres a considerable number of houses were
under his huge hamme.r.E ach blow shakes the head ·and the body . looted as the chain-gang passed by (La Pltalange, 1 August 1836).
. . . Indeed, one does not think of the danger that ,he victim might In this festival of the departing convicts, there was something of
face if rhe hammer missed its mark; this impression is nullified or the rites of the scapegoat that is struck as it is chased away, some
rather defaced before ,he profound impression of horror one thing of the fes,ival of fools, in which the reversal of roles is prac
experiences in comempla~ing·onoef Godts creatures in such a state tised, something of ,he old ceremonies of the scaffold, in which the
of abasement.'' It also had the dimension of a public spectacle; <ru1h must burst for1h in the full light of day, something, coo, of
according to ,he Ga;we di!s iribunaux, over 100,000 people '!\'atched those popular spectacles, in which 'famous characters or traditional
the chain-gang leave Paris on 19 July: 'The descent from ihe Cour types were recognized: the play of truth and infamy, the procession
tille 10 the Mardi G,as .. .' Order and wealth came to wa,ch from a of no1oriery and shame, invective against the guilty who have been
distance the passipg of the great nomadic tribe thar-had been put in unmasked and, on the other hand, the joyous avowal of crimes. One
chains, that other species, 'the race aparr rhat has, the privilege of soughr to rediscover ,he face of the criminals who had had their
populating the convict-ships and prisons'. The spectators of die glory; broadsheers recalled the crimes of those one saw pass; news
lower classes, as at ,he time of the public executions, kept up their papers provided their names and recounted their lives; sometimes
ambiguous exchanges with the convictS, alternating insults, threats, they provided a description of their persons and dress, so that their
words of encouragement, blows, signs of hate or complicity. Some identiry might nor pass unno<iced: like programmes for spectators.•
thing violent aroused and accompanied the procession along itS People also came to examine different types of criminals, ,rying tO
entire course: anger againsl a justice that was too severe or too decide, according ro facial appearance or dress, rhe 'profession' of
indulgent; shoutS against the detested criminals; movements in the convict, whether he was a murderer or thief: it was a game of
favour of prisoners one knew and greeted; confrontations wilh ihe masquerades and marionnenes, which was also, for more educa1ed
police: 'During the whole journey from the Fontainebleau barrier, eyes, somed\irlg of an empirical ethnogr•phy of crime. From spec
groups of enraged spectators hurled insults at Delacollonge: Down tacles on trestles 10 Gall's phrenology, according to the milieu to
with the priest, they said, down· wiih rhat hateful man; he should which one belonged, one practised the semiologies of crime at one's
have got his deserts. Wi1hout the energy and firmness of the muni disposal: 'Physiognomies ace as varied as clothes: here a majestic
cipal guard, serious disorders could have taken place. At Vaugirard, head, a Murillo face; there a vicious face, framed with thick eyebrows,
259

t'nson 111egallt.1easn d delinquency
which convey all the energy of the determined villain .. , ElsewhrH! 1ecciving,b ut which were addressed to him, and the ridicule that
the head of a Fagin emerges from the body of an urchin. Here"" brought baak, under the appearances of another criminal, the priest
the smooth, feminine features of accomplices; there the glautl, 1hncb e was and would have liked to have concealed. His passion
debauched faces,o f teachers.'• 'the convicts themselves respondp~ was laid out before his eyes, by a buffoon murderer to whom he was
to this game, displaying their crimes and enacting their misdeed, chained.
this was one of the functions o.f tattooing, a vignette of their dl:ed• In every town it passed through, the cbain•gang brought its
or their fate: 'They bear the insignia.o f their crimes, either a guillo festival with it; ir was a saturnalia of punislunenc, a penalty turned
tine tattooed on their left aims, or on their chests a dagger plunged Into a privilege. And, by a very curious tradition which seems to
into a bleeding heart.' As rhey passed, they mimed the scenes of tbdr have escaped ,he ordinary rites of the public execution, it aroused
crimes, mocking the judges or the pplice, boasting of as yet un In the convict not so much the compulsory marks of repentance as
discovered deeds of wickedness. Fransois, Lacenaire's former accom. the explosion of a mad foy that denied the punishment. To the
plice, said that he had invented a method for killing·• man without ornaments of the collar and chain, the convicts themselves added
making him cry our and without spilling a single drop of blood. ribbons, bra.ideds traw, Rowers or precious stuffs. The,chain was the
The great travelling fair of crime had irs tumblers and its mummers, round and the dance; it was also a coupling, a forced marriage in
in which the comic affirmation of truth answered curiosity and invec forbidden love. Wedding, festival and rite in chains: 'They ran in
tive. A whole series of scenes, in this summer of 1836, took p)aqc front of the chains, bunches of flowers in thcir hands, ribbons or
around Delacollonge: his crime (he had cut his pregnant misrres, straw tassels decorated their caps and the. most skilful made crested
into pieces) was made much more spectacular by rhe fact that he helmets. .. Others wore open-work stockings and clogs or ~
was a priest; this facr had also saved him from ,he scaffold. It seems fashionable waistcoat, uhder a workman's smock.'' And throughout
that he aroused considerable hate among the people. Earlier, in the the evening that followed the rivetiog, the chain-gang formed a
cart that had l>rought him to Paris in June , 836, he had been insulled great merry-go-round, which went round and round the courtyard
and had been unable ro hold back his tears; however, he had of Bici!tre: 'Woe betide the warders if the chain-gang recognized
expressed a wish not to be conveyed in a closed carriage.,b eHeving them; they were enveloped and drowned in its rings; the prisoners
that the humiliation formed part of his punishment. As he left remained masters of the field of battle until nightfall.'' The convicts'
Paris, 'one cannor imagine the virtuous indignation, the moralanger Sabbath corresponded to we ceremonial of justice through the
and base actions unleashed by the crowd on this man; he was spectacle it invented. 11 inverted the splendours, the order of power
covered with earth and mud; stones and insults rained down upon and its signs, the forms of pleasure, But something of the political
him from the furious bystanders ... It was an explosion of un Sabbath was not far away. One would have had to be very deaf
paralleled rage; the women above all, like veritable furies, displayed indeed not 10 bear somerhing of these new accents. The convicts
an unbelievable exaltation of hate' (La Phalange, r August 1836). sang marching songs, which .rapidly became famous and were
For his protection, his clothes had to be changed. Certain spectators repeated everywhere for a long time after. No doubt an echo was
were misled by this and thought that Fransois was he. Fran,;ois to be found in them of the complaints that the b'roadsheets attributed
entered into the spirit of the game and accepted the role; but, 10 the 10 criminals - an affirmation of the crime, a black heroizacion, an
comedy of the crime that he did not commit, he added that of the evocation of terrible punishments and of the general hare that
priest that he was not; to the account of 'his' crime, he added the surrounded them: 'Renown, let the trumpets blow for us• ••
prayers and broad gestures of blessing directed at the jeering crowd. Courage children, let us submit without fear 10 the terrible fate
A few steps away, the real Delacollonge, 'who seemed like a martyr', that hangs over our beads ... Our chains are heavy, but we will
was undergoing the double affront of the insults that he was not be.,, them. For the convicts, no voice rises 10 say, relieve them of
26o

l'rison llleg;ilities and dehnquency
their suffering.' Yet there was in tbose collective songs a totally,,. •p;llation that had always surrounded the public executions now
tonality; the moral code, which most of the old complaints obty fiiund an echo in precise threats. One can see why the July monarchy
was _rev~rsed.I nstead of bringing remors~, torture sharpened prhl ,lecicledt o abolish the chain-gang for the same - but more pressing
the JllSnce that brought the sentence was rejected, and the ctn ttasons that brought about, in the eighteenth century, the abolition
that came to witness what it believed 10 be repenta.noeo r humill~rl uf the public executions: 'It is no part of our morality to trear men
was scom,ed; 'So, far from our homes, we sometimes moan. lh Int his way; one must avoid providing in the towns that the convoy
stem brows will make our judges blench ... Avid of misforru 11•ssesth rough so hideous' a spectacle, which, in any case, teaches
you rum your eyes upon us, hoping Lof ind a blighted, humilioto the population nothing' (G"{ette des tdhunpwx, 19 July 1836). It
tea.rful race. But there is pride in our eyes.' One also finds ti was necessary, therefore, to break witl1 these public rites; to subject
assertion that the convict's life with its companionship has pleasu the movements of convicts 10 the same mutation as the punishments
that liberty cannot know. 'With time let us link our pleasures. Unrl, themselves; and 10 bring them, too, under the veil of administrative
lock and key feast days will be born ... Pleasures are turncooi decency.
They will flee the executioners; they follow where die song lenrl, But what, in June 1837,w as adoptecho replace tlie chain-gang was
And, above all, the present order will not last forever; not only will not the simple covered cart, which had been suggested at one time,
the convicts be freed and resu.met heir rights, bur their a~cusers will but a machine that had been very meticulously designed: a ca;riagc
take their place. Between the criminals and their judges, the day or conceived as a moving prison, a mobile equivalent of the Panopricon.
the great reverse judgement will come: 'The contempt of man A central corridor divided it along its entire length: on either side
bdongs to u_sc onvi~rs. The gold ,they worship is also ours. One duy, were six cells in which the two rows of convicrs sat facing one
this gold will pass mto our hands. We will buy it with our live-. nnotl1er.T heir feet were pla~ed in rings that were lined on the inside
Others will seize these chains that today you make us bear; they will with wool and linked together by chains eighteen inches long; tile
b~com~ slaves. As we break out of our shackles, the star of Bberiy legs were secured in metal knee-guards. The convict sat on a .kind
w,11s hine for us ... Farewell, for we brave both your chains and of 'zinc and oak funhel that emptied onto the public way'. The coll
your laws.'• The pious theatre imagined by the broadsheets, In had no window onto the outside; it was completely lined with sh®t
which the convict exhorted the crowd never to imitate him wu, iron; only a ventilator, also of sheet-iron, with holes pierced in it,
. '
bee ommg a threatening scene in which the crowd was asked w allowed a 'suitable Row of air'. On the comdor side, die door of
choose between the barbarity of the executioners, the injustice of the each cell was provided with a hatch, divided into 1woc ompartmen!fli
judges and rhe misfortune of convicts who, though def~ated today one for food, the other, covered by a grill, for surveillance. 'Thr
would triumph one day. • opening a.nd the oblique direction of the hatches were so arranged
The great spectacle of the chain-gang was link,ed with the old that the warders had the prisoners constantly in view and heard
tradition of the public execution; irwas also lin~ed with that multiple every word they spoke, though the prisoners themselves wen,
representation of crime that gave rise at the time to newspapers, unable to see or hear one another.' In tbis way, 'the same carrin11r
broadsheets, mountebanks and street theatres;' but it was also linked may, without the slightest inconvenience, 'contain at one and 1hr
same timea convict and a.s impleo ffender,m ena nd women, childre,,
with th~ confrontations and struggles whose first rumblings it con
veyed; It gave them a kind of symbolic outlet: though vanquished and adults. Whatever the length of the journey, all would bp
by the law, the army of disorder promised to return; what the brough~ to their destination without having been able to perceiv•
violence of order had driven away would overthrow that order and one another or to speak 10 one anot\!er.' Lastly, the constant sur
bring liberty on its ·remrn. 'I was h orrified to see so many sparks veillance of the two warders, who were-eacl1a rmed with a small oak
reappear in those ashes' (L, Dernier jour d'un. condomni). The club, 'with thick nails of crushed diamond' made it possible 1n
J.6J

l"'r1son lllegat1t1esa nc1a eunquency
operate a w.bole system of punishments in confonnity with !hr tion, then the recognition of its failure; then the slow rise of projects
internal regulation of the carriage: a diet of bread and water, thumb of reform seeming ro culminate in the more or less coherent
screws, lack of a cushion that would allow one to sleep, chains on deliohion ~f penitentiary technique; then the implementation of this
both arms. 'Any reading other than that of books of morality is project; lastly, the recognition of its successes or its failure. There
forbidden.' was in faat a telescoping or in any case a different distribution of
If only for its mildness and speed, this machine 'would bave,donc these elements. And, just as the project of a cor,ective technique
honour to 1he sensibility of its author'; but its merit lay in the fact accompanied clie principle o.f punitive detention, the critique of the
that it was a veritable penitentiary carriage. By its external effects, prison and illlm ethods appeared very early on, in tl1ose same Y:"15
it had a quite Benthami1e perfection: 'In -die rapid passage of this 1810-41; indeed, ir was embodied in a number of formula11ons
mobile prison which, on its dark, silent flanks, bears no other which - figures apart - are today repeated almost unchanged.
inscription than the following words - Transport of Convicts - - Prisons do not diminish the crime ra1e: they can be .extended,
there is something mysterious and gloomy, which Bentham requires multiplied or transformed, the quantity of crime and criminals
in the carrying out of criminal sentences and which leaves in ,he remains stable or worse, increases: 'In France, one calculates a.t
1
minds of onlookers a more salutary and lasting impression than the about 108,000t he number ofindividuals who are in a state offfagrant
sight of those cynical and joyous travellers' (Gatette <ks uil,Uftaux, hostility 10 society. The means of repression at one's disposal are;
15 June 1837). It also had internal effects; even in a journey lasting the scaffold, ·the iron-collar, three convict-ships, 19m aisonscentrales,
only a few days (dttring-which the inma1esJiad not been detached 86 maison.sd t. justice, -361 maiso,isd 'arTet, 2,800 cantonal prisons,
for a single moment), it functioned as an apparatus of correction. 2 238 cells in police stations. Despite all rhese, vice goes unchecked.
One emerged from· it astonishingly calm: 'From a moral point of The number ofc rimes is not'd.iminishing ... 1benumber of recidiv
view, chis tran3portation, which Jasts no more than seventy-two ists is increasing, rather than declining' (La Ftaterniti, no . .10,
hours, is a terrible torture whose effects on the prisoner seem to be February 1842).
lasting.' The ~onvicts themselves support this vieiv: 'In the cell - Detention causes recidivism; those leaving prison ha,ve more
carriage, when y.ou don't sleep, you can only think. And when I chance than before of going back 10 it; convicts arc, in a very high
thought, I came to regre, what t had done; in ,he end, you see, I proportion, former inmates; 38 per cent of those who left me maisons
would have been afraid 10 mend my ways and I don't wanr 10.'• cent.talesw ere convicted again and 33 per cent of those senr to con
The panoptic carriage had only a short history. Yet the way in vict-ships (a figure give11b y G. de Rochefoucauld qunng the debare
which it replaced the chain-gang and ,he reasons for this replacement on the refonn of the penal code, 2 December r8JI, Archivesp arle
recapitulated ,he whole process by which in eighcy years penal meruair<sL, XXll, 209-10); between 1828 and 1834, out of almost
detention replaced public execution as a calcu.la1edt echnique for 35;000 convicted of crime, about 7,400 were recidivists (that is,
altering individual behaviour. The cell-carriage was an apparatus of 1 out of 4"7 of ibose convicted); out o( over UXJ,oooc orrewoMl.r,
reform. What replaced the public execution was nor a massive or petcy offenders, almost 35,000 were also recicl,ivists( 1 out of 6);
enclosure, it was a carefully articulated disciplinary mechanis(ll - ar in ail, one recidivist out of 1·8 of those convicted (Ducperiaux, 1837,
least in prrnciple. 276ff); in 1831, outofi,174 of those condemned for recidivism, 350
had been in convict-ships, , ,682. in mqisons ct.,urale.s J , 42 in four
For the prison, in its reality and visible effects, was denounced at maisonsd e,c orrectio"t hat followed the same regime as the central<s
once as die grear failure of penal justice. In a very strange way, 1be (Ducpetiaux, 1837, 276fl'). And the diagnosis became even more
history of imprisonment does not obey a chronology in which one · severe during the July monarchy: in 1835, out of 7,223 convicted
sees, in orderly succession, the establishment of a penality of de ten- criminals, r,486 were recidivists; in 1839, , ,749 ourof?,858; in 1844,

t'rJson 111egaunesa na aeunqut:111,,;y
1,811 out of 7,195. Among the 980 prisoners at Loos, there were 570 like the slaves, by entrepreneurs and bought by manufacturers. , •
recidivists and, atMelun, 745 outofi,008 prisoners (Ferrus,363--7) Is this how we reach our pdsoners honesty? Are they not still more
Instead of releasing corrected individuals, tben, the prison wo, demoralized by these example,so f abominable exploi1ation?'•
setting loose a swarm of dangerous delinqueni:s throughout ,hr - The prison makes possible, even encourages, the organization
population: '7,000 persons handed back·each year tci·society. .. they of a milieu of delinquents, loyal 10 one another, hierarchized, ready
are 7,000 principles of crime or corruption spread throughout ,1,r to aid and aberany future criminal act: 'Society prohibits associa
social body.And, when one diinks that this population is consramly tions of more than twenty persons ... and it constitutes for itself
increasing, ,hat -it live.s and moves around us, ready to seize every associations of ,200, 50;0,] ,200 convicts in the maisoris c11mralu,
opportunity of disorder, 10 avail itself of every crisis in society w which are constructed for them ad hoc, al)d which it divides up rnr
try out its strength, can one remain unmoved by such a spectadet' their great.er convenience into workshops, courtyards, dormitoric1,
(Beaumont and Tocqueville, 22-3). refectories, where they can all .meet together •.. And it multipllo•
- The prison cannot fail to produce delinquents. Ir does so by ,hem across Fra11cei n such a way that, where there is a priM111,
the very type of existence that it imposes on its inmates: whether ,here is an association .. , and as many anti-social clubs' (Moro,,u·
they are isolated in cells or whcrhtr ,hey are given useless work, Christophe, 7). And it is in these clubs that the education of 1h,
for which they will find no employmcnr, it is,' in any case, not 't(J young first offender takes place: 'The first desire that is born whhln
think of man in society; it -ist o create an unnatural, useless and dan him wiU be 10 learn from his cleverer seniors how to escape I lir
gerous existence'; the prison should educate its inmates, bur can a rigours of the law; the first lesson will be derived from the ~irit,
system of education addressed co man reasonably have as its objeo, logic of thieves who regard society as an enemy; the morality will
ro_acr against the wishes of nature? (Lucas, I, u7 and 130). The be the informing and spying honoured in our prisons; the 11111
pnson .also produces delinquents by imposing vlolenr constraimi passion to be aroused in hi!Tlw ill be 10 frighten the young mind hy
on its inmates; it is suppqsed to apply the law, and 10 teach respect these monsters that must have been born in the dungeon and whlrh
for it; but all its functioning operates in the form of an abuse of the pen refuses to name. .. Henceforth he has broken with every
power. The arbitrary power of admin.istration: 'The feeling of in thing that has pound him to society' (L' Almanac!t popu/hir, ,/,
justice that a prisoner has is one of the causes that may make his France, 49-56). Faucher spoke of 'barracks of crime'.
character untamable. When he sees himself exposed in this wa.y 10 - The conditions to which the fi;-eei nmates are subjected ll<'tl
suffering, which the law has neither ordered nor envisaged he sarily condemn them to recidivism: they are ·under the survcillunc4
I
!x'Comes habimally angry against everything around him; he sees of the police; they are assigned to a particular residence, or forbirli1 1•11
every agent of authority as an executioner; he no longer 1hinks that others; '.they leave prison with a passport that they must show ovrt\
he was guilty: he accuses justice itself' (Bigot Preameneu). Corrup where they go and which mentions the sentence that they hov•
tion, fear and the inefficiency of the warders: 'Between 1,000 and served' (Barbe Marbois, 17). Being on the loose, being unable 1111111,I
1,500 convicts live under the surveillance of between rl1irty and work, leading the life of a vagabond are the most frequent fact1in l11
forty supervi.sors, who can preserve some kind of security only by recidivism. The Gazeue des eribunaux, but also the workers' n~w
depending on informers, thar is co say, on the corruption that they papers, regularly cited cases like that of the '\','Orkerc onvictcil "'
carefully sow themselves. Who ar~ these warders? Retired soldiers, theft, placed under su~veillance at Rouen, caµglu again for 1IM1,
men uninstructed in their task, making a trade of guarding male and whom no lawyers would defend; so he took it upon himsell '"
factors' (La Fracemiti, March 1842). Exploirmion by penal labour speak .before the court, told the story of his life, explained how, '•II
which can in these conditions have no educational character: 'On~ leaving prison and forced to reside in a particul~r place, ho w,;
inveighs against the slave-trade, Bur are not our prisoners sold, unable to take up his trade as a gilder, since as an ex-convict lit• 11'•1<
266

Prison U.lt!bauues anu ueunqut:ncy
turned down wherever he went; the police refused him the right 10 principles, of which, such wonderful results are still expected tod11y,
seek work elsewhere: he found himself unable t0 leave Rouen, with are well enough known: for the past 150 years they have coosrl1111c,I
nothing to do but die of hunger and poverty as a result of this the seven universal maxims of the good 'penitential condition'.
tel'J'ibles urveillance. He went to the town hall and asked for work; I, Penal detention must have as its essential function the tron111
for eight days he was gi.ven work in the cemeteries for fourteen sous formation of the individual's behaviour: 'The reform of the convict
a day: 'But,' he said, 'I am young, I have a good appetite, [ eat mote as the principal aim of the penalty is a sacred principle whose fonnijl
than two pounds of bread a day at five sous a pound; what can I do appearance in 1he domain of science and above all in that of legislu
with fourteen sous ro feed myself, wash .my clothes and find lodging/ tion is quite recent' ('Congres penitentiaire de Bruxelles', 1847).
I was driven 10 despair, I wanted to become an honest man again; And the Amor commission, of May 1945, faithfully repeats: 'Tltr
the surveillance plunged me back into misfortune. J became dis penalty drat deprives of liberty has as its essential aim the reformn
gusted with everything; it was then that I met Lemaitre, who was ti~m ~d social .rehabilitation of the convict.' The principle of
also a pauper; we had 10 live and wicked thoughts of thieving came corr~uon.
back to us.'•• 2. Convicts must be isolated or at least distributed according 10
-LaStly, the prison indirectly produces delinquents by throwing the penal graYity of their act, but above all according to age, menml
the inmate's family into destitution: 'The same order that sends the attitude, the technique of correction to be used, tl1e stages of their
head of the family 10 prison reduces each day 1he mother to destitu ttansfqrmation. '"Onem ust take into account, in usjng methods for
tion, the children to abandonment, the whole family to vagabondage altering the great physical and moral differences to be found in rhe
and begging.1 t is in this way that crime can take root' (Lucas, TJ6, 4). characters of convic,s, their degree of perversity, the unequal
ft should be noted that this monotonous critique of the prison opportunities for correction that they may offer' (February, 1850).
always rakes one of two directions: either that the prison was in .. 1945: 'The distribution in the penitentiary establishmen,s of indivi
suffic:iemly corrective, and t~at the penitentiary technique was still duals serving a light sentence of up to one year is based on sex,
at the rudimentary stage; or that in auempting to be corrccti vc it personality anil the degree of perversion of the delinquent.' Tliep r,n
ciple ofc/a.s,ijicanoµ.
lost its power as punishment, 11 that the true penitentiary technique_
was rigour, 11 and that prison was a double economic error: directly, J· lt must be possible 10 alter the penalties according to tl\e
by its intrinsic cos, and, ind.irecdy, by the cost of the delinquency individuality of the convkts, the tesuJts that have been obtaine~
that it did not abolish.'' The answer 10 these criticisms was invariably progress or ·relapses. 'Since the principal aim of the penalty is the
the same: the reintroduction of the invariable principles of peniten reform of the convicr, it is desirable that any convict whose moral
tiary technique. For a century and a half the prison had always been regeneration is sufficiently assured should be set free' (Lucas, 1838),
offered as i,s own remedy: the reactivation of ,he penitentiary 1945,:' A progressive regime is applied ... with a view to adapting
techniques as the only means of overcoming their perpetual failur~; the treatment of the prisoner to his attitude and t0 bis degree of
the realization of the corrective project as the only method of over improvement. This regime stretches from solitary confinement to
coming the impossibility of implementing it. semi-liberty ... The benefit of parole is extended to all penalties
This is shown conclus,vely in the fact that the prisoners' revol,s involving a term of imprisonment.' The pr1i1ciploef ,ft, modulation
of peiuiltie,.
of recent weeks* have been attriiiu1ed to the fact that the reforms
proposed in 1945 never really wok effect; that one must therefore 4. Work must be one of the essential elements in the transforma
return to the fundamental principles of the prison. But these tion and progressive so~ialization of convicts. Penal labour 'must
not be regarded as-the complement and as it were an aggravation
• A series of_uprisings in French prisons, between r972 and 1974, in
protest against living conditions. of the penalty, but as a mitigation, of which it is no longer possible

.Cll:::.VJI .wega11aesa na oeunquency
to deprive the prisoner'. Ir must enable him to lea.rn or to practise" One must not, tberefote,. regard the prison, its 'failure' and its
trade, and tQ provide the prisoner and his family with a source of rnore or Jess successful reform as three successive stages. One
income (Ducpetiaux, 1857). t94F 'Every common-law prisoner i• should think rather of a simultaneous system that historically has
obliged co work ... No prisoner may be forced to remain u.noccu• been superimposed on the juridical deprivation ofliberty; a fourfold
pied.' The principleo f work cu obligationa nd right. system comprising: the additional, disciplinary element of the prison
I· The education of the prisoner is for the authorities both or, - the element of 'super. .p ower'; the production of an objectivicy., a
indispensable precaution in the interests of society and an obligatlo11 technique, a penitentiary 'rationality'· - the element of au,ciliary
to the prisoner. 'Educarion alone may serve as -a penitentia,y knowledge; the dt facto reintroduction, if not actual increase, of a
instrument. The question of penitenriary imprisonment is a question criminality thar the prison ought to destroy - the element of in•
of education' (Lucas, 1838). 1941: 'The treatment 111e1eodu t co thr verted efficiency; lastly, the repetition of a 'reform' d1at is isomor•
prisoner, outside any com,pting promiscuity ... musr be directed phic, despite i1s 'idealism', with 1he disciplinary functioning of the
principally to his general and professional instruction and to hi~ prison - 1he elemem of urnpian dup1ication. [t is this complex
improvement.'T he princi'pleo. f p~nitentiarye .d{lca:iOn. ensemble that constitutes thB 'carceral system', not only the insthu ..
6. The prison regime must, at least In part, be supervised and tion of the prison, with. its walls, its staff, its regulations and its
administered by a specialized staff possessing the moral qualities and violence. The carceral system combines in a single figure discourses
technical abilities required of educators. In 1850, on the subject of and architectures, coercive regulations and scientific propositions,
prison medicine; F errus remarked: 'It is a useful addition to all real social effects and invincible utopias, programmes for correcting
forms of imprisonment ... no one could possess more intimately delinquents and mechan.isms that reinforce delinquency. Is not the
than a physician the trusr of the prisoners, know their characters supposed failure part of the functioning of the prison? Is it not to
better, influence their mental attitudes more effectively, while reliev be included among d1ose effects of power that discipline and the
ing their physical ills and, by 1his means, reJ?rimand or encourage auxiliary technology of imprisonment havdnduccd in the apparatus
as he thinks fit: 1945: 'In every penitentiary establishment, there of justice, and in society in general, and which may be grouped
functions a social and medico-psychological service.' T/1, prir1cipk together under rhe name of 'carceral system'? If the prison-institu
of the t~dmical; supe_rvisioonf de.u.ruUm. tion has survived for so long, with such immobility, if the principle
7. Imprisonmenr must )le followed by measures of supervision and of penal detention has never seriously been questioned, it is no
assistance until the rehabili1ation of rhe 'former prisoner is complete. doubt because this carceral system was deeply rooted and carried
Not only must he be pla.ced under surveillance on I.caving prison, out cercain very precise functions. As evidence of this strength and
'but he must be given help and suppon' (Boulet and Benquot at the immobility, let us take a recent fact: the model prison opened at
Chambre de Paris). 1945: 'Assistance is given to prisoners during Fleury-Merogis in 1969 simply rnok over in its overall plan the
and after imprisonment with a view 10 facilitating their rehabilita panoptic star-shape that made such a stir in 1836 at the Petite
tion: TIHp: rinciple of auxiliary in.stizutions. Roquette. It was the same machinery of power that assumed a real
Word for word, from one century to the other, rhe same funda body and a symbolic form. But what role was it supposed to play?
mental propositions are repeated. They reappear in each new, hard
v,on, finally accepted formulation of a reform that has hitherto If the law is supposed to define offences, if rhe function of the
always been lacking. The same sentences or almost the same could penal apparatus is td reduce them and if the prison is the instrument
have been borrowed from other 'fruitful' periods of reform; the end o( this repression, d1enf ailure has 10 be admitted. Or rad1er- for in
of the ninereenth century and the 'movement of social defence'; or order to establish it in historical terms, one must be able to measure
again, the last few years, with the prisoners' revolts. the effectS of the penaliry of detention on the overall level of

rnson 111egal1t1easn d delinquency
criminality- one should be surprised thar for ,he pas, t 10 year.i thr The general schema of penal reform had taken shape.at the end of
procla!IJation 6f the failure of tl1c prison has always been ;iccom the eighteenth century in the struggle against illegalities: a whole
panied by its maintenance. Ti)e only ·ahemaiive acrually envisaged equilibrium of tolerance, mutual support and interests which, under
was deporration, which England abandoned at the beginning of thr the Ancien Regime, had maintained the illegalities of different social
nineteenth cenrury and which Fr anee 100k up under the Second strata side by side, was disrurbed. There then emerged the utopia of
Empire, but rather as a rigorous and distant form of imprisonl'!lem. a universally and publicly -punitive society in which ceaselessly
Bu, perhaps one should reverse ,he problem and ask oneself whnt active penal mechanisms would function without delay, mediation
is set'.Vedb y the failure of the prison; what is the use of 1hesed ifferent or uncertainty; one law, doubly ideal because perfect in its calcula
phenomena ,hat are continually being criticized; ,he maintenance of tions and engraven on the minds of each citizen would stop, at their
delinquency, the encouragement ofrecidivism, the transformation or very origin, all practices of illegality. Now, at -the rum of the
the occasional.offender imo a habitual delinquent, the organizatio11 eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and against the new codes, the
of a closed milieu of delinqueng,. Perhaps one.should look for wl\ar danger of a new popular illegality arose. Or, to be more precise,
is hidden beneath the apparent cynicism of the penal institution, perhaps the popular illegalities began 10 develop according to new
which, after purging the convicts by means of their sentence, con• dimensions: those that were introduced by the movements which,
tinues to follow them by a whole series of 'brandings' (a survelllancc from the 17Sos to the Revolutions of 1848, Linked together social
that was once d, jure an'd which is today de facto; the police record conflicts, the struggles against the political regimes, the resistance
that has taken the place of the convict's passport) and which thus 10 the movement of industrialization, the effects of the economic
pursues as a 'delinquent' someone who has acquitted himself of his crises. Broadly speaking, there were three characteristic processes.
punishment as an offender? Can we not see here a consequence First, the development of the political dimension of the popular
rather than a contradiction? If so, one would be forced 10 suppose illegalities. This occurred iri rwo ways: hitherto localized practices,
thar the prison, and no doubt punishment in general, is·nor intended limited in some sense t9 themselves (like the refusal to·pay taxes and
to eliminate offences, but rather to ,;listinguisb them, 10 distribute rents or -ro comply with conscription; the violent confiscation of
them, to use them; ,hat it is not so much that they render docil~ hoarded goods; the looting of shops and the forced selling of pro•
those who are liable to transgress the law, but that they t,end 10 ducts ;t a 'fair price'; confrontations with the represenratives of
assimilate the transgression of the laws in a general tactics of subjec• power), were able during the Revolution to lead 10 directly political
tion. Penalitywould then appear to be a way of handling illegalities, struggles, whose aim was,n,ot simply to excract concessions from the
of laying down the limits of tolerance, of giving free rein to so111e, state or to rescind some intolerable measure, but 10 change the
of putting pressure 011 others, of excluding a particular section, of governmem. and ,he very sµucrure of power. On the other hand,
making another •useful, of neutralizing. certain individuals and or certain political movements were explicitly based on existing forms
profiting from others. In short, penality does not simply 'check' of illegaliry(for example, the royalist agitation of the west and south
illegalities; it 'differentiates' them, it provides them with a general of France•used ,he peasants' rejection of the new laws on property,
'economy'. And, if one can speak of justlce, it is not only bee•= religion and conscription); this political dimension of illegality was
the law itself or the way of applying it serves the interests of a clas~, it to become more complex and more marked in the relations berween
is also because the differential administration of illegalities thrcough the workers' movement and the republican parries in the nineteenth
the mediation of penality forms part or'those mechanisms of dothina• cenrury, in die passage from the workers• struggles (strikes, pro
tion. Legal punishments are· ti> be resiruated in an overall strategy hibited coalitions, illegal associations) 10 political revolution. Tna ny
of illegalities. The 'failure' of the prison may be understood on this case, on the horizon of these illegal practices - which multiplied with
basis. ever more restrictive legislarion - there emerged struggles of a
I

1-'nson rnegaum:s ana aeunquency
strictly political kind; the possible overthrow of power. was no, derailed techniques of surveillance, increased the occasions of
pr0$e0t in all of them, far from it; but a good many were able to turn offences,a nd threw to the other side of the law many individuals, who,
themselves 10 account in overall political strugg.les and sometimes in other conditions, would not have gone over 10 specialized
even to lead directly to them. criminality; itis against the background of the new laws of property,
On the -other hand, through the rejection of the 'law or other against the background, 100, of unacceptable conscription that a
regulations, it is easy enough 10 recognize ,he struggles against those peasant illegality developed in the last years of the Revolution, with
who set them up in ,heir own interests: people were no longer a consequent increase in violence, acts of. aggression, thefts, looting
fighting against ·the tax farmers, financiers, ,he king's agents, pre and even the greater forms of 'political brigandage'; it was also
varicating .magistrates or bad ministers - all the agents of injustice - against a background of legislation or very heavy regulacions ( con
but against the law. i,self and the justice whose rask it was ,o apply cerning the livret, Qrs ervice certificater, ems, hours,a bsencesf rom
it; against local landowners who introduced new rights; against work) that a· workers' vagabondage developed that often crossed
employers who worked 10gerher, but forbade workers' coalitions; the boundary into actual delinquency. A whole series of illegal
against entrepreneurs who inrroduced more machines, lower wages practices,.which during the previous century had tended to remain
and longer working hours, and made the fac10ry regulations more isolated from one another, now-seemed to come together to form. a
and more strict. 1tw as against the new regime of landed property - new 1hreat.
set up by a bourgeoisie that profited from the Revolution - that a There was a threefold diffusion of popular i.llegalitiesa t the rurn
whole peasant illegality developed. This no doubt assumed its most of the century (quite apart ftom a quantitative extension that is
violent forms between Thermidor and the Consulate, but it did not problematic and still uncalculated): 'their insertion in a general
disappear then; it was against the new system of the legal exploita political outlook; their explicit articulation on social struggles; a
tion of labour 1ha1w orkers' illegalities at the beginning of the nine communication between different forms and levels of offences.
teenth century developed: from the most violent such as machine These processes may not have reached their full development;
breaking,o r the most lasting such as the formationo f associations-, certainly there did not develop at the beginning of the nineteenth
to the most everyday, such as absenteeism, abandoning wQrk, century a massive movement of illegality that was both political and
vagabondage, )O\ilferingra w materials, deception _ast o the quantity social. Bur, in their emerging form and despite their dispersal, they
and quality of the work completed. A whole series of illegalities were sufliciently marked 10 serve as a support for the 'great fear'
was inscribed in struggles in which those struggling knew that of a people who were believed 10 be criminal and seditious as a
they were confronting both the law and the class that had im whole, for the myth of a barbaric, immoral and outlaw class which,
posed it. from the empire 10 the July monarchy, haunted the discourse of
Lastly, although it is true that, during the eighteenth century, legislators, philanthropists and investigators into working-class life.
criminality tended towards more specialized forms, inclining more It is these processes that are to be found behind a whole serfes of
and more to the skilful theft, and became, m some extent, the prac affirmations that are quite alien ro the penal tl1eory of the eighteenth
cice of men on the fringes ofsociery, isolated from a population that cenn~ry:t hat crime is not a potenrialityt hat inrerestso r passions
was hostile to them - one sees, in the last years of the eighteenth have inscribed in the hearts of all men, but that it is almost exclu
century, the reconstituti1m of certain links o, the establishment of sively committed by a certain social class; that criminals, who were
new relations; not, as contemporaries said, that the leaders of popular once 10 he mer with in every s0cial class, now emerged 'almost all
agitation had been criminals, but because the new forms of law from the bottom rank of the social order' (Comte, 49); that 'nine
1
the rigours of the )about regulati'ons, the demands either of the tei1ths of murderers, thieves and idlers come from what we have
state, or of the landowners, or of the emplqyers, and ,he most called the social base' (Lauvergne, 337); that it is not crime that
175

rqson 111egallt1eas nd delinquency
alienates an individual from society, but that crime is itself due rather ity, irreducible at a certain level ·and secretly useful, at once refrac
to the fact that one is in society as an alien, that one belongs 10 thai tory and docile; it isolates, outlines, brings out a form of illegality
'bastardized race', as Target called it, co that 'class degraded by that seems to sum up symbolically all the others, bur which makes it
misery whose vices stand like an invincible obstacle to the generous possible to leave in 1.hes hade those that one ,.,;,hes to - or must·
intentions that wish to combat it' (Bure, 391); 1ha1,i his being the tolerate. This fonn is, strictly speaking, delinquency. One should
case, it would be hypocritical or naive to believe that the law was not see in delinquency the rriost intense, most harmful form of
made for all in the name of all; that it would be more, prudent 10 illegality, the form that the penal apparatus must fry to eliminate
recognize that it was made for the few and thar it was brought to through imprisonment because of the danger it represents; it js
bear upon others; that in principle it applies to all citizens, bur that rather an effect of penality (and of the penality of derention) that
it is addressed principa1ly to the mosr numerous and least enlight makes it possible 10 differentiate, accommodate and supervise
ened classes; thac, unlike political and civil laws, their application illegalities. No doubt delinquency is a form of illegality; certainly
does not concern eve'3/body equally (Rossi, I, p); that in the courts it has its roots in illegality; but it is an illegality that the 'carceral
society as a whole .does not judge one of its members, but that a system', with all its ramifications, has invested, segmented, isolated,
social category with an interest in order judges another rhat is penet.rated, organized, enclosed in a definite milieu, and 10 which it
dedicated to disorder: 'Visit the places· where people are judged, has given an instrumental role in relation to the other illegalities.
imprisoned or executed. , . One thing will .strike you everywhere; In short, although the juridical opposition is between legality and
everywhere you see two quire distinct classes of men, one of which illegal practice, ,he strategic opposition is between illegalities and
always meets on the seats of the accusers and.judges, the ocher on delinquency,
the benches of the accused', which is explained by ,he fact that the For die observation that prison fails to eliminate crime, one should
latter, for lack_o f .resources and education, do not know fhow to perhaps substitute the hypothesis that prison has succeeded ex
remain 'within the limiis of legal probity' (Lucas, II, 82); so that the tremely well in producing delinquency, a specific type, a politically
language of the lll'W,w hich is supposed ro be universal, is, in this or economically less dangerous - and, on occasion, usable - form
respect, inadequate; it rnusr-,i f it is to be effective,. b'et.h e discourse of illegality; in producing delinquents, in an appareridy marginal,
of one class to another, which has neither the same ideas as it nor but in fact centrally supervised milieu; in producing ,the delinquent
even the same words: 'How. are we, with our prudish, contemptuous as a pathologized subject. The success of the prison, in the struggles
languages, overloaded with formality, to make oursel'vesu nderstood around the law and illegalities, has been 10 specify a 'delinquency'.
by those who have never heard anything but the crude, poor, We have seen how the carceral system substituted the 'delinquent'
irregular, but lively, frank, pictu.resque dialect of the market, the for the offender, and also superimposed upon juridical practice a
tavern and the fair. , . What language, what method should we use whole horizon of possible knowledge. Now this process that con•
when drawing up laws that will act effectively on the uneducated sti1u1es delinquency as an object of knowledge is one with the
minds of those less capable of resisting the temptations of crime?' political Ojlera1ion that dissociates illegalities and isolates delin
(Rossi, I, 33). Law and justice do not hesitate to proclaim their quency from 1hei:nT, he prison is the hinge of these two mechanisms;
necessary class dissymme,ry. it enables them to reinforce one another perpetually, to objectify the
If this is the case, tHe prison, apparently 'failing', does not miss delinquency behind the offence, to solidify delinquency in the move
its target; on the contrary, it readws it~ in so far as it gives rise to ment of illegalities. So successful has the prison been that, after a
one particular form of illegality in the midst of others, which it is cemucy and a half of 'failures', the prison still exists, producing the
able 10 isolate, to place in full light and to organize as a relatively same results, an·d there is the greatest reluctance to dispense
enclosed, but penetrable, milieu. It helps to establish an open illegal- with it.

t-'ason lllegalities and detinque.ncy
The penality of detention seems to fabricate - hence no doubt it• breaking); it,prevents them from leading to broader, more obvious
longevity - an enclosed, separated and useful illegality. The ciniuli forms, rather ;tS thr;,ugh ihe· exemplary effect once expected of the
of delinquency would seem 10 be not che sub-product of a prlsn11 spectacle of die scaffold was now soughr not S!> much in the rigour
which, while punfahing, does not succeed in correcting; it is rathor of the punishmencs, as in the visible, branded existence of delin
the direct effect ·of a penality which, in order co conrrol illcgiil quency itself: while cli!forcntiatingi tself from other popular illegali
practices,s eems co invest certain of ,hem in a mechanismO f1 punish ties, delinquency serves to ke,;p chem in check.
ment-reproduction', of w~ich imprisonment is one of the malr, But delinquene~:has other direct uses. The example of coloniza
parts. But why and how is -tlie prison called upon to participate In tion comes to mind. Yet it is not the most convincing example;
the fabrication of a delinquency that it is supposed to combat? indeed, although the deportation of criminals was demanded qn
The establishment of a delinquency that-constitutes some1hin11 several occasions under the Restoration, either by the Chamber of
like an enclosed illegality has in fact a number of advantages. To Deputies or by the ·c;eneral Cr;,uncils,t his was essentially in order
begin with, it is possible IO' supervise it (by locating individual,, to lighten the financial burdens imposed by the whole apparatus of
infiltrating the group, organizing mutual informing): for ihe vague, detention; and, despite aU the projects that were drawn up under the
swarming mass ofa population practising occ.lsional illegality, which July monarchy for delinquents, undisciplined soldiers, prostitutes
is always likely 10 spread, or again for those loose bands of vag-~• and orphans to take part in the colonization of Algeria, that, colony
bonds, recruiting as they move. from place co place, and accorcjin11 was formally excluded, by the law of 1854, from becoming one of
to circumstances, from the unemployed, beggars, 'bad characten' cheo verseasp 'enac1o lonies; in fact, deportationc o Guianao r Jater
of all kinds, which sometimes reach such proportions_, as we saw•• to New Caledonia had no real economic imporiance, despite ,he
the end of the eighteenth century- as to form formidable force$ fnr obligation imposed on the convicts to remain in the cplony where
a
looting and rioting, is substitutecl relatively small and enclosed they had servea their sentence for a number of years equal 10 rheir
group of'individuals on whom a constant surveillance may be kepi, time of detention (in certain cases, they even had to spend the rest
Moreover, it is pr;,ssible1 0 dh,en this self-absorbed delinquency to of their lives d1ere)." In facr, the use of delinquency as a milieu
forms of illegality that are less dangerous: maintained by the pres, that was both separate and manipulable took place above all on the
sure of controls on the fringes r;,f society, reduced co precarioul fringes of legality, th at is to say, a sort of subordinate illegality was
conditions of existence, lacking links with the population that would also set up in the nineteenth century whose organization as \ielin
be able 10s ustain it (as .w. as once the case with smugglers or certain quency, with all the surveillance that this imp.lies,p rovided a guaran
forms of bandits - cf. Hobsbawm), delinquents inevitably fell back tee of docility. Delinquency, controlled megaliry, is an agent for the
on a localized criminality, limited in i,s power 10 atrract popular illegality of the dominant groups. The setting up o( prostitution
support, politically harmless and economically negligible. Now tlli• networks in the nineteenth century is characteristic in this respect1:5
concentrated, supervised and di~rmed illegality is clirectly useful, police checks and checks on the prostitutes' health, their regular
It may be useful in relatfon tQ other illegalities: isolated from them, stay in prison, the large-scale organization of the rnaisoruc lo;e.so, r
turned inwards upon its o,wn intern~I organization, dedicated co • brothels, the strict hierarchy that was maintained in the prostitution
violent criminality, of which the poorer classes arc often the first milieu, its control by delinquem-i~formers, .. 11t his !)lade it•possiblc
victims, hemmed in on every side by che police, exposed 10 long to canalize and to recover by a whole series of intermediaries die
prison semences, followed :by a permanently 'specialized' life - enormous profits from a sexual pleasure that' an ever-more insistent
delinquency- chisa lien, dangerous and often hostile world obsrruclS everyday monµization condemned t0 semi-clanclestinity: ind natui:ally
or at least maintains ar a sufficiently low level everyday illegal made expensive; in selting up a price for pleasure, in creating a
practices (petty thefts, minor acts of violence, rou,tine acts of law• profit from repressed sexualicy and in collecting this profit, the

Prison Illegalities and delinquency
delinquent milieu was in compliciLy with a self-interested purimn• regarded as dangerous by informers, almost all of whom were
ism: an illicit fiscal agent operating over illegal practices.11 Arm, former delinquents, supervised as such by tbe police: delinquency,
iraf!icking, the illegal sale of alcohol in prohibition couniries, 01 an object among others of police surveillance, is also one of its
more recently drug iraf!icking show a similar functioning of thi1 prtvileged insrruments. All these surveillances presuppose the
'useful delinquency': the existence of a legal prohibition create, organization of a hieratchy; pardy official, partly secret (in 'the Paris
around it a field of illegal practices, which one manages to supervise, police, this was essentiallyt he •securitys ervice', which corilpriscd,
while exiracting from it'1n illicit profit through elements, themselve, apartf rom its •open agent:S-' inspect'?rsa nd sergeants- its 'secre,
illegal, bur ,endered manipulable by th~ir organiz.ation in delin• agents' and informers, who were motivated by fear of punishment
quency. This organization is an instrumem for administering and or the prospect of reward: cf. Fregier,1, 142-8). They also presup
exploiting illegalities. pose the setting up of a documentary system, the _heart of which
It is also an instrument for the illegality with which the very would be the location and identification of criminals: compulsory
exercise of power surrounds itself. The political use of delinquents description of the criminal combined with a.rrestwarrants issued by
as informersa nd agents provocateurs - was a fact well before the 1heassizecour1s,a description included in prison comnlittal registers,
nineteenth century. 11 But, after the Revolution, tllis practice copies of the registers of assize courts and courts of summary
acquired quite different dimensions: the infiltration of political jurisdiction sent each month to the Ministries of Justice and of
partiesa nd workers' associations,t he recruitmento f thugs agains1 General Police, the organization a little later at the Ministry of tl1c
strikers .and -rioters, the organization of a sub-police - working Interior of a cri.minal records offiq, with an alphabetical index con
directly with the legal police and capable if necessary of becoming a taining summaries of tl,ese regisrers, the us.ei n about 1833,a ccording
sort.of parallel army- a whole extra-legal functioning ofpowerwu to the method .of 'naturalists, librarians, .merchants, businessmen' of
partly assured by the mass of reserve labour constituted by the a system of individual cards or reports, which'facilitatcd the integra
delinquents: a clandestine police force and standby army at the tion of new data and, at the·same time, together with the name of the
disposal of the state. It seems that, in France, it was around the individual under investigation, al1 the information that might con
Revolution of 1848 and Louis Napoleon's seizure of power that cern him (Bonneville, 18 44, 92-3)- the appearance of the card-index
these practices reached their beight•(Marx, EighreentAB ruma,.",e.. . , and the constitution of the human sciences are another invention
63-5). Delinquency, solidified by a penal system centred upon the that historians have taken little note of). Delinquency, with the
prison, thus represents a diversion of illegalky for the illicit circuits secret agents that it procures, bur also with the genexalized poHciog
of profit and power of the dominant class. that it autliocizl?S,c onstitutes a means of perpemal surveillance of
The organization of an isolated illegality, enclosed in delinquency, the population: an apparatus tha\. makes, it possible to supervise,
would not have been possible without the development of police through. the delinquents LQemselvest, he whole social field. Delin
supervision. General surveillance of the population, 'silent, mystel'i quency functions as a political observatory. In their rum, the statis
ous, unperceived vigilance ... it is the eye of the government cease ticians and the sociologists have made use ofit, long after the police,
lessly open and "Watchingw ithout distinction over all citizens, _yet But t!u~su rveillance has been able to function only in conjunction
without subjecting them to any measure of coercion whatever ... It with the prison. Because the prison facilitales the supeivisiQn of
does not need to be written into the law' (Bonneville, 1847, 397--9). individuals when they are released, because it makes possible tl1e
Surveillance of individuals, envisaged by rhe cQde of 1810, of ex recruiting ofinformers and multiplies mutual denunciations, because
convil:ts and of all those who, having appeared before the courtS on it brings offenders into contact with one another, it precipitates the
serious charges, were legally presumed to represent a new threat to organization of a delinquent milieu, closed in upon irself, bur easily
the peace of society. But surveillance, too, of milieux and groups supervised: and all the results of non-rehabilitation (unemployment,
280

Prison IUegalities and delinquency
prohibitions on residence, enforced residences, probation) make II Blas of the,other end of the cenrury, who soon rook a turn for the
all too easy for former. prisoners to carry out 11,e tasks cassignc,1 worse: disrurbances, adventures, swindlings, of which be was
to them. Prison and police form a twin mechanism; together they usually himself the victim, brawls and duels;_s uccessive enlistments
assure in the whole field of illegalities the differentiation, isolatlun and desertions,.contacts with prostitution, gambling, pickpocketing
and use of delinquency. In the illegalities, the police-prison sys1e111 and soon large-scale.brigandage. But the al!'llostm ythical importance
segments a manipulable delinquency. This delinquency, with it• that he assumed in the eyes of his ~ontemporaries was based not on
specificity, is a result of the system; but it also becomes a par< an<l this, perhaps embellished past; irwas not'even based on the fact that,
an instrument ofit. So that one should speak of an ensemble whos<' for the first time in history, a former inmate of a convict-ship,
three terms (police-prison-<lelinquency) support one another and redeemed or qui1e simply bought, became a chief of 'police, but
form a circuit that is never interrupted. Police surveillance provide, rather on the fact that, in him, delinquency visibly assumed its
the prison with offenders, which the prison transforms into delin• ambiguous status as an object and instrument for a police apparatus
quents, the targets and auxiliaries of police supervisions, which that worked both against it and with it. Vidocq marks the moment
regularly .send back a certain number of them to prison. when deliquency, detached from other illegalities, was invested by
There is no penal justice intended to prosecu1e-all illegal practices power and turned inside oui. It was then that the direct, institutional
which, to do so, would use the police as an auxiliary and prison as :i coupllng of police and delinquency took place: the disturbing
punitive instrument, and not leave in its wake the unassimilab]o moment when criminality became one of the mechanisms of power.
residue of'delinquency". One should regard this justice as an instru• A figure had haunted earlier· times, that of the monstrous king, the
ment for the differential supervision of illegalities. In relation 10 thi~ source of all justice and yet besmirched with crime; another fear
instrument, crim.inal justice plays the role of legal surety and prin now appeared, that of some dark, secret understanding between
ciple of transmission. Ir is a relay in a general economy of illegalities, those who enforced the law and those who violated it. The Shake
whose other elements are{not below it, but beside it) the police, the spearian age when sovereignty confromed abomination in a single
prison and delinquency. Police encroachment on justice and the character had gone; the everyday melodrama of police power and of
force of inertia that the carcera)i nstitution opposes to ;ustice-are not the complicities that crime formed with power was soon to begin.
new, nor are they the result of a sclerosis or of a gradual shift in Opposite Vidocq stood -his contemporary, Lac;enaire. His pres
power; it is a structural feature chat characterizes punitive mcchan• ence, 3$Sured for ever in the _paradisoer the aestheteso f crime, is
isms in modem societies. The magistrates can say what they like; surprising enough: despite-all his good will, his neophyte"s zeal, he
penal justi~, with all iis theattieal apparatus, is intended 10 respond was only able to commit, and even then with a singular lack ofskill,
10 the daily demand of-an apparams of supervision half submerged no more than a few minor crimes; he was-so strongly suspected of
in the darkness in which police and delinquency are brought to being a police spy that the administration had to protect him against
gether. Judges are the scarcely resisting employees of this appara his feUow prisoners, who tried to kill-him (the charge was formally
llls.1 8 They assist as far as they can in rhe constJmtion of delinquency, taken up by Canler, t 5), and it was t\ie fashionable society of Louis
that is to say, iQ the differentiation of illegalities, in the supervisio11, Philippe's Paris that gave him, before his execution, a feast beside
colonization and use of certain of these illegalities by the illegality which -111anya later literary resurrection has been little more than
of the dominant class. academic homage. His fame owed nothing either to the ex1enr 0£ his
Two figures-stand out as representative of this process, which crimes or to the art of their conception; it was their ineptitude that
developed in the first thirty or forty years of the nineteenth cencury. gave cause f,;,r surprise. But it did owe a great deal to the visible
First, there was Vidocq (cf. his Memoires and Histoire d, Vtdoc play, in what he did and what he said, between illegality and delin
9
,~ontie par lui-mim,). He was a oian 0f the old illegalities, a Gil quency. Swindling, desertion, petty theft, imprisonment, ihe revival
-283

Prison 1ue~11t1e$a no oeunquency
of friendships made in prison, mutual blackmail, recidivism, up to chain-gang and the scandalous demonstrations that accompanied it.
the last, failed attempt at murder - Lacenaire is the typical 'delin These two festivals overlapped in history; and, ind~, Fran~qis,
quent'. But he brought with him, at least potentially, a horizon of Lacenaire's.accomplice, was one of the best-known characters in the
illegalities that had, until quite recently, represented a threat; this chain-gang of 19 July.•• The one extended the ancienrrituals of ,he
ruined petty bourgeois, of good education, would, a generation public e)(ecution at the risk of reactivating popular illegalities around
earlier, have been a revolutionary, a Jacobin, a regicide;1
•
had he been the criminals. It was to be prohibited, fot the criminal was no longer
a contemporary,of Robespierre, his rejection of the law would have to occupy any other space than that appropriate to delinquency.
taken a directly political fonn. Born in 1800, at more or less the The othc,r inaugurated tl1e theoretical play of an illegality of the
same time as Stendhal's Julien Sorel, his charactet bears the rrace privileged; or rather it marked the moment w,hen the political and
of these possibilities; but they wok the form of theft, murder and economic megalities actually p,ractised by the b.ourgeoisie were to
denunciation. All these potentialities became a delinquency of no be duplicated in theoretical and aesthetic representation: the 'Meta
physics of crime', a tenn often associated with Lacenaire. The F rel)ch
grear moment: in this sense L-acenairei s a re.assuring character,
And if these potentialities rea 1 ppear, it is in what he says about the translation of De Quincey's Murder Considereda s Orn,o f rhe Fin•
theory of crime. At the moment of his death, Lacenaire manifested Arts was published in 1849.
the triumph of delinquency qver illegality, or mher the figure of an
illegality, on the one hand, dragged down into delinquency, and, This production of delinquency and its investment by the penal
on the other, displaced towards an aesthetics of crime, that is io say, apparatus must be taken for what ,hey are: not results acquired once
towards an art of the privileged classes. There is a symmetry be• and for all, but tactics thatshifr according to ,how closely they reach
tween Lacenaire and Vidocq, who in the same period, made it their target. The split between delinquency and oilier illegalities, the
possible 10 turn delinquency in upon itself by constituting it as an way in which it is turned back upon the.ro, its colonization by the
enclosed, observable milieu and l>y displacing towards police tech dominant illegality-thcsc·all appear clearly in die way in which the
niques a whole delinquent practice that was becoming the licit police-prison system functions; yec they have always met with
illegal,ity of power. That the Parisian bourgeoisie should have resistance; they have given rise to srruggles and provoked reaction.
feasted Lacenaire, that his cell should have been open to famous Erecting the ba,:rier 10 separate delinquents from all the lower strata
visitors, that he should have been showered with praise during the of the population from which they sprang and with which they
last days of his life, he whose death his plebeian fellow prisoners-had remained link~d has be<:na difficult ra.sk, especially no doubt in
demanded before his judges had done so, he who had done every urban milieux." rt has been a long and arduous undertaking. I, has
thing, in court, to brirrg his accomplice F ran$ois 10 ,be sea/fold, involved the use of the general principles of the 'moralization' of tl1e
there was a reason for all this: what was being celebrated was the poorer classes that elsewhere has had such crucial importance both
symbolic figure of an illegality kept within the bounds ofl delin from an economic and a political point of view (the acquisition of
quency and transformed into discourse- that is to say, made doubly what might be called a 'basic legalism', which was indispensable
inoffensive; the bourgeoisie h·ad invented for itself a new pleasure, from the time when custom was replaced by the system of the code;
which it has still far,f rom outgrown. It should not be forgotten that learning the elementa.ry rules of propeny and thrift; training in
Lacenaire's celebrated death succeeded in muffling the echoes of docility at work, in stability of residence and of the family, etc.).
Fieschi's attempt on tl1e life of Louis-Philippe; Fieschi, one of the More !ipecific methods were used to maintain the hostility of the
most recent of the regicides, represented the converse figure of a pporer classes to delinquents (the use of ex-convicts as informers,
petty criminality leading to political violence. Nor should we forget police spies, strike-breakers or thugs). There has been a systema.tic
that it took place a few months before the departure of the last confusion between offences against common law and those offences

1'rison lllegaHties and delinquency
against the severe legislation concerning the livret {work record), fort of the prisons' and for giving prisoners the hardest and most
strikes, coalitions, associations," for which the workers demanded dangerous work; against the excessive interest shown by philan
political s1an,s. Workers' action was regularly accused of beinj\ thropistsi n the delinquents;a gainstt he literaturec hate xal1sc rime;'s
animated, if not manipulared, by mere criminals (cf., for example, it is also proved by the general mistrust felt throughout die workers'
Monfalcon, 142). Verdicts were of,en more severe against worker~ movement for former common-law convicts. 'At the dawn of the
than against thieves (cf. L' Areliu, October 1840, or La Fracern,,l, cwentierhc entury,' writes MicheleP errot, •surroundedb y contempt,
July-August , 847). The two categories of convict were mixed In the highest of walls, the prison finally dosed in on an u.npopular
the prisons ,and preferential trearmem given 10 common-law people' (Perrot).
offenders, while convicted journalists and politicians·usually enjoyed Yet it certainly cannot be said that this tactic triumphed or that
the right 10 separate treatment. In short, a whole tactic of confusion it brought about a total break between the delinquents and the lower
aimed at maintaining a permanent state of conflict. classes. The relations between the poorer classes and illegality, the
To rhis was added a patient attempt 10 impose a highly specific reciprocal position of the proletariat and the urban plebs has yet to
grid on the common perception of delinquents: to present them as be srudied. But one thing is cert'ain: delinquency and repression
close by, everywhere present and everywhere to be feared. This was were regarded, in the workers' movements of the years 1830-50,
the function of the fair divers, which invaded a part of the press and as an important issue, There was no doubt hostility towards the
-which began to have its own newspapers." The criminal fair divtr.r, delinquents; but it was a battle around penality. The-workers' news
by its evtryday redundancy, makes accept1lblet he system of judicial papers often proposed a political analysis of criminality that con
and police supervisions that partition sociery; it recounts from day tradicted term by term the description familiar to the philanthropists
co day eas on ofinterna) ban1e against the faceless enemy; in this war, (poverty - dissipation - laziness - drunkenness - vice - theft -
itconstirutes ,he daily bulletin of alarm or victo~y. The crime novel, crlme). They assigned rhe origin of delinquency not to the indivi
which began to develop in the broadsheet and in mass-circulation dual criminal (he was merely the.occasion or the first victim), but
literature, assumed an apparently opposite,role. Above all, its func 10 society: 'Tbe man who kills you. is not free not to kill you. I, is
tion was 10 show that the delinquent belonged to an entirely different society or, to be more precise, bad social organiz.ation that js
world, unrelated to familiar, everyday life. This strangeness was first responsible' (L'Humanitairc, August J 841). This is so either because
that of the lower depths of sociery (Les Mysteres de Paris, Rocam sociery is incapable of providing its fu.nclamemaln eeds, or because
bole), then that of madness (especially in the latter half of the cen it destroys or effaces in him possibilities, aspirations or needs that
rury) and lastly that of crime in hig!i society {Ars~ne Lupin). The later emerge in crime: 'Bad education, unused aptitudes and forces,
combination of the fait divers and the detective novel has produced the intelligence and the l1eart crushed by forced labour at too tender
for the last hundred years or more an enormous mass of 'crime an age' {La Fraterni1,, November 1845). But d1isc rirninaliry of need
srories' in which delinquency appears both as "ery close and quik or of repression masks, by the attention paid to it and the disappro
alien, a perperual threat to everyday. life, but extremely distilnt in its bat,ion surrounding it, another criminality that is sometimes its
origin and motives, both everyday and exotic in the milieu in which cause and always its extcns,on. This is the delinquency from above,
ir takes place. Through the imporiance attributed to it and ihe a scandalous example, the source of misery and the principle of
surfeit of discourse surroundingi t, a line is traced round it which revolt for the poor. 'While misery strews your srreets with corpses,
1
while exalting it, sets it apart. In such a formldable delinquency, and fills your prisqns with thieves and murderers, where are the
coming from so alien a clime, what illegaliry could recognize itselfr .. , swindlers of the fashionable world~ . . . The most corrupting
This multiple tactic had its effect: this is proved by the campaign examples, the most revolting cynicism, the most shameless robbery.
of the workets' newspapers against penal labour;" against the 'com- Are you not afraid that the poor man put into the dock for

Prison Ulega1u,esa nd cteunquency
snatching a piece of bread from a baker's stall will not, one da)', isolate it as a monstrosity and to depict it as the work of the pootest
become so enraged that stone by stone he will demolish the Stoak class.
Exchange, a wild den where rhe treasure of the state and the fortune In the course of this anti-penal polemic, the Fo urierists no doubr
of families are stolen with impunity?' (Ba Ruche populaire, Novem went further thart any of the others. They were perhaps the first to
ber ,1842). But this delinquency of wealth is tolerated by tlie laws, elaborate a political tl1eoryw hich, at the same time, places a positive
and, when it does find its way into the courts, it can depend upon value on crime. Although, in their view, crime is a resultof'civHiza
the indulgence of the judges and the discretion of the press.•• Henco tion', it is also, and by that very fact, a weapon against it. Ir bears
the idea that criminal trials may become the occasion for a political within it a figure and a future. 'The social order dominated by
debate, that advanrnge should be taken of controversial trials or the fatality of its repressive principle continues to kill rhrough the
proceedings instituted against workers to denounce the general executioner or thro,1gh the prisons those whose natural robustness
functioning of penal justice: 'The courts are no longer as they once rejects or disdains its prescriptions, those who; too strohg to remain
were a place for ,he exhibition of the miseries and wounds of the enclosed within its tight swaddling-clothes, break from them and
time, a kind of brJnding ih which the sad victims of our social dis tear lhem 10 pieces, men who do not wish to remain children' (La
order are displayed side by side; it is an arena ,hat echoes·with ,he Phalange, 10 January 1837). There is not, therefore, a criminal
cry of combatants' (La Fraumirl, November 1841) . Hence, 100, the nature, but a play of forces which, according 10 the class to which
idea that political prisoners, since they nave, like delinquents, a individuals belong, .. will lead them 10 power or to prison: if born
direct experience of the penal system, bur,. unlike them, are in a poor, today's magistrates would no doubt be in the convict-ships;
position 10 he heard, have a duty to be the spol<esmeno f all pri and the convicts, if they had been well born, 'would be presiding
soners; iL is their task ~o enlighten "the good bourgeois of Francc-1 in the courts and dispensing· justice' (La Pltalange, r December
who has never known the penalties inflicted through the pompous r838). A-1b 'ottom, the existence of crime manifests 'a fortunate
indictments of a public prosecutor' (A/manach populaire d• la irrepressibility 9f human nature'; it should be seen ,not so mucl1 as
France, 1839, 10). a weakness or a disease, as an energy that is reviving, an 'outburst
ln this Jeappraisal of penal justice •and of the frontier 1ha1 it of protest in the name of human individuality', which no doubt
carefully rraces around delinquency, the taciic of what might be accounts for its sttange power of fascination. 'Without crime, which
called the 'counter-fair <liversi's characteristic. \Vhat the.workers' awakens in us a mass of torpid feelings and half distinguished
newspapers do is to reverse the use chat was made of crimes or trials passions, we would remain still longer in disorder, in weakness'
in the newspapers whic~, like the Ga;:eue des-uihunaux, 'gorge (La Plialang,, 10 January 1837). It may be, therefore, that crime
themselves with blood', 'feed on prison' and provide a daily 'reper constitutes a political instrument thar could prove as precious for
toire of melodrama' (Pa,n,r• Jacquu rst year, no. 3), The counter the liberation of our society as it bas been for the emancipation of
1
J'<utd ivers·s ystematically stresses ,he facts of delinquency in the the Negroes; indeed, will such an emancipation take place without
bourgeoisie, showing that it is the class affected by 'physical degen. it? 'Poison, fire-raising and sometimes even revoh are evidence of
eration' aoi:I 'moral de<iay'; for the accounts of crimes committed the terrible miseries of the social condition' (La Phalange, 10
by ordinary people it substitutes descriptions of the l)lisery into January 1837). And what of the prisoners, 'die most unfortunate
which their exploiters plunge diem and who, literally; starve and and most oppressed part of mankind'? La P~alange sometimes
murder them;" it points out in the criminal trials of workers what shared the contemporary aesthetic of crime, but in-. very different
share of responsibility must be attributed to the employers and 10 cause.
society as a whole, In short, a whole effort was being made 10 Hence a use of fai, divers that was intended not only to turn the
reverse this monotonous discourse on crime, which sought both to reproach of immorality back upon the adversary, but to reveal rhc

l'rison Illegalities and delinquency
play of opposing forces. La Pha/ance analyses penal affairs as • coaches when they arrive and carry luggage for the passengers; T
confrontation coded by ;civilization', the great crimes not an cum can-wheels on the avenue de Neuilly; ac nighr chere are the
monstrosities, but as the fatal return and revolt of what is repressed,'' shows; I open,coach doors, I sell pass-out rickets; I've plenty to do.
the minor illegalities not as the necessary margins of society, but a, - It would be better for you to be put into a good house as an
a rumbling from the midst of the baule-field. apprentice and learn a trade. - Oh, a good house, an apprenticeship,
After Vidocq and Lacenai,e, a third character must·be introduced, it's roo much trouble. And anyway the bou.rgeois ... always
He made only a short appearance; his notoriety lasted.hardly mon, grumbling, no freedom. - D.oes not your faiher wish to reclaim you?
than a day. He was merely the passing figure of minor illegalities: • - Haven't got no father. -And your mother? - No mother neither,
child of thirteen, without home or family, charged with vagabond no parents, no friends, free and independent.' .Hearing his sentence
age and whom a two-year sentence had no doubt long placed in tho of two years in a reformat0ry, Beasse 'pulled an ugly face, then,
circuits of delinquency. He would certainly have passed without recovering his good humour, remarked: "Two years, that's never
trace, had he not opposed to the discourse of the law ,hat made him more than twenty-four months. Let's be off, then." '
delinquent (in the name of the disciplines, even more than in the It was chis scene that La Phalange took up. And the importance
terms of the code) the discourse of an illegality that remained resist• chat che newspaper gave it, the extremely slow, careful analysis,
ant to these coercions and which revealed indiscipline in a systemacic shows chat the Fourierists saw in such an everyday affair a play of
ally ambiguous manner as the disordered order of society and as the fundamental forces. On rhe one hand, thar of 'civilization', repre
affirmation of inalienable rights. All ihe illegalities that ,he courr sented by ihe judge, 'living legality, the spirit and letter of the law'.
defined as offences the accused reformulated as the affirmation of a Ir had its own system of coercion, which seemed to be the code,
living force: ihe lack of a home as vagabondage, the lack of a master but which in fact was discipline. There had to be a place, a location,
as independence, ,he lack of work as freedom, ihe lack of a time-rable a compulsory insertion: 'One sleeps at home, said the judge, because
as the fullness of days and nights. This confrontation of illegality in fact, for him, everything must have a home, some dwelling, how
wiih the discipline-penality--<lelinquencys ystem was perceived l,y ever magnificent or mean; his task is not to provide one, but to
contemporaries or rather by the journalist who happened co be chere force every individual to live in one.' Moreover, one must have a
as the coniic effect of the criminal law at grips with the petty details station in life, a recognizable identity, an individuality fixed once
of indiscipline. And it was true: che affair icself and the verdict chat and for all: 'What is your station? This question is the simplest
followed represented the heart of the problem of legal punishment expression of the established order in society; such vagabondage is
in the nineteenth century. The irony wlth which the judge tried to repugnantto it, disturbs it; one must have a stable, continuous long
envelop indiscipline in the majesty of the law and the insolence term sta~ion, thoughts of the future, of a secure future, in order to
with which the accused reinscribecl indiscipline among the funda reassure it against all attacks.' In short, ohe should have a master,
mental rights represent for penalicy an exemplary scene. be caught up and situated within a hierarchy;·one exists only when
This, no doubt, is the value of the account published in the fixed in definite relations of domination: 'Who do you work with?
Ga{ert• des tribunaux for August 1840: 'The judge: One must sleep That is to tay, since you are not a master, you must be a servant,
·at home. - Btasse: Have lgot a home! - You live in perpetual vaga whatevery our station;i t is not a que.-c;tioonf your satisfactorinessa s
bondage. - I work to earn my living. - What is your sracion in an individual; it is a question of order to be maintained.' Confronted
life? - My station: to begin with, I'm thirty•sii<a c least; I don't work wi,h discipline on the face of che law, there is illegality, which puts
for anybody. I've worked for myself for a long time now. I have my itself forward as a right; it is indiscipline, rather than the criminal
day station and my night station. In the day, for instance, I hand out offence, that causes the ruprure. An indiscipline of language:
leaflets free of charge to all 1he passers-by; I run aftet 1he stage• incorrect grammar and the tone of the replies 'indicate a ,tjolent

Prison
split between the accused and society, which, through the judjl,,
3, The carceral
addresses him in correcr terms'. An indiscipline that is the indiscl
pline of native, immediate liberty: 'He is weU-aware that the appren,
tice, the worker is a slave and that slavery is sad ... '.fhis liberty,
this need of movement that possesses him, he is well aware that hr
would .no longer enjoy it in a life of ordinary order ... He prcfcn
liberty; what does he care if others see it as disorder? It is liberty,
that is to say, the most spontaneous development of his individual
ity, a wild development and, consequently, brutal and limited.,,but ~
natural, instinctive development.' Indiscipline in family relation•; Were I t0 fix the date of completion of the.carceral system, l would
It does not matter whether this lost child was abandoned or freed choose not 1810 and the penal code, nor even 1844, when the law
himself voluntarily, for 'he would have been unable to bear thr laying down the principle of cellular internment was passed; I might
slavery of education either at his parents' or with strangers'. And not even choose 1838, when books on prison reform by Charles
through all these minute disciplinesji is ultimately 'civilization' as 11 Lucas, Moreau-Christophe and Faucher were published. The date I
whole that is rejected and 'wildness' ,bat emerges: 'lt is work, it I, would choose would be n January 1840, the date of the official
laziness, it is thoughtlessness, it is debauchery: it is everything e.xcep, opening of Mettray: Or better still, perhaps, that glorious day,
order; the difference in occupations and debauches, aside, it is tltt unremarked and unrecorded, when a child in Mettray remarked as
life of the savage, living from day to day and with no tomorrow' he lay· dyfog: '\Vhat a pity I left the colony so soon' (Ducpetiaux,
s
,(La Pha(ange, 1 August 1840). 1852, 383). This marked the death of the first penitentiary saint.
No dpubt the analyses of La Phafange cannot be 1egarded •• Many of the blessed no doubt went to join him, if the former
repr.esentativeo f the discussions that took place in the workers' pre$S inmates of the penal colonies are to be believed when, in singing
at this time on crime and penality. Nevertheless, they are situated in the praises of the new punitive policies of the body, they remarked:
the context of this polemic. The lessons of La Phalange were not 'We preferred the blows, but die cell suits us better.'
quite wasted. They found an echo when, in the second half of fhe Why Metrray?' Because it is the disciplinary form at its most
nineteenth century, taking the penal apparatus as their point of extreme, the model in which are concentrated all the coercive
attack, the anarchists posed the political problem of delinquency; technologies of behavfour. In it were t0 be found 'cloister, prison,
when they thought t0 recognize in it the most militant rejection of school, regiment'. The small, highly hicrarchized groups, into which
the. law; when they tried not so much co heroize cne revolt of the the inmates '\Vered ivided, followed simultaneously five models: that
delinquents as to disentangle delinquency from the bourgeois legality of the family (each group was a 'family' composed of 'brothers' and
and illegality that had colonized it; when they wished to re-establish two 'elder brothers'); that of the army (each family, commanded by
or constitute the political unity of popular illegalities. a head, was divided into two sections, each of wbioh had a second
in command; each inmate. had a number and was taught basic
mllitary exercises; there was a cleanliness inspection every day, an
inspection of clothing every week; a roll-call was taken three times
a day); that of rhe workshop, with supervisors and foremen, w.ho
were responsible for the regularity of the work and for the appren
ticeship of the younger inmates; that of the school (an hour or an
hour and a half of lessons every day; the teaching was given by the

t'rison The carceral
instructor and by the deputy-heads); lastly, the judicial model (r.u 1, the establishment of power relations; strong, skilled agricultural
or
day 'justice' was mered out in the parlour: 'The least acr JI, workers are produced; in tliis very work, ptovided it is technically
o.bediencei s punished and the best way of avoiding serious offfm•• supervised, submissive subjects are produced and a dependable
is to puoish the most minor offences very severely: at Mettray, a"" body of knowledge builrup about them. This disciplinary technique
1less word is punishable'; the principal punishment inflicted IV•• exercised upon the body had a double effect: a 'soul' ro be known
confinement to one's cell; for 'isolation is rhe best means of actln1'o n and a subjection to be maintained. One resultvindicated this work of
rhe moral nature of children; it is there above all that the voicc 11( training: in 1848, ata m~menc when 'the fever of revolution fired the
religion, even if it has never spoken to their hearts, r~covers all 110 imagination of all, when the schools ar Angers, La Fleche, Alfort,
emotional power' - Ducpetiaux, 1852, 377); the entire parape11•I even the boarding schools, rose up in rebellion, che. inmates of
instirution, which is created in order not ro be a prison, culmina1r1 Memay were calmer than ever' Werrus).
in the cell, on the walls of which are written in block letters: 'Go,1 Where.Menray was especially exemplary was in the specificity
sees you.' char it recognized in this operation of training. It was related to
This superimposi,ion of different models makes· it possible 1u ocher forms of supervision, on which it was based: medicine, general
indicate, in its specific features, the function of 'training'. The ch1d, education, religious direction. But it cannot not he identified abso
and their deputies at Mettray had to be nor exactly judges, or lutely with ihem. Nor with administration 'in the strict sense. Heads
teachers, or foremen, or non-commissioned officers, or 'parents'. or deputy-heads of 'families', monitors and .foremen, had to live in
but something of all these things in a quite specific mode of in•~•· close proximity ca the inmates; their clothes were 'almost as humble'
vention. They were in a sense technicians of behaviour: engin?cr• as those of the inmates themselves; they prai:tically never left their
of ~onducr;orthopaedists of individuality. Their task W'!St o produce side, observing them day and night; they constituted among rhem
bodies that were both d_ocrlea nd capable; they supervised rhe nine a network of permanent observation. And, in order to train rhem
or ten wor!\ing hours of every day (whctfwr in a workshop or in themse\ves, a speciaLiud school had been organized in the colony.
the fields); they directed the orderly movements of groups of in The essential elemenr of its programme was to subject ihe future
mates, physical exercises, military exercise·s>r ising in the morning, cadres to the satne apprenticeships and to the same coercions as the
going to bed at night, walks to the accompaniment of bugle and inmates themselves: 'they were 'subjected as pupils to the discipline
whistle; they taught gymnastics;' they checked cleanliness, super• that, later, as Instructors,t hey would themselves Impose'. They were
vised bathing. Training was accompanied by P""manent observa taught the art of power reladons. lt was the first training college in
tion; a body of knowledge was being constantly built up from tbt! pure discipline: the 'penitentiary' was not simply a project thar
everyday behaviour of the inmates; it was organized as an instrument sought its justification in 'humanity' or its foundations in a *science',
of perpetual assessment: 'On entering the colony, the child is sub bur a technique thar was learnt, transmined and which obeyed
jected co a sorr of interrogation as to his origins, ,he position of his general norms. The practice that normalized by compulsion the
family, the offence for which he was brought before the courts aod conduct of the undisciplined or dangerous could, in turn, by
all the ocher offences char make. up his short and often very sad teclinical elaboration and rational' re/lection, be 'normalized'. The
existence..T his information is wriucn down ·on a board on which disciplinary technique became a 'discipline' which also had its
everything concerning eaC:hin mate is noted in wrn, his stay at the school ..
colony Md the place to which he is sent when he leaves' (Ducpeci It so happens that historians of rhe human sciences dare the birth
aux, 1811, 61). l'he mode!Ung of the body produces a knowledge of scientific psychology at this time: during these same years, it
of the individual, the apprenticeship of the techniques induces modes seems, Weber was manipulating his little compass for the measUie
of behaviour and the acquisirion of skills is inextricably linked with menr of sensations. What cook place at Merrray (and in other
•9.S

Prison l ne carc;enu
European countries sooner or later) was obviously of a quite differ penality. It was the most famous of a whole series of institution,
ent order. lt was the emergence or rather the institutional specifica which, well beyond the frontiers of criminal law, constituted wh~t
tion, the baptism as it were, of a new type of supervision - both one might call the carceral archipelago.
knowledge and power - over fodividuals who resisted disciplinary Yet the general principles, the great codes and subsequent legisla
normalization. And yet, in the formation and growth of psychology, tion were quite clear on the matter: no imprisonment' outside the
the appearance of these professionals of discipline, normality and law', no detention that had not been decided by a qualified judiclol
subjection surely marks the l:!eginningo f a new stage. It will be said institution, no more of those arbitrary and yet widespread confine
that the quantitative assessment ofsensoriaJ.responses could at least ments. Yet the very principle of extra-penal incarceration was in
fact never abandoned. (A whole study remains to be done of the
derive authority fr.om the prestige of the emerging science of
physiology and that for this alone it deserves to feature in the debates that took place during the Revolution concerning family
history of the sciences. But the supervision of normality was firmly courts, paternal correction and the right of parents to lock up their
encased in a medicine or a psychiatry that provided it with a sort children.) And, if the apparatus of the great classical form of con
of 'scientificity'; it was supported by a judicial apparatus which, finement was partly (and only partly) dismantled, ir was very soon
directly or indirectly, gave ir legal justification. Thus, in the shelter reactivated, rearranged, developed in certain directions. But what is
of these two considerable protectors, and, indeed, acting as a link still more important is that it was homogenized, through the media
between them, or a place of exchange, a carefully worked out tion of the prison, on the one hand with legal pu.nishments and, on
rechnique for the supervision of norms has continued 10 develop tlte other, with disciplinary mechanisms. The frontiers between
right up to the present day. The specific, institutional supports of confinement, judicial punishment and institutions of discipline,
these methods have proliferated since the founding of the small which were already blurred in the classical age, tended to disappear
school at Meru-ay; their apparatuses have increased in quantity and and to constitute a great carceral conti'nuum that diffused peniten
scope; their auxiliary services have increased, with hospit~ls, schools, tiary techniques imo the most innocent. disciplines, transmitting
public administrations and private enterprises; their agenrs have disciplinary norms i1110t h~ very heart of the penal system and
proliferated in number, in power, in rechnical qual.ification; the placing over the slightest lllegaliry, the smallest irregularity, devia
technicians of indiscipline have founded a family. In the normaliza tion or anomaly, the threat of delinquency. A subtle, graduated
tion of the power of normaliz.ation, in the arrangement of a power carceral net, with compact institutions, but also separate and diffused
knowledge over individuals, Metrray and its school marked a new methods, assumed responsibility for the arbitrary, widespread,
era. badly integrated confinement of the classical age.
I sha)l not atternpr here to reconstitute the whole network that
But why choose this moment as the point of emergence of the formed lirst the immediate surroundings of the prison, then spread
foimatiotl' of an art of punishing that is still more or less our own? farthe, and farther .outwatds. However, a few references and dates
Precisely because this choice is somewhat 'unjust'. Because it should ~ive some idea of the breadth and precocity of the phenome
situates the' 'end' of the process in the lower reaches of criminal law. non.
Because Mettray was a prison, but nor entirely; a prison in that ir There were agricultu.ral sections in tbe.maisonsc ,nt.ralu (the first
contained young delinquents condemned by the courts; and yet example of which was Gaillon in r824, followed later by Fontevrault,
something else, too, because it also contained minors who bad been LesD ouaires,. Le Soulard); there were colonies for poor, abandoned
charged, bur acquitted under article 66 of the code, and boarders vagrant ch.ildren( Petit-Bourg in 1840, Ostwald in 1842); there were
held, as in the eighteenth century, as an alternative to paternal almshouses for y.oung female offenders who 'recoiled before the idea
correction. Mettray., a punitive model, is at the limit of strict of entering a life of disorder', for 'poor innocent girls w!iose

t'rJson
morhers1 immorality has exposed to precocious perversity'; or fur remained separate in so far as they related 10 separate criteria and
poor girls found on the doorsteps of hospitals and lodging house•. authorities (court, penitence, confinement). Incarceration with its
There were penal colonies envisaged by the law of 1 Sso: minor~, mechanisms of surveillance and punishment functioned, on the
acquitted or condemned, were to be sent to these colonies and contrary, according to a principle of relative continuity. The con
'brought up in common, under strict discipline, and trained 111 tinuity of the institutions themselves, which were linke<I to one
agricuhural work and in the principal industries related to it;' la[c.r another (public assistance whh the orphanage, the.reformitory, the
1
they were to be joined by minors sentenced 10 hard labour for life penitentiary, the disciplinary. battalion, the prison; the school with
and 'vicious-and insubordinate wards of the Public Assistance' (on the charitable society, the worl<shop the almshouse, the peniten
1
all these institutions, cf. Gaillac, 9~107). And, moving still farther tiary convent; the workers' estate with the hospital and the prison).
away from penality in the strict sense, the carceral circles widen and A continuity of the punitive criteria and mechanisms, which on the
the form of the prison slowly diminishes and finally disappears basis of a mere deviation gradually strengthened the rules and
altogether: the institutions for abandoned or indigent children, the increased the punishment. A continuous gradation of the established,
orphanages (like Neuhof or Mesnil-Firmin), the establishments for specialized and competent authorities (in the order o( knowledge
apprentices (like the Bethleem de Reims or the Maison de Nancy); and in the order of power) which, without resort 10 arbitrariness,
still farther away the faorory-convenrs, such as La Sauvagere, but strictly according to the. regulations, by means of observation
Tarare and Jujurieu (where the girl workers entered about the age of and assessment hierarchiz,ed, differentiated, judged, punished and
thirteen, lived confined for years and were allowed out only under move<Ig radually from the correction of irregularities to the punish
surveillance, receive<I instead of wages pledged payment, which ment of crime. The 'carceral' w:ith•i ts many diffuse or compact
could be increased by bonuses for zeal and good behaviour, which forms, its institutions of supervision or constraint, of discreet sur
'
rhey could use only on leaving). And then, still further, there was a veillance and insistent coercion, assured che communication of
whole series of mechanisms that did not adopt the 'compact' prison punishments according to quality and quantity; it connected in
model, but used some of the carceral methods: charitable societies, series or disposed according to subtle divisions the minor and the
moral improvement associations, organizations that handed aut serious penalties, the mild and· the strict forms of treatment, bad
assistance and also practised surveilJance, -workers' estates and marks and light sentences. You will end u_pi n the convict-ship, ihc
lodging houses - the most primitive of which still bear the all tOQ slightest indiscipline seems to say; and the harshest of prisons says
visible marks o( the penitentiary system.' And, l~tly, cl1isg reat to the prisoners condemned 1·0 life: I shall note the slightest irregu
carceq,I network reaches all the disciplinary mechanisms that func larity in your conduct. The generality of the ·punitive function that
tion throughout society. the eighteenth century sought in the 'ideological' technique of
We have seen that, in penal jusrice, the prison transformed the representations and signs now had as its support the extension, ,he
punitive procedure into a penitentiary technique; the carceral archi material framework, complex,.disperse<I,b u.tc oherent, of the various
pelago transported this technique from the penal insdnnion 10 the carceral mechanisms. As a result, a certain significant generality
entire social body. With several important results. moved between the least irregularity and the greatest crime; it was no
r. This vasr mechanism established a slow, continuous, imper longer the offence, the attack on the common interest, it was the
ceptible gradation that made it possible ,o pass naturally from dis departure from the norm, the anomaly; it was this that haunted
order t0 offence an·d back from a transgtession of the h1w1 0 a slight the school, the court, the asylum or the prison. Ir generalized in
departure from a rule, an average, a demand, a norm. In the classical the sphere of meaning the functiqn that the carceral generalized in the
period, despite a certain common .reforence to offence in general,' sphere of tactics. Replacing the adversary of the sovereign, the
the order of the crime, the order of sin and the order of bad conduct social enemy was transformed into a deviant, who brought with him
299

Jtq:sun. J..H._, .....u.-..-.,u•
""'"""I
the multiple danger of disorder, crime and madness. The The carceral network does not cast the unassimilable into a con
nerwork linked, through innumerable relations, the two lcin~, fused hell; there is no outsille ..I t takes back with one hand what it
multiple series of rhe puniiive and the abnormal. seems to exclude with the other. I, saves everything, including what
2. The carcera~ with its far-reaching networks, allows the rr i, punishes. 1t is unwilling to waste even what it has decided to
cruitment o( major 'delinquents'. It organizes what might be callril disqualify. In. this•panoptic society of which incarceration is the
'disciplinaryc areers' in which, through various exclusions .uni omnipresenta rmature,t he delinquenti s not out"Sidleh e Jaw;h e is,
rejections, a whole process is ,set in motion. In the classical perioJ, from the very ouiset, in the law, at the very heart of tl1e law, or at
there opened up in the confines or interstices of society the confusl'II, le'!Sti n the midst of those mechanisms that transfer the individual
tolerant and dangerous domain of the 'outlaw' or at least of 1h~1 imperceptibly from discipline to the law, from deviation to offence.
:w.hiche luded tl1e direct hold of power: an uncertain space that wa, Although it is true that prison punishes delinquency, delinquency
for criminality ,a training ground and a region of ~efuge; thcrr Is for the most part produced in and by an incarceration which,
poverty, unemployment, pursuc:d innocence, cunning, the strug~lr ultimately, prison perpetuates in ii,; turn. The prison is merely the
against the powerful, the refusal of obligations and laws, and organ natural consequence, no more than a higher degree, of that hier
ized crime all came together as chance and fortune would diqoioi archy laid do'l'n step by step. The delinquent i~ a11i nstitutional
it was the domain of adventure that Gil Blas, Sheppard or Mandnn, product. It is no use being surprised, therefore, that in a consider
eacl1 in his own way, inhabited. Through the play of disciplinary able proportion of cases the biography of convicts passes through
differentiationsa nd divisions, t.he nineteenth century constructed all these mechanisms and establishments, whose purpose, it is widely
rigorous channels which, within the system, inculcated docility and believed, is 10 lead away from prison. That one should find in them
produced delinquency by the same mechanisms. There was a sort eol what one might call the index of an irrepressibly delinquent 'char
disciplinary 'training', continuous and compelling, that had somo• acter': the prisoner condemned to bard labour was meticulously pro
thing of the pedagogical curriculum and something of the profc•• duced by a childhood spent in a reforma1ory,.according to the lines
sional network. Careers emerged from it, as secure,, •~ predictable, of force of the generalized carceral system. Conversely, the lyricism
as those of public life: assistance associations, residential apprentiae• of marginality may find inspiration in die image of the 'outlaw', the
ships, penal colonies, disciplinary battalions, prisons, hospital~, great social n0mad who prowls on the confines of a docile, fright
1
almshouses. These networks were already well mapped out at the ened order. But it is not on the fringes of society and through succes
beginning of the nineteenth century: 'Our benevolent establish sive exiles that criminality is born, bur by means of ever more
menis present an admirably coordinated whole by means of which closely placed insertions, under ever more insistent surveillance, by
the indigent docs notremain a moment without help from the cradle an accumulation of discip,linary coercion. In short, the carceral
10 the. grave. Foil ow the ,course of the unfortunate man: you will archipelago assures, in the depths of the social body, the formation
sec him born among foundlings; from there he passes to the nursery, of delinquency on the b'!Siso f subtle illegalities, the overlapping of the
then to an orphanage; at the age of six he goes off 10 primary school latter by the former and the establishment of a specified criminality.
and later 10a dult schools. If he cannot work, he is placed on the list 3. But perhaps the most important effect of the carceral system
of the charity offices of his district, and if he falls ill he may choose and of its elf.tension well beyond legal imprisonment is that·it sue•
between twelve hospitals. . . Lastly, when the poor Parisian ceeds in making the power to punish natural and legitimate, in
reaches the end of his c;,reer, seven almsho11sesa wait his age an~ lowering ar least the threshold of tolerance to penality. It tends to
often their salubrious regime h'!S prolonged his useless days well efface what may be exorbitant in the e)(erciseo f punishment It does
beyond those of the rich man' (Moreau de Jonnes, quoted in this by playing the two registers in which it is deployed - the legal
Touquet). register of justice and the extra-legal register of discipline - against
300 301

' ll~VII
one another. In effect, ,he grea, continuiry of the carceral system each individual through innumerable,,m echanisms of discipline. By
1hroughouL the Jaw ahd its sen1ences gives a sor1 of legal sanction means of a carceral cQntinuum, the authority that sentences infil
to the disciplinary mechanisms, to the decisions and juclgemenat trates al1 those other authorities that supervise, [ransform, correct,
thai rhey enforce. Throughout tlus network, which comprises so improve. lt might even be said that nothing really distinguishes
many 'regional' institutions, relatively autonomous andjndependent, them any nwre except the singularly 'dangerous' character of the
is transmitted, with the 'prison-form', the model of iustice itself. delinquents, the gravity of their departures from normal behaviour
The regulations of the disciplinary establishments may reproduce and the necessary solemnity of the ritual. Bur, in its function, rhe
the law, the punishmentS imi1a1e the verdicts and penalties, the power 10 punish is not essentially different from that of curint;-or
surveillance repeat rhe police model; and, above all these multiple educating. It receives from them, and from their lesser, smaller task,
establishments, the prison, which in re1a[ion to lhem is a pure form;t a sanction from below; but one that is no less.important for that,
unadulterated and unmitigated, gives them a sort of official sanction. since it is the sanction of technique •nd rarionali,y. The carceral
The carceral, with its long gradation stretching from the convict 'naruralizes' ,he legal power ,o punish, as it "legalizes' the technical
ship or imprisonment with hard labour to diffuse, slight limitations, power to discipline. In thus homogenizing tl1em,effadng what may
communicates a type of power that the law validates and that justice be violent in one and arbitrary in dte other, attenuating the effec1so f
uses as its favourite weapon. Bow could the disciplines and the revolt 1hat ,hey may both arouse, thus depriving excess in either of
power that functions in them appear arbitrary, when they merely any purpose, circula.ting 1J,e ~ame calculated, mechanical and dis
operate the mechanisms of justice itself,.even with a view 10 mitigat• creet methods From one to the other, the carceral makes it possible
ing their intensity? When, by generalizing its effec1s and 1rans to carry out that great 'economy' of power whose formula the
mi11ingit 10 every level, it makes it possible to avoid its full rigour? eighteenth· century had sought, when the problem of the accumula
Carceral continuity and the fusion of rhe prison-form make ii tion and useful administration of men first emerged.
possible to legalize, or in any case 10 legitimate disciplinary power, By operating at every level of the social body and by mingling
which thus avoids any element of excess or abuse ir may entail. ceaselesslyt he art of rectifying and the right tOp unish, the universal
But, conversely, the carceral pyramid gives LO the power to ity of the·carceral lowers the level from which it becomes natural
inflict legal punishment a contextln.which it appears to be free of all and acceptable to be punished. The question is often posed as to
excess and all violence. In the subtle gradation of the apparatuses of how, before·and after ihe Revolution, a new foundation was given
discipline and of the successive 'embeddings' that they involve, rhe 10 the right to punish. And no doubt the answer is to be found in
prison does not at all represent the unleashing of a different kind of the theory of the contract. Bur it is perhaps more important to ask
power, but simply an additional degree in theimensiry of a mechan the reverse quesrion: how were people made to accept the po·wer to
ism that has continued 10 operate since the earliest forms of legal punish, or quite simply, when punished, tolerate being so. The
theory of the !'onu;act can only answer this question by the fiction
punishment. Between the latest institution of 'rehabilitation', where
of a juridical subject giving to oth,ers the power to exercise over him
one is taken in order to avoid prison, and the prison where one is
senc after a definable offence, the difference is (and must be) scarcely 1he right that he himself possesses over them. Ir is highly probable
perceptible. There is a strict economy that has the effect of rende, that the great carceral continuum, which provides a communication
ing as discreeL. as possible the singular power to punish. There is between the power of discipline an·d the power of the law, and
nothing in it now that recalls the former excess of sovereign power extends without interruption from the smallesl coercions to the
longest penal detention, constituted the technical and real, immedi
when it revenged its authority on the 1ortured liody of those about
to be exec;uted.P rison con tint.lest on those 'Who are encrusted to it, ately material counterpart of that chimerical granting of the right 10
a work begun elsewhere, -which the whole of society pursues on punish.
301 303

1 f)e catcera1
4. With this new economy of power, 1he ca.rceral system, whicb
enables it to play this double role. By virtue ofits meihods of fixing,
is its basic instrt1ment, permitted the emergence of·a new form of
dividing, recording, it has been one of the simplest, crudest, also
'law': a mixture oflegality and nature, prescription and constitution,
most concrete, but perhaps most indispensable conditions for the
the norm. This had a whole series of effects: the internal dislocation
development of this immense·activity of examination 1hat has objec
of the judicial pi;,wer or ar least of its functioning; an increasing
tified human behaviour. If, after the age of 'inquisitorial' justice, we
difficulty in judging, as if one were ashamed to pass sentence; a have entered the age of 1examinatory1 justice, if, in an even more
furious desire on the part' of the judges to judge, assess, diagnose, general way, the meihod of examination has been able to spread so
recognize the normal and abnormal ,and daim the honour of curing
widely throughou1 society, and 10 give tise in part to ,he sciences
or rehabilitating. In view of this, it is uselt;ss to believe in the.good
of man, one of the great instru111entfso r ihis has been the multiplicity
or bad consciences of judges, or even of their unconscious. Their
and close overlapping of the various mechanisms of incarceration.
immense 'appedte for medicine' which is constantly manifested -
I am not saying that the human sciences emerged from the prison.
from their appeal to psycliiacric experts, to their attention to the
But, if they have been able 10 be formed and 10 produce so many
chauer of criminology - expresses ,he major fact that the power
profound changes in ihe episteme, it is because they ha_veb een
they exercise has been 'denatured'; that it is ata certain level govemed
conveyed by a specific and new modality of power: a certain policy
by laws; that at another, more fundamental level it functions as a
of the body, a certain way of rendering the group of men docile and
normative power; it is th'e economy of power chat they exercise,
useful. This policy required the involvement of definite relations of
and nor tl1at of their scruples or their humanism, that makes them
knowledge in relations of power; it called for a technique of over
pass 'therapeutic' sentences and recommend 'rehabilitating' periods
lapping subjection and objectification; it brought with it new pro
of imprisonnlem. But, conversely, if tbe judge.$a ccept ever more
cedures of individualization. The carccral network constituted one
reluctantly to condemn for the sake of condemning, the activity of
0£ the armatures of this power-knowledge that has made the human
judging has increased ,precise)~ to the extent that the normalizing
sciences historically possible. KnowiU)le man (soul, individuality,
power has spread. Borne al1mgb y the 0111nJpresencoef the mechan
consciousness, conduct, whatever it is called) is the ,object-effect
isms of discipline, basing itself on all the. carccra] apparatuses, it has
of this analytical investment, of this domination-observation.
become one of the major functions 9f our socieiy. The judges of
6. This no doubt explains the extreme solidity of the prison, that
normality are present everywhere. We are in the society of the
slight invention that was nevertheless decried from the outset. If it
teacher-judge, tlie doctor-judge, the educator-judge, the 'social
had ,been no more than an instrumento f rejecriono r rep.ressioni n
worker'-judge; it is on them that the universal reign of the normative
the service of a state apparatus, it would have been easier to airer its
is based; and each individual, wherever he may find himself, subjects
more overt forms or to find a more acceptable substirute for it. -Bur,
to it his body, his gestures, his behaviour, his aptitudes, his achieve
motcd as it was in mech,anisms and strategies of power, it could
ments. ~he carceral network, in its compact or disseminated forms,
meet any attempt to transform it with a great force of inertia. One
with its systems of insertion, distribution, surveillance, observation, fact is characteristic: when it is a question of altering the system of
has been the greatest support, in modern society, of the normalizing
imprisonment, opposition does not come from the judicial instiru
power.
tions alone; resistance is ,o be found not in the prison as penal sanc
,5. The carcera\ texture of socie1y,assures both the real capture tion, but in the pris0n widi all its determinations, links and extra•
of 1he body and, its perpetual observation; it is, by. its very nature, judicial results; in the prison as the relay in a gene,al network of
the apparatus of punishment diat conforms most completely to the
disciplines and surveillances; in 1he prison as it functions in a panop
new economy of power and the instrument for the formation of
tic regime. This does not mean that it cannot be altered, nor tliat ir
knowledge that this very economy needs. Tis panoptic functioning is once and for all indispensable to our kind of society. One may, on
305

l'nson The carceral
the contrary site the two processes which, in the very continuity of In 1&36, a correspondent wrote to La Phala/lg.: 'Moralists,
1
the processes that make the prison function, are capable of exercising philosophers, legislators, Aatrerers of civilization, this is the plan of
considerable restraint Qn its use and of transforming it,; internal your Paris, neatly ordered and arranged, here is the improved plan
functioning. And no doubt these processes have already begun to a in which all like things are gathered together. At tbe centre, and
large degree. The first is that.which reduces the utility (or increases <vithin a first enclosure: hospitals for all diseases, alroshouse. for
a
its inconven;ences) of a delinquency accommodated as specific 3)1 types of poverty, madhou.ses, prisons, convicc ..p risons for men,
illegality, locked up and supervised; rhus the growth of great women and children, Around the nm enclosure, barracks, court
national or in1erna1ionali llegalities directly linked 10 the political rooms, police stations, houses for prison ~rders, s~affolds, houses
and economic apparatuses (financial illegalities, information services, for the executioner and his assistants. Ar: the fdur corners, the
arms and drugs rrafficking, property speculation) makes ir clear that Chamber of Deputies, the Chamber of Peers, the Institute and the
the somewhat rustic and conspicuous work force of delinquene-y is Royal Palace. Outside, there are the various services that supply
proving inC:ffectiveo; r again, on a •smaller- scale, as soon as the the central enclosure, commerce, with its swindlers and its bank
econo'mic levy ?n sexual pleasure is carried out more efficiently by ruptcies; industry and its furious struggles; the press, with its
the sale of contraceptives, or obliquely through publications, films sophisms; the gambling dens; prostitution, the people dying of
or shows, the archaic hierarchy of prostitution loses much of its hunger or wallowing in debauchery, always ready 10 lend an ear
former usefulness. The second process is the growth of the disci tQ the voice of the Genius of Revolutions; the heartless rich ...
plinary networks, the multiplication of their exchanges with the Lastly the ruthless <varo f all against all' (l.,, Phalange, 10 August
penal apparatus, the ever more important poivers that are given 1&36).
them, the ever mote massive transference to them of j~dicial func I shall stop·with this anonymous text. W c are now•f ar away from
tions; now, as medicine, psychology, education, public assistance, the country of tenures, doued with wheels, gibbetS, gallows,
'social work' assume an ever greater share of the powers of supe.r pillories; we are far, mo, from that dream ot' the reformers, less
vision and assessment, the penal apparatus will .be able, in turn, to than fifiy years before: the dty of punishments in which a thousand
become medicaliied, psychologized, educationaliz.ed; ahd by the small theatres would have provided an endless multicoloured repre
same m)ien ,hat tuming-point represemed by the prison becomes sentation of jus1ice in which the punishments, meticulously pro
less useful when, through the ~ap between its pcnitcntiary·discou,se duced on decorative scalfolcls,w ould have constituted the permanent
and its effect of consolidating delinquency, it articulates the penal festival of the penal code. The carceral ci1r, with its imaginary
power an,:Jt he disciplinary power. In_t he midst of all these.mechan 'geo-politics', is _governedb y quite different principles. The extract
isms of normaliiadon, :which are becoming ever more rigorous in from La Pha!a12gree minds us of some ·of the more important ones:
their application, the specificity of the prison and iis role as link are that at the centre of this city, and as if to hold it in place, there is,
losing something of their purpose. not the •centre of power', nor a network of forces, but a multiple
If there is an overall political issue around the prison, it is not network df diverse elements - walls, space, institution, rules, dis
therefore whether it is 10 be corrective or not; whether the judges, course; that the model of the carceral city is not, therefore, the body
the psychiatrists or the sociologists are to eKercisem ore power in it of the king, wirh the powers that emanate from it, nor the contrac
lhan the adminis1ratorso r supervisors; it •is noc eveh whe1her we rual meeting of wills from which a body char was borh individual
should have prison or something other than prison. At present, the and collective was born, but a strategic distribution of elements of
problem lies rather in the ·steep rise in the use of these mechani•sms different natures and levels. That the prison is not the daughter of
of normalization and the wide-r,anging poivers which, through the law,, codes or the judicial apparatus; that it is not subordinated 10
proliferation of new disciplines, they bring wi,h them. the court and the docile or clumsy instrument of the sentences tha,
306

Yrison
it hands out and ,of the results that it would like to achieve; that it 1•
the court that is ext~rnal and subordinate tO the prison. That in I ltr Notes
central position that it occupies, iris not alone, but linked to a wholr
series of 'carceral' mechanisms which seem distinct enough - sine,
they are intended to alleviate pain, to cure, to comfort - hut which
all tend, like the prison, to exercise a power of normalizatjon. Thn1
these mechanisms.are applied no, to tr'ansgressions'agains1 a 'central'
law, but to the apparatus of produccion - 'commerce' and 'industry'
- to a whole multiplic(iyof illegalities, in all their diversity of naturr
and origin, ,their specific role in profit and the different ways In
PART ONE TORTUR£.
which they are dealr -v,ith by the punitive mechanisms. And tlm
ultimately what presides over-all these mechanisms is not the w1itary t The 6oJy of th, condemned
.funciioning of an apparatus or an institution, bur the necessity o(
1 The public .execution of traitors described by William Bla~kstonc,
combat and 1he rules of strategy. That,.consequently, the nodons of
Commentarieso n ,the Law, of Enslmid, vol. 4, 1766 9, 89. Smee the
institutions of repres~ion, rejection, exclusion, marginalization, arc French translation was intended to bring out the humaneness of
not adequate 10 describe, at the very centre of the carceral ci~y, the English legislation, in contrast wich the ~Id or~inance o( 1j6o,. the
formation of the insidious leniencies, unavowablc petty cruelties, French translator adds tlte following note: In this form of execuuon,
small acts ·of cunning, calculated methods,. techniques, 'sciences' which is so terrifying to see, tl1eg uilty man does not suffer much pain,
that permit the fabrication of the djsciplinary individual . .ln this or for long.' .
central and centralized humanity, the effect and instrument of com ln any case, l could give no notion by referenceso r quotati~ns w~at
2
plex power relations, bodies and. forces subje<:te.d by multiple this book owes to Gilles Deleuze and the work he is undertakingw 1tlt
mechanisms of 'incarceration' objects for discourses' that are in Hlix Guauari. 1 should also have quoted a number of pages from
themselves elements (or this str 1 a tegy, we must hear the distant roar R. Castell's PsycAan•'l•nze and say how• much I am indebred 10
of banle. Pienc Nora.
3 I shall study the birth of the prison only in the Frend\ penal system.
At this point I ·end a book that must serve as a historical back
Differences•in historical dcvclopmems·and institutions wo~1d make a
ground to various studies of the power of normalization and the
detailed comparativee xaminationt oo burdensomea n·da ny anempt to
formatiQn of knowledge in modern society.
describe che phenomenon as a whole too schematic.
, The ,ptctad, of the ,caffold
The name given to two fortresses in old Paris, the Grand and the
1
Petit Cfw.telet.T he first, demolished in 1801, was situ.acedo n the
right bank of the Seine. It wa• the seat of the criminal jurisdiction of
the viscoumy and provomy of Pari,. The second, on the left bank,
near the H61el-Pieu, ~eryed a• a prison [Tr.).
, In the catalogues of judicia.lp roofs, the confession ~ppears in, about
the thirteenth or fourteenth century. Bernard of Pav,a does no, refer
it, but it-is mentionedb y Hostiemis. Crater's aefini!ion is character
10
istic: 'Aut ltgitt~ convictus au.I sponu confessUS.'
308.

Notes l'IOtCS
In medieval l<tw,t he confession was valid only when made by ;111 PART TWO 'PUNISJ-IMEN11'
adult and before the adversary. Cf. Levy.
r Generali{edp .um'shnumt
3 The Ga{tlle. mDunau)I;·, 6 Ju1y 18371 reportS, from a Gloucester news.
pa1;>ert,h, e 'atrocious and disgusting' conduct of an executione( who r Mogensen, 316. The author shows that in Auge crjmcs of viole.nte
af1er ha.nging a condemned map 'rook 1he corpse by the shoulder$, were four times less numerous on the evt of the Revolutfon tltan at the
violently turned it round and SI.rucki t ~everalt imes saying: "J).re you end of the reign of Louis XIV. Generally speaking, !he work directed
dead enoug~ now!" then, turning towards the c,rowd, laughing and by .Pierre Chaunu on criminality in Nonnandy shows the same rise in
jeering, he made several indecent remarks'. fraud a, lhe expense of violence. Cf. articles By 13. Boutelet J, C,
1
4 Argenson, 241. Cf. also B,arbier,4 51. One of the first e8isodes of this Gcgot and V,B oucheron in the Arma/es J, Normand,, of 196', 1966
affair was very typical of popular agiraUonc oncerning penal justice in and 1971. For Paris, cf. Petrovitch. The same phenomenon, it seems,
the eighteenth cen,ury. The lieuienanc-generalo f police, Berryer, had cook place in England: cf. Hibber~ 72 and Tobias, ,7ff,
·5eized 'libertine children whhout confession'; lhe guards agreed co 2 Le Roy-Lldurie, (9.73. Cf. also Farge who confirms thi~ tendency:
hand them b3ck to their parcnrs 'only when given money'; it was said between 1750 and 1751, f per cent of those convic1ed for sre-,llngf ood
um !he children were intended 10, provide for the king'.s pleasure, were sent to ,he galleys; bu, 15 per tent between 1775 and 1790: 'T11e
The crowd, having discqvered an informer, killed him 'with an courts became more severe a$ time went on ... The vaJues useful to a
Inhumanity carried to the farthest exc~$1$ and 'di:agged him after his society that wished to be ordered and respectful of property were
death, a rope arou.nd his neck, to M. Berryer's door'. N'ow, this under threa1' (Farge, lj<>-42).
informer was ~ thief who would have been broken on1,t"hew heeJ with J On this c:rit:icismo f 'e~cessive powe/ and of irs bad distribution in the
his accompli~ Raffia~,h ad he not ~greed 10 act as an informer; he was judidal apparau15, cf. in particular Dupaty, 1788, Lacre1elle nnd
grearly appreciated by the police on accouni of.his knowledge of all Target,
the, intricacies of the plot; and he was 'highly regarded lo his new 4 Cf. N. Bergasse on the judicial power: 'Deprived of any lcind of
uade'. \Ve have an exainple here that is interesting on a nWllber:-of accivity against rhe political regime of the Stat'e and having no influ
counts: a movement of,revolt trigg~red off by a relatively ntw means ence on the wills that come together to form thatrCgime or to maintain
of repre~sion, which was not penal justice, but the police; a case of that it, it must have at its disposak in order to protect all individuals and all
t~hnical collaboration between delinquents and police, Which was w tight$, s-uclia: force th:u, all.powerful in defending and assisting ihac
become nor,nal from the ejghteenth cenmry onw~rds; 3:r iot in whic,h regime, it should become absoluccly nil as soon as itS destination is
people took it upon themselves tO torture a condemned man who had changed in any attempt to use it to oppress' (Bcrgasse, t 1-u.).
unjustly escaped 1he scaffold. f Rousseau, ,.s. T rs houlcl be J\Otedt hat these ideas of Rouss.eau•sw ere
1 Those whom R. Mandrou calls ,,he two great ones: Carrouche and used in the Constituent Assembly by certain deputies who wi$hed to
Mandrin, 10 w,hom one shoula add Guilleri (Mandrou, l 12). Jn Eng maintain a system of very strict pe,nalties.A nd, curiously enough, the
land, J onaihan Wild, Jack Sh~pparda nd ClaudeDuval played a somf'. principles of 'the Social Gontrau could be used 10 support the old
whar similar role. cor~c$pOndenceo f arrocicy berwce.nc .rimea nd punlsh'ment. 'The pro
6 This title is 10 be found nor only•i n ihe Bibliochequed e Troyes, bui rect.ion due to cititens· requires that penalties be .measured according
also in the Bibliotheque de Norrnandie (cf, Helot), to the atrocity of the crimes and not sacrific~ ·in the,name ofhumanicy,
7 Cf., for example, Lacre,elle: 'In order to satisfy this need for strong humanity itsclr (Mougi~s de Roqueforr, who quotes this passage from
emotion, in order to deepen the itnpressi9n of a great example. one the Social Contra.,:c f, Mougins, 637).
allows the$Ct errible stories to circulate. The poets of ihe people rake G Duport, Archives parlemcn1aire.t~ 744. 0ne might :iJso cite in
1
them up and spread ,heir fame 10 every part of the land. One day a support the different competitions proposed at 1hc end of the eigh
family hea~ at hs PoQr the story' in song of the crime and execuLion teenth century by learned societies and academies: 'How is the mild
of its sol's' (Lacretelle, 100, ness o'f these. investigations and penalties to be rcconcilec:lw ith the
certainties of a prompt and exemplary punishment, so that civil society
J 11

.t.,_-totes
finds the greatest possible security for liberty and humanity?' (Eco 3 Part of this code was tr•nslated in the introduction to the French
nomic Sociccy of Berne, 1777). Maralr espondedw ith his Plan de translationo f G:olqu.houn1t8 o7,I , 84.
LigislariOn.u imint/lt. "Whata re the meanso f alleviatingt he rigourp f 4 ~rhise xpla.inst he numei-ousp rison regulationsc oncerningt he exac
the pen•l laws in France without damage to public safety?' (Academic tions of the warders, the security of the premises and the inability of
de Ch:ilons-sur-Marn 1 e1780;t he winnersw ere Brissota nd Bema(dJ); prisoners 10 'Communicaraem ong chem.selves.F or example, the
'does the extremes everityo f thel aws rendt o diminisht he nurnbcra nd judgement of the Dijon Parlement of >t September t;o6. Cf. -.!so
enormity of crimes in a depraved nation?'( Acad~mied e Marseille. Serpillon, 001-47.
1786; the winner was,Eymar.). This iSTepeatedex actlyi n thed eclarationo f 4 March1 714 on reddivlSt
7 G. Target, Oh.urva1i0Ms ur le proju du Codep dnal, in Locre, 7-8. le thieves or that of 18 July 1714 concerning vagabondage. A boy, who
is to be found in an invertedf orm in Kant. was too young to go to the ga]leys,r emainedin a prisonu ntil he was
8 'Society does not see in the punishmentsi t inflicts the barbarous old enough to be sent there, sometimes to serve the whole of his
pleasure of making a human being suffer; it sees it as a ne(essary sente,nceC. f. Crim.eu criminalitie n Frances ous l'Amien Rigima, 166fT.
precautiont o prevenrs imilarc rimes, 10 protects ocie1yf rom thee vils 6 Phalaris, tyrant of the Greek town of Agrigentum in Sicily, reigned
with which murdert hreatensi t' (Barnavc,9 ). about 50!' o.c. He is said to have roasted men alive in a brazen bull.
9 .Beccaria, 26. Cf. also Brissot: 'If pardon is equitable, the law is bad; His name is used here to typify tyrants in general [Tr.].
when legislation is good, pardonsa re only crimes against the law' 7 Briey, 'Tiers Etat', quoted in Desjardin, 484. Cf. Goubert and Denis,
(Brissot, 200). 203. One also finds in tJ1ec ahier.td emandsf or the maintenanceo f
,o Mably, 317. Cf. also Vattel: 'It is not so much the atrocity of the houses of detentiont hat familiesm ight use.
penaltiesa s the exactitudew ith which they are carriedo ur that keeps 8 Cf. Thorsren SeUin,P ionuring ,'n Penology, 1944, which gives an
everybody within his duty' (Mably, t63). exhaustive Study of the Rasphuis and the Spinhuis of Amsrerdam, One
11 Co~rraryt O what Carnoto r Helie and Chauveaus ay, recidivismw a., may leave to one side another' model', of,en cited in the eighteenth
very dearly punishedi n a numbero ( lp.wsu nder the Ancien Regime. century. This is the one proposed by Mabillon in the Rljl<XionSsu r lu.
The ordinance of , !49 declares that the malefactor who repeatS his pri10Md es ordru rtligie.u.xrepublishedin 1845.I t seernst hatt hisw ork
crime is an 4CX:e.crabilnef,a mous being, eminenlly pernicioust o the -wase xhumedi n the nine 1 t ~nth centurya t II time when the Catholics
commonwealth'; recidivism for blasphemy, thef~ vagabond.age,e tc., were dispu{ing with the Protestants the plape they had taken up in the
we.res:u bject to specialp enalties. philanthr'Spimc ovementa nd in certaina dministrativbe odies. Mabil~
12 Le Peletier, 311-2. The following year, Bellartm :i:dcw hat may be Ion's-work, w..hichs eeins ,o have remainedr elativelyu nknown and
regarded ,1s the first defence of a crime passicnel This was the Gras unin6uentia1sets out to show that 'the firstt houghto f the American
1
affair. Cf. Anna/esJ u /,arreaum odem,, 1813, Ill, 34. penitenti"irsy_ ystcmis' 'a quitem onastica nd Frencht houghrwhatever
1
one might say by -way of giving it a Gcnevan or Pennsylvanian
:l Tlte gentle way i'np unt'slrmem origin' (L. Faucher).
9 Vilan XIV, 64; this memoir, which is bound up with the foundation of
t ,LeP eletier de Saint-Fargeau. The aud\ors who abandoned the death
the prison at Ghent, remained unpublislied until 1841.T he frequency
penalty envisaged some definite penalties: Brisso!, 29-30. Oufrichc de
of the penalty of banishment emphasi,ed still further the relations
Valaze, 344: perpetual imprisonment for those who have been judged
between crime and vagabondage. ln t771, the States 0£ Flanders
'irremediably wicked',
remarkedt hat 'pen3.ltjeos .fbanishmcnitm posedo n beggarsr emained
2 Masson, t39. Yet the objection made against penal labour was that it
ineffecru.il;, n view of the fa-ctt hat the States send to one another
implied a recourse to violence (Le Peletier:)o r that it representeda
sul/jectS d1at they find pcmi~ious at home. As a result, a beggar,
profanation of the sacred character of work (Duport), Rabaud Saint·
cl]ased in this way from place to place, will finally get himself hanged,
Etienne got the term 'fooced labour'a dopted in contra--distinctiotno
whereas, if he had becn·given the habit of work, he would not have
'free labour that belongs exclusively to free men' (Archivu Parkm<11-
tafru, XXVI,7 1off). embarked on his evil path' (Stoobant, .218).
312 313

Notes
10 The Quakers certainly also knew the Rasphuis and Spinhuls nl for the rich and a bench for thepopr 'so that ve.rntinw nl not be passed
Amsterdam. Cf. Sellin, 109-10. ln any case, Walnut Street Prison W", on'. A third section for newcomers: 'When t~eir ability has be.en
a continuation of the Almshouse opened in 176.7 and of rJ-1ep en11I rccognited, tl1eyw ill be given a place' (M.I.D.B., 1<>-'7).
legislalion thai the Quakers had wished 10 impose.despi1et he English 4 The. success of t11eP russian troops can only be anributtd to the
administration. •excellenceo f their discipline and their exercise; the choice of exercise
IJ On the disorders caused by this law, cf. Rush, 1-9 and Vaux, 41• h is not therefore a mauer of indifference;. in Prussia the subject has been
should be no1ed that in the report by J. L. Siegel, which had inspired studied for fony years with mtremirting applicatiQn' (Saxe, II,
the Rasphuis of AmsterdamJ it was envisaged that penalties would r,u1 249).
be proclaimed publidy.i 1hat prisoners would be brought into 1hr Writing exercise:' ... 9: Hands on the knees. This command is con
prison at night, that warders would swear nor 10 reveal their idemity veyed by one r.ing on the bell; to: hands on the table, head up; 1 i:
and 1ha1n o visiis would be permitted (Sellin, 27-8). dean the slates: everyone cleans }1iss late with a linle salival or beuer
t 1 B. RushJ who was one of the inspectors, 1\otesa fter a visit to Waln"'' still with a piece of rag; u: show the slates; 13: monitors, inspect.
Strett: 'Moral cares; preaching, reading of good books, cleanliness or They i~pect the slates with their assi.stantsa nd then those of their
clothes and room~ baths; one does not raise one's voice, little wine, own bench. The assismnts inspect those of their own bench and every
as Jiule tobacco as possible, little obscene or profane conversation, one returns to his ow11 place.'
Constant work: the gardens taken care of; it is beautiful: 1,2.00 he:1do ( 6 This mixture,appears clc:ar1yi n certaill classes of the apprenticeship
cabbage' (in Teeters, 1931, so). contract: the master .is obliged to give his pupil - in exchange for his
1) Rush, 14, This idea of an iippararus for transforming human beingl'I money and his labour - all his knowledge, without keeping any secret
is already to be found in Hanway's project for a 1reformatory1 'The: from him; otherwise, he. is liable to a fine. Cf., for e~ample, Grosre
:
idea of a hospi1:i.al nd that of a malefactor arc incompatible; but lee u!J naud, Gz.
rry, to make the prison an aurhenric and effective refonnatory, instead 7 F. de la Noue re<:ommendedt he creation of military academies at the
of it being like the ochers a schooJ of vice' (Hanway, 52). end of the sixteenth century, su~esting that Qne.should learn in them
14 C[ the. criticism made by Rush of punitive specradcs, in particular 'how to ha1tdle horses, to practise 'Vith the dagger, with and without
<.hosei magined by Dufriche du Valaie (Rusl), j-<J), shield, to fence. to perform on horseback, to jump; if .swimminga nd
wrestling were added, it would be t0 the good, for ::illt his makes the
person robust and more subtle' {Noue:, 181-i).
PART TARSI? DISCIPLINE
8 'through the schools at Liege, Devenport, Zwolle, Wesel; and 1h11nks
, Dodi, boJ;,, also to Jean StU-rm-a ridh is memorandum of I S38 for tlle organization
of a gyrn,uuium at Strasburg, Cf. BJJ/lttin de la. .tqct'bl d'fu'srot'rdt u
1 [ shall choose examples from military, medical, educa,ional and
prores-rartti.t~X XV, 499-so~.
industrial insciturions. Od1er examples might have been taken from
It .should be noted that the relations between the ar,my, religious
colonization, slavery and child rearing.
organization and education a.rCv ery complex. The 'dec.ury', the unit of
> Cf. what La Meclieriew rote after, visi1 to Le Creusot: 'The buildings
th,e Rom,an army, is (0 be found in aenedictine monasteries, 3S the
for so fine an e~tablishment and so large a·quandry of different work
unit of work nnd no doubt of supervision. The Brothers of the Com
should cover a·suffident areal so that there will be no confusion among
mon Life borrowed it and adilptcd 1r 10 their own educatjon organiia
die workers during working time' (La Merherie, GG).
tion: che pupils were grouped in,rens. It was this unit that the Jesuits
J J.-B. de la Salle, Coruf,,iuJ uicoles chririe,,nu, B.N. Ms. 11719, 248-9.
100k up in the scenogrophy of their scl1ools, thus reintroduclng a
A liule earlier Batcncour proposed r.l1act lassrpoms should be d.iyidtd
military model. But the decury was replaced in tum by an even more
into 1l1reep arts: 'The most honourable for those who are le.ar:Nng
military schema, with ranks) columns, lines.
Latin ... It should be $tressed that ,here are as many places ar the
9 Guibert, 18. Jn fac~ this very old problem came foto the forefront
rabies as there will be writers_,i n order to avoid the confusion usually
once more in the eighteenth century~ for tlle economic and 1echnical
ca.used.byt he lazy.' In another, those who are learning to read: 3 bench
314 Jtj

l't'UtCS .l'IULQ
reasons tha~ we are about to see; and the "prejudice' in quest.ion had 2. In the Postscript to tlit.-Panoj,ticott, 1791, Bentham adds dark ·in~pec:
been disc:ussedv ery often by others besides Guiben himself (follower$ , don galleries painted in black around U1e inspector's lodge, each
of Folard, Pirch, Mesnil-Durand). ma.king it possible to observe two Storeys c;,fc eHs.
10 In the sense in which this term was used after 1719· 3 In his .firscv ersion of the.·P anoptico, 1 1 Bentltam had also im.i,gineda n
11 The movement that brought the rifle into widespread use may be acoustic surveillance~ operated by means of pipes leading from the
roughly dated from the battle of S1einldrk, 1699. cells to the central tower. In the Posucn"pt h¢ abandoned the idea,
12 On this imporumce of geometry, see J. de Beaus.obre:' The science of perhaps because he cou,ld not introduce into it the principle of dis
war is essentiaJlyg eometrical. .. The arrangement of a battalion and symmetry and preve,nt the prisqners from hearing the inspector as well
a squadron on a whole from and at so much height is alone the effect -as the inspettor hearing them. Julius tried to develop a system of dis
of an as yet unknown, but profound geometry' (Beausobre, 307). symme1ricall istening (Julius, 18).
•~ Journal pour l',iu1ruaitOnil,i m~ra,'rt, April 1816. Cf. Tronchot, who 4 Imagining this continuous flow of visitors entering the central tower
has calculat·edt hat pupils must have been given over 200 commands a by an unc:Jergroundp as~ge and then observing the circular landscape
day (wjthout counting exceptfonaJ orders); for the morning a,lonc of the Panopticon, was Bemham aware of che Panoramas that Barker
twenty-six commands communicated by the voice, twenty~three by was construe.ting at exactly the same period (the· first seems to have
signs, thirty-seven by rings of the bell, and twenty-four by whistle, dated from 17~7) and in which the visitors, occopying the central
which means a b1ow on the whisde or a ring on the bell every thr~ place, saw unfolding around them a landscape, a city or a battle. The
mfoutes. visitors occupied exactly the place of the sovereign gaze.
! In tlie second half of the eighteenth century, it was often suggested
1 Tlie mtanr of corrtct rrain.ing that the army shou,ldb e used for the surveillance and general partition
ing of the pQpulacion.T he army, as yet to undergo discipline in the
1 Rigltmtnt p<JUr!'iltfanurpier us1itnne,F r. trans., Arsenal. . MS.4 1o617 fo. seventeenth century, was r~ed as a force capable of ins-tillingi t.
144~F or older p1anss ee Praissac, 17-8 and Montgommery 1 7 7. For the Cf. .. for example, Serv:m, Le Soldat cirayen,1 780.
new plans, cf. Beneton de Morange, HU,oire <Ulag uerre, 1741, 61-4 G Arsenal, MS. 21G1. Under this number, one also finds regulations for
and Diuerra1ion.ssu r lu Te,pes; cf. also the many regulations such as
charity associations of lhe seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
the l11.1uu.c1.miotr il e ,1erviced u rJglement.dJ4 Caya/t.rieJ ans its camps,
7 Le Maire in a n1emor,andum wrinen at the request of Sartine, in
29 June 1753. answer to sixteen questions pose:d,byJ oseph Il on the Parisian police.
1 Arch. nae. MM 666-9. Jeremy Bent11amr ecounts that it was while TI1is memor:mdtlm '?'as published,by Cazier in 1879.
visiting the i!cole Militaire that his brother fim had the idea of the
Panopticon.
J Demia, •7--<JO• ne might note a phenomenon of the same kind in the P,4,RT FOUR PRrSON
organiz.ationo f schools; for a long 1ime" prefects' were, independently 1 Completea nd a.u.11eri'en .1,ituu'on.s
of the teachers_e.n, trusted with the moral responsibility for small groups
of pupils. After 1761; above all, one sees the appearance of a new 1 The play be.tweeqt he two 'narures' of the prison still continues. A few
type of,supervisiot:1,w hich was more administrative and more inte days •~o (summer 1974] the head of state recalled the 'principle' that
gra.ccd imo the hierarchy; .supervisors, maltres de 9uartier, maitres detention ought 10 be no more ,han a 1depriVationo fliberty' - rhe pure.
suha{ternesC. f. Dupont-Ferrier, 114 and 476. essence of imp'risonment, frted of the reality of prison; and added that
the prison could be justified only by its 'corrective' or rehabilitating
j Panopu'cz'sm effects.
2 Treilhard, 8-9. The same them:e is often io be found in the years
I Archives militaires de Vincennes, A 1,51G9 1 sc. Piece. This regula immediately prior to this; 'The penalty of detention pronounced by
tion is broadly simHar to a whole series of 01hers that date fr<;>md te the:l aw has above all the object of correcting individua1s, chat ism say,
same period aod earlier. of making them better, of preparing them by trials of shorter or longer
Jl7

duration, to take up their pince once more in society wilhour abusing 8 Abbe Petigny, Allocu.u<ma dressle aux pri..ronm"er.Jr , l'occasion de
it ... The surest ways of making individuals beuer -il.re work and l'inaugurau'on du htitr'menr.tc ellu!aires de la prison de Yt!r.raI'Uu.C f.,
education.' £ducat.ion consist-snot only in reading and arithmetic, but a few years later, in T/,.e Counto f Monte. Cri1to,a very clearly Christo
also in reconciling the prisoner$ with ~ideaso f order, morality, respect logical version of rcs-urrectiona fter incarceration; in this case prison
for themselves and for others' (Bcugnot, prefect of Seine-lnffrieure, teaches not docilicy to the law, but the power, acquired through -a
order issued Frimaire, Year X). ln the reporrs that Chapral demanded secret knowledge, to dispense justice beyond rhe injustice of 1he
from the General Councils of the diparremems, over a dozen asked for magistrates.
prisons in which the inma1es could be made to work. ·9 G. A. Real. Before this, several insrructions from the Ministry of rhe
J The most important were no doubt those_p roposed by Lucas, Marquet• Interior had stressed the need for providing work for prisoners: ~
Wasselot, Fat1cher,1 3onnevillc, and a little later by Ferms. It should Fructidor Year VJ, 3 M.essidorY ear VIJJ, 8 Pluvi6se and 18 Vent0se
be no1ed thac most of them were not philamhropists, criticizing the Year IX, 7 Brumaire Year X. Immediately after the codes of 1808 and
carceral instinnionfrol1l the outside, but were bound up, in one way or 1810, o~e still finds new instructions~1 0 October 181 r, 8 December
another, with the administration of the prisons. They were official 18u; or again the long order of 1816: 'lt is of lbe greatest importance
technicians. to keep prisoners occupied as mu~ as possible. One must instil in
4 In Germany, Julius directed thejah.rhikl1«t fiir Scrafa-und Bu.rerungs them a desire to work, distinguishing bety.,een the fate of those who
An.rta!un. arc·o_ccupicd- ~f,d_ thato f prison~s who O(isht o remain idle. The first
l Although these ncwspilpcrs·w ere above all organs of defence on 1he will be bener fed and hav.em ore comforrablc beds than rhc second.'
part of those in prison for debt and had on several occasions dissoci. .. Melun and Clairvaux were very soon organized into great workshops.
ated themselves from delinquents.as such, one finds the statement that 10 Bonnevil1e, 1846, 6. Bonneville proposed measures of 'preparatory
'the columns of Paa11re Jacques are not devoted to an exclusfve liberty'• but also of 'afflictivea dditions' oc an extension of imprison•
speciality. The terrible law of constraint by body and its disastrous mcm if it was shown that 11hep enal pi;escriptionJf ixed approximately
applicatioo will not be the only t:lrget of the journalist prisoner. .. according to the prob.a.bitd egree of the .prisoner•s obdufacy was not
Pauvrt. Jac9ues will draw the anemion of its readers to places of enough 10 produce rhe effecte xpected of it'. This extension was not to
reclusion and detention, priso'ns and almshouses; it will not keep silent exceed one. eighth of the original penalty; preparatory liberty could
on places where the guilty man is handed over to torture when the law begin after three quarters of the sentence ha? been served (Traz'tJ des
condemns him only to work .. .' 1(Pauvre Jacques, 1st year, no. 7). diru.sts in.rtitutt'onsc .omplimr:ntairt.s:.1, 5d f).
Similarly, the Ga,ette. de Saiflu-Pilagr'e eampaigncd for a penitentiary 1 t In GO{ette Ju uihunaux. Cf. also .M-arquet-Wasselot, t8_)2, 7◄-S·
system whose aim wou.ldb e 'the amelioration of the species', any other Lucas notes that minQr offenders 'are generally recruited a.rno1;1tgh e
being 'the expression of a still barbarous society' (11 March 1831). urban populations' and that 'the majority of those sentenced to hard
6 The discussion that began in France abouc r 830 was still continuing in labour come from ihc agricultural ,POpulationS( Lucas., I, 46-10).
1810; Charles Lucas., the a<lvocareo f Auburn, was the il\spirarion n. 'If one treacs of the administ,rativeq uestion by abstracting the question
behind th( order Qf, 8.39o n the running of the maisons ccmrale1 {work of buildings, one runs the risk of drawing up principles rhat are based
in common and •bsolme silence). The wave of revoh that followed on no reaHcy;w hereas, with a sufficienck nowledge of administrative
and perhaps the general agi\ation in the country in the years 184>-J needs, an architect may ~ccept a particula,t system of imprisonment
resulted in the adoption in 1844 of rhe Pennsylvanian regime of tha1 theory may have dismissed as U1opian' (Blouei, 1).
absolute isolation, ~dvocated by Demetz, Blouct and Tocqueville. But 13 1The English reveal their genius for mechanics in everything they
the second penitentiary congress in 1847 opted against chis met.hod. do ... and they want their buHdings to functio,, as .a machine subject
7 'Every man•, said Fox, 'is illuminated by 1..hed ivlne lighr and I have 10 1hea C\iOno f a single mo1or' (Baltard, 18).
seen h sliine through every man.' It was in the spirit of the Quakers t 4 One should study how clie practice of biography became widespreada i
and of Walnut Street that 1he prisons of Pennsylva~ia, Pittsburgh a11d about the same rime as the constitution of the individual deHnquenti n
Cherry Hill were organiied from 1820. the punitive mechanisms: the biography or autobiog~phy of prisoners

1'1(ote~
in Apperr; the drawing up of biographical files on the psychlairlr 6 A song of the same kind is quoted by the Gar«" des iribunaux of
mod~!; the_u se of biog,aphy in the defence 6( accused persq11s,O n 10 April 1836. It was sung to the tune o[ 1he 'Marseillaise'. The
the fast ~omt one m.1ghtc omparet he great justificatorym emoir.su f patrioric war song clearly became the song of the social war: 'What do
the latec 1ghteemhcenturwy ritten for the threem en condemned1 0 1hr these stupid people wan,to f us, do they come to .ins-ulut s in o~r mis•
.wheel, or for Jeanr1Se almon - and 1he defences.o f criminalsi n 1ht• fortune?T hey starea t us calmly. Our butcher:ds o not horrify them.'
!'eriod of Louis Philip~•· Chaix d'Es1-Ange pleaded for La R'onci~rc: 7 There is a dass of writers who 'haves triven to glor:ifyt he crimeso f
If long before the crime, long before the charge is laid, you ean cenain e<eeptionally skilled malefactors, give them the leading roles
s~rutm1zeth e defendant'sl ife, penecracein to his-hear1,f ind im mos, and expose the agentso f autltorityt o theirs allies,t heirj eersa nd their
hiddenc orners,l ay barea ll his thoughts,h is entires oul ... • (.D,'scourJ ill-disguised mockery. Whoever has seen a performance of Auberg• du
et plaidoyers, TU,.1 6<,). Adreu or Ro~n Ma~aire, a dramac elebrateda mong the people wHI
1
recognizew ithout dlfficulcyt he correctnesso f my observations.I t is
1 11!,galitt"qun J /<.liiu;ne..ncy the triumph, the apotheosis, of audacity and crime. Honest folk and
1 Rt!Vutd!e Paris! 7 June 183GT. his part of the spectacle,I n ,s3G, tlie forces 9f public order art ridiculed frombcginning to end' (Fregier,
w;i~
no longer public;o nly a few privtlegeds pectatorsw ere admiuedt o it. II, 187-8).
8 Gar_medu tribunaux, 13 July 1837. On 9 August, the Garm• reported
The accounto f the riveting of the convicts' chainst o be tound 'int he
that the carriage had overturned on the outskirts of Guing,mp:
Rt!vued e Paris ~orr<:Spondexs acdy - to the point even of using 1..he
instead of m~tinying, the prisoners,' helped their guardianst-o put
same words -wuh tnat of the Dtmier jour d'un condamnt 1819.
theirc ommonv ehicleb ack on its wheels'·Y. ee on 30 October,i t noted
2 The Garette du trihunaux regularlyp ublished these list~ and 1..hcse
an escapea t Valence.
'criminal'n otices. From the following descriptionp eople would be
able co recognite Ddacollonge: 'Old cloth 1..rouscrosv er a p3ir or 9 Text addressedt o L•Attlier, October 1841, by a workeri mprisoned
for joining a workers•a ssociation.I t was able to note-thisp rotesca t a
boots, a peaked cap of the same 5tulf ond a grey overdll, .. A coat or
-iime when the same new$papewr as waging a campaigna gain5tcom
blue Stuff' (<>June1 836). Later, it was decided 10disguisc Delacollonge
petitionf romp enall abour.T he samei ssuec arrieda lenerf roma nother
in ord~rc o pr~tecth im from the violence of the crowd. The Gat4tt<. worker on the s.1mc. subject. Cf. also La .Fraterru'1Ml, arch 1842
'du 1r.~bun.au1xm mcdia1,eldyc .'Scribetdh e disgui$e:' Striped trousers, 1
3 b R l e u v e u e li n d e t n P o a v ri e s r , a J l u ls n , e a 1 st 8 r 3 a 6 w . C h f a . t C ' ( l 2 a 0 u d J e u G ly u ). e ux: 'Fed oil d1ose heads.,, 10 G 1s a t re y u e e a r d , u n o tr . i 1 h 0 u . naux, J December1 819.e r.a lso Gacttte du lfihunaux,
19 July 1839; the Ruch, populair<,A ugust 1840;L a Fratem;,;, July
each of these falkn men has below him his own bestial type. , , H"ere
_is the Jynx,h er:et he cat, here the monkey, here the vulture here the August 1847.
hyena.' ' 11 This campaignw as very vigorousb eforea nd after the inss-ingo f new
regulationsf or the maison$c mtrales in 1839. The regu,lacionws ere
4 Revue de Paris, 7 June 1836. According ro tt1eG a•ute du tri6unaux
I > severe{ :>ilcncea,b olidon of wine .1ndt obacco,r eductioni n food) and
Th orer, who co.mmanded the chain-gang of 19 July, wished to
they were followed by tevolts. On 3 October 1840, 1.., Morur<11r
removet heseornamentS'J: t is not fittingt hat as·you go t0 lhe convict
wrote: 'It wa:>s candaloust o see priso.nergs orging themselvesw hit
ship ro expiatey 0ur crimes, you ,$houldp u~he ffronterys o far as to
wine, meat, game, de.Hc.1cicosf all kinds and treating prison as n
dec:oratyco ur hair,a s if you were going to your wedding.'
convenient hostelry where they could procure all the comforis thot
5 Revue d, Paris, 7 June 1836. On this dace, tl,e chain-gang had been
the state of liberty often refused them.'
shortenedm order to prevent this merry•go.. r ound and soldiers had
n In 1816, many of the General Councils demanded that depormlnn be
been commandedt o maintaino rder up t:ot he dcpartu·rocr the chain•
gang. TJ~ec, o~vicu' Sabbath is described in the Demier jour d'un subsrltutedf or constant and ineffecdve incarceration1. n J 8◄1, 1l1u
General Council of the Hautes-Alpes demanded that the prlw,11
eondamne:S ocietyw as representedt here.byt he gao]ersa nd the horri
become 'truly expiatory'; those of Dsome, Eu,e-e1-Loir, Nlavro,
fied and curious bystanders. The criminal defined the intentions of
Rh6ne and Seine-et-Gist:m ades imilard emands.
society and m;:idoef 1hish orriblep unishmenta familyf ostival.'
JlO

~otes Notes
13 According lo ~n investigation carried out in 1839a mong the direc1om someone to have his name in the police register for him never to be
of the maisons ant rafts. Tl).ed irec10r of the mai.son,ce,,ir(liol!f Embnrn Jost sight of/
remarked: 'The excessive comfort in the prisons probably coo1ribu1cl r8 Of the rtsistance of lawyers to par6cipating in this functioning, there
a great deal 10 the 1.enib]ei ncrease in the number of redd.iyists:" Whtie is abundanr evidence from as early as the Restoration (which proves
the direclor at Eysses r·cmarked: 1The present regime is nOl severe that it is in no way a rece.ntp henomeno,l). In particular the liquidation
enough, and if one thing is certain it is tlrnt for many of che inmates or rather the re-utilizatio1\ of the Napoleonic police posed certain
prison has itS attractions and that they find in prison depraved pleasures problems, But 1he difficulties c:(>ntinued.C f. Belleymo's fir>t speech
1hat are entirely to their liking.' The director at Limoges: •The after his appointment in 1821, in which he sought to differentiate
present regime of the maistms ctntral.:.rwhich,f or the recidivists, are (n himself from his predeoessors: 'Legal ways are open to us. .. Brought
fact little more than boarding houses, is in 1,0 way repressive' (E:r. up in die school of law1e ducattd in the school of so worthy a magis
Moreau-ChriS1ophe, 1840, 8G). Compare tliese remarks with declara trature ... we·art the auxiliaries of justice ... ' {Bellcyme);s ee aJso the
tions made, in July l974, by tl1e.leaderso f the union of prison workers very interesting pamphlet by Molene, D, I• /ibmi.
concerning the effects of liberalization in prisons. 19 For contemporary views of Lacenaire, see the dossier drawn up by
14 On the problem of depormion, cf. Borbc-Marboi$a nd the discussion M. Lebailly in his cdilion of Lacenaires Memoires, r968, >97-304.
between Blosseville-andL a Pilorgerie (on ,he subject of Botany Bay). 10 The circle of ,he years 1835-6: fieschi, who served the penalty com
Bur<!,M arengo and L. de Cam~, among others, drew up plans for ihe. mon tO parricides-and regiddesl was one of the reasons why RiviCre,
coloniz.ation of Algeria with delinquents. the parricide, was condemned to death despite a memorandum whose
r 5 One of 1hef irst episodes was the organization under pol Ice supervision astonishing character was no doubt muffled by the brilliance of
of the maisons dt tqluance (1813), which went well beyond the pro lacenaire, of his :rial, and of his writings, whic:h were, published
visions of the law of 14 July. 1791 conccm.ingsurveill"nce io br:othels. thanks to the head of the Sureie (censored to some ex1em), at the
1
Cf. on this subject the manuscripts collected by the Prefecru.(e of beginning of 1836 some months before his accomplice Fran)ois was
1
policc--(~0-..26l}n. particular, the followiogcircular-from the Prefect of tO provide, with the ehain-gang of Brest, one of the last great circus
police, dated 14 June 1823: "The--eStablishmemo f houses of prostitu.- shows of crime. A circle of illegalities and delinq_uenc.iest,h e circle of
1ion ought naturally to be regarded with displeasure by any man who discourse of crime and on crime.
is conC1?rnCwd ,ith public morality; 1 am not surprised that the Com• 1.1 Ar the end of ,he eighteenth century Colquhoun gave some idea of d1e
missioners of police oppose to the utmost <>ft heir powet"St he estab• difficulty of the task for a city like London (Colquhoun, 27-9; 293-4).
lishment of houses in t~Cir various quarters ... The police believed 22 •.Noo ther dass is subjected co a surveillance-of this kind; it is exercised
that 1hey had done much 1owards public order if they had succeeded almost in the same way a5 that of released prisoners; it seems to place
in enclosing prostitutiOrl within colerated houses over which its action ,he workers in 1he category ihat we now call the dangerous doss of
may be constant and uniform and which would nor, be able to escape. society' (L'Atelier, 5,h year, no. 6, March 1845),
survei11ance.' 23 Apart from 1he Ga,.__-eduets crihunauxa nd the Courriu .du tr/hunaux,
rQ The book by Parcnt-Ducha,tel~t on .Prostz"ruti'odn P ari".r,1 836l mny be the journal des conci'erges.
read os evidence ot this link, encouraged by the PQlice and penal 24 Cf. L' A1elier,J une 1844, petition to the Chambre de Paris that
institutions, between the delinquent milieu and prostltacion. The case prisohers should be made to do 'urlheahhy and dangerous work'; in
of the Tralian Mafia rransplan1cdt o ,he United States and used bod, to April 184f, the. newspapers quoted a case in Brinany where a large
extract illicit profit's and for po1itical ends is a fine example of. the number of military convicc·s died of fever while working on canal•
coJoniiation of an illegality of JO!Opulaorr igin. building. \Vhy were the prisoners not working with mercury or white
17 On tl1is role of delinquems for police and especially political surveil lead in Novcinbec 1841<.'. . Cf. also the Democra11p,o /iuq,,, of the
lance, cf. the memorandum written by Lemaire: jlnformtrs:' :ire people years 1844-5.
wh6 'expect indulgence for themselves'; they are usually 'bad subjects .1$ 1n L' Aitlier, of November 18,13, there was an attack against the
who expose others· who are worse still. Furthermore, it is enough fot My"''" de Pori, because the)' showed the delinquents in 100 good a
321.

notes
light, sues.singt heir picturesquenesst,h eir vocabulacy,a nd beca1111r for good behaviour, for signs of devotion and each J'""' these prizes
therew as too much emphasiso n the fatalc haractero f 3 proclivitym are competed for by a large number of competitors' (Houze de
c~e. In .la Ruc.11p-Ot plilaires imilara crackso n the Lheatre are tO bf l'Aulnay, 13-11).
found. ) Crime was explicitly defined by certain jurists such as Muyart de
16 Cf. In La Ruche populaire (December 1839) Vin;ard replied to •11 Vouglans, 1767, 108 and 1780, 3, or Rousseaud de la Combe, 1-2.
article by Baluc published in Le Sik/e. Baliac had said chat a chorj(r
of theftw as to be madew ith prudencea nd discretionw hen it c:oncernecl
a rich ma.nw hose slightest dishonesty immediatelyb ecame kn6wnt
'Say, Monsieurw, ith your hando n your conscience,w hethert he con
traryd oes not occur every day whet.herw, ith a great formnea nd ::in
elevated rank in society, one does not find a thousand$ Olutio1»1,1
fhousandm eansr o hush up some unfortunatea ffair.'
27 TnL a Fraterm'ti, M.irch1 847, therei s a discussiono f the Drouillard
affaira nQ referencei s made to thefts in the naval administration Q I
Rocheforr. In June 1847, t\lere was an article on, the Boulmy trial ond
on the Cubiere-Pcllaprat affair; and, in July-August J847, on the
Bc-nier-Lagrang~uJs s.ieua ffair,w hich involved misappropriationllf
public funds.
28 'Licensedp rostitution,d irc.."m<:att erialt heft, house--breakingm, urder,
brigandagef or the Jower classes; while skilful spoliadon, indirect,
refined theft,, clever exploitationo f human cattle, carefully planned
and brilliantlye xecutedb etrayalst, ranscendenpt ieceso f sharpp racdc~
in short, all the rrulye legantv ices -!,ndlu crativec rimesw hich the l3w
is far 100 polite to interruptr em3,inth e monopoly of the upperc lasses·
(1 Deocrnber 1838).
29 Cf., for example, what L,. Phalange said of Delacollonge or of Elira
bide on 1 August 1836 and~ October 1840.
L 'Anything that helps ,to tire the b-Odyh e.lps to expel bad thoughts; so
care is takenc hatg amesc onsisto f violent exercise.A t night, they fall
asleep the moment they touch the pillow' (Ducpetiaux; 1814, 371--6),
2 Cf., for example, the following description of workers' accommodation
built at Lille in the mid-nine,ecnrh century: 'Cleanlin~ss ls the order
o( rhe day. It is the heart of the regulations. There are a number of
stvtre provisionsa gainst noise, drunkenness,d isorderso f all kinds.
A.s erious offence brings expulsion. Brought back 10 regular habiei of
order and economy, the workers no Jongerd esert the workshopso n
Mondays. .. The children are better supervised and are no longer a
cause of scandal. .. Prizes are given for the upkeep of the dwellings,
J1S

.t11b1tography
Beneton de Morange, E. C., Dissertar,'ons. sur le.s Tentt.s, 173S ·
Bibliography
His wire de la gu~rre, 1741.
J.,
Ben,ham, Works, ed. Bowcing,.JV, 1843.
DcrccY, .-M.,C roquams.e r nu-pit.dt, 1974.
Berenger, A., Rapport a I' AcaOmi~ du SFiencum orales, June 1836.
Bergasse, N., Rapport d la Coru11'tuan1.reu.,. rf.e ,pcuvoirj ud1'ct'aireJ, 789.
Bernard, Samuel, RapfOrt du a<>oc tobre 18, 6 d la socii,i de I' m.uigrununt
mutuel.
Bexon, S., Code de s'urul publique, part 2, J 8o7.
F.,
Bigot Prcaroencu, RapportaJJ.c on.seigl tniral de la socidtl dtspri.son.s>18 19.
Aguct, J. P., I.., Greru sous la monarch,, d, Jui/let, 1954. Bladmone, .W. C , ommentarieso n ,he Laws of En&land,v ol. 4, 1766-9.
Agulhon, M., La. Yiew .soci'alem PrtJvence, .t970. Blouet; Abel, Proje.t de pn'sons c4{/ular'rup1 843.
Almanaclt populaiu dt: la France, L', 1839. Bonneville, A., D, la, ricidiv<,1 844.
r.
Ambo,le, Projt.t Je ,egtenu.,up our l'acilrie d', Archives m1tion~I~ u, Des lihlrations pr4paratoiru, J.846.
1301. Des institutt'ons complimentairu du sy.s~emep tnitencicr, 1847.
Anchel, R."J Crimes t:l ch,i.u'menu au X //f/Jo siede, 1933. Boucher d'Argis, A., Obsttva.Jions sur. lu loi.sc rimt'nellu, 1781.
AnnaJu du harreau mcdune, ID, 182 ,. Cah.llr d'un magittrar, 1789.
Archives na1ionales, MM 6j8, 30 March 1718 and MM6 66, 15 Sep,embor Boussarielje, L. de, Le Bon Mil,',aire, 1770.
1763. Dradford, W., An in'luiry liowf or 1/iep 1111is!imenotf de.at.fti.s neceua,y in
Archives mlli~ircs dt Vincennes, A 1,pG 91 .so. Pennsylvani'a.i1 793.
Ard.ivt,1 parllme.niaire.r,X fl, XXVI, LXXII. Brant~me, Mimoires. La vie des liommes illustres, Il, ed. r71.2..
Argenson, Marquis d', Journal et ml.moire.s, VI, r 859-6? edn. Brissoc, J.P., TAiorie de., loi.t cr,'min.ellu, I, 1781.
Adfs, P., L'Enfom et la famille, 1960.
Bruneau, A., Ohsen,acions ct ,noximes sur /es mati'tru crim1'nellts,1 7 c5 .
Atelier, L"i October 1840; M,11ch1 842; October 1842; November 184); Bulleri'n de la socilU {l!fu&toir~d u protutanti.sme-, XXV.
June 1844; March 1845. Bure. • E., .JJe la mislrti dt.s classes /abon'eusu en 'Angleuru tf en France, II>
Aylies, S., Du systlmt pinitl'.(ttia.ire,1 837. 1840.
Ayrault, P.~ L'Ordre,formaliti tl tn.suu<tionjudt'daire. Buxwn, Thomas F owell, Parliamentary D~l,au~ 1819XXXIX.
1
Balcard, L, Ardu'11cconograplu'dee s prison.s, r829. Canguilhc.m, G.> Lt Normal, et le Ra,Aologiqttt, ed. 1966.
BarbC-Marbois, F. dt, Rapport sur l'd1ai-du priso11.sd u Calvados, de I' Eurf, Canler, P. L. A., Memoires, ed. 1968.
la Manche et la. Seine lnflrieure, 1813. ' Cariou, P., Lu ldialitl-s ca.ruistiqtte.(tu npublished rhesis).
Barbier, E.-J.-F.,Journal, JV, ed. 1847-5~. Chabroud C.., :Arcliivu parlemen1airts, XX.VI.
1
Barnave A., 1Discours 3. la Consthuante', Archives pd.r/tme,ita.itt,, ChaS$aigne, M., La LicutmMCt gi11draled e µlice, 1906.
1
XXVII, 6 July 1791. Chassan6~ B. de, Consimuqo Burgundi, 1 p8.
J. r
Batencourt, c.l 1 e / n.stttJctr'onnJ .Uliodi'/1puo il.r lt:0le poroiuiale, J 669; Ch.i.unu, P.; Arvza.lesd e No,:mandie.
BeaumonL,E . de and Tocqueville, .A. de, Nots sur le systi.ml!p ltuif.n1ia1're, Choiseul, Mimoire <XJ10sitifB, .N. MS. 8129.
1831. Colquhoun,~-, Treo,4• on 1h, Police of rhc Mttropo/is, 1797.
Le SystJme pir,ittntiati-ti aux .ttats ..U nis, ed. 1845. Comte, C .. , Tra.itl de lcgiJlatiDfl1833.
Bea.usobre~ J . de, Commemaire .sur kt diftrues du places, II, t717. Coquille, G-.C, outu.med u Nivern 1 .ait>e d. 1646.
Beccaria, C. de, Traitl des di/its tt du ptinc.s>t '7G4 ed. J8f6, Corre, A., Docume{lts de critrij'no!ogircl trospectivc, 1891·
1
Bellcyme, M. de. H1~toired e l' admini.slfaiion. Dqcumems pour servir d /' lii1tor'red e.l a torturej udiCiairee n.B rttogne, J 89G.
327

DIOUOgrapny tlibliography
Coumol, G., Con.sid/r41U)nd.'i,n tlrll puhlic sur le dro,'td 'e.xplo,'url .urr,.inu, Ferrlhe, C., Dictlonnat'u th pratt"qw, II, 1740.
1790, Arch. nar. A XIII". Ferrusl G., Des pri.sonniers, 1850.
Crime u criminalirde n Fran<es ous tAnci'cn RJgime, 1971( Yarious authors:). Fesry, 0., Lu Deti;.s rwaux tr leur rlpr6l.fion sow la Rboluti'on et !6
Consular, 19sG.
Daisy, Le royaume ill France, 1745. Fielding, Henry, Tlit Causu of ti,~l ate 1itcrtosei 'nR ohbers, 1 ?S1 , in Works,
DamhoudCre, J. de, Pff'uiquej udi.tiaire As cauits ci'vile.s,,f 7l. X, ed. 1784.
Danjou, E., Du prison.s, 1821. Filangieri, G., La. Science de fa Ugisfation,I V, 1786 (Fr. trans.).
Dauphin, V., RecAercliu .sur l'industrie t-txrilt en.A njou, 1913. Fleury, Joly de, B.N. Fonds Joly de Fleury, 258.
Da~tricoun,P ., La CriminalitJ et la rlprusion au Parhme',u da Flandre, Fratt.rniti., Lal November ,841j February 1841j March 1841; November
1721-1790, 1912. 184i; March 1847; July-August 1847.
Deca,zes,E ., 'Rapport au roi ~-url es prisons', I:.e Moniuur, 11 April_1 819, Fregier, H. A,.l Les·Classes,dangertusu, 1840.
Delamare, N., Trait, IUp olice, 1701. Fresnel, R., Coruidirarions sur lu m.ai.ron.d.,e refuge, 1829.
Delcuz.c, Gilles and Guauari, F~lix, A,.,i-Otdipt, 197> Funck-Brentano, F.,C atalogued es manuscrt'tsd 6 la ln'hHotlriqudee l'Ar.rtnal,
Pemia, C:, R~gl<mtntp our lu ico{u d, fa v,1/e Je Lyon, 1716. lX.
D~pOts de la Guerre, 3689.
Des Essarts, T. N.,JJictionnaire univerul de police, 1787. Gaillac,H ., Lu MaUons de corrtction.1971.
Desjardin, A., Lu Caltiersd u E,au ginlraux et la ju.sa'cec. rlmi,ulle, 1883. Gasparin, I,. . ~ E , de, Rapport atf. mini. 1 si re de l'lmJr,'t.ur sur la rlforme des
Ducatel, ln.srruuion pour la corutrutriond u mai'sonsd 'arrll, 1841. pr,~on.s,t 837.
Ducpetiaux, E .• De. la rlfarme pinitt.ntiaire, ill, 1837. Ga.reued ' A.m11udam, .1 April, 1757.
Du cqfON.'tsa gricolu, 185 1. G"{ette Jes tribunaux, 3 December 1829; 30 August 1832; 10 April I 836;
De la.c ondiu'onp !tysigue et morak du jeunu ouvriets, II, 18_s4.
6 June 1836; 20 July 1836; 6 Ap',il 1837; 15 June 18n; 13 July 1837;
Du sys time de I' t,nprisorm4,nvu cellulm're,1 857.
9 Augu"' 1837; 19 July 1839; August , 840.
Dufuu, 'Di$COUrSa la Constiruante', ArcA.p art., XXVI. Gerspach, E., La Manufacture Jes Gohelins, 1892.
Du(riche de Valazt, C. E., Du fois pdnales, 1784.
Goubert, P. aJtd Denis, M., Lt.s Fran;ais om la parole, 1964.
Duruimel, L., Les Exkution.s capita/ts d Avignon au XVfll• ,iMe, 1890. Grellct-Wam 1 my, Malluel Ju prisons, 11, 1839.
Dupafy.t C., Mlmoire ju.stifi.carij'pourl u tro1'slr .ommu condant.nU, i la roue, Gregory, -C.d e, Projet de Cod«plnal uniYersal, 1832.
1786. Grosrenaud, F., La Corporati'ono uvriire Q B6.1anfort,1 907.
Ltttres sur la procldurt u,iniiullt, 1788. Guerry, F. and Deleule, D., L~ Corpsp roduuif, ,973.
Dupont-Ferrier, Du co{Uged , Cftrmont au fycle Louu-fe-GranJ, I. Guibert, J. A. de, 'Discours prCHminaire', Essai ginJ,al de tactt'que,l t
Du port, A., 'Discours a la Constituante.•, 21. December 1789, Ard. par!.,
1n2.
X and XXI. •
Duras, L., article appearing in Le Progrusif and quoted by La PAalange, J.,
Hanway, TA, Defects of Police, •nl•
1 December 1838. Hardy, S. P:,M u foi,irs, B.N. !.jS. 6680-87, 1n8.
Durkheim, E., "Deux lois de Jitvolution p~na1e', A~U .srxiollJgiquItV , Harou-'Romain, ~- P., Projec, tk pini1er,cier,1 840.
1899-1900. Helot, R., La Dihlio1hi9ue6 /we ut Normand,~, 1928.
Hibbert, C., The Roots of E¥i~ 1966.
Encycloptdu, articles on' 'Supplice' and 'Manufacture'. Hobsbawm, E. J., B andits, 1969.
Esm~in, A., Historie de.l a praclJuu crimiiulk UI Fro.nee, 1881.. Houz~ de l'Aulnay,. .,.A ., Des lt,g~mtnts ouvn'ersa Lill~, 1863.
Humam'taire, L', August r841.
Farge, A., 'Le Vol J'alim,nu d Paris au XVJ/l• siicle, 1974,
Faucher, L., De fa rlforme Jes pri-,, 1838.
Instruction par l'ex~rcise de r,it[anrtritl 14 May I?H·

01011ograpny
J, J.,
l11,.t1ruaioJntlf le service dtJ regltmtntl Je Co.valeried an., lu campst 29J une M;,r<Juei-Wasselot, La-Ville du r,fuge, 1832.
175}- L'Et!u:ograp/u't dts prisont 1841.
1
Marx, Karl, Tire.E ,'ghttMtlt Dru.moireo f Louh Bonaparu, ed. 1954.
Joly de Maizeroy, P., TJ1icrr'ed e la guuri!, J777• Capital, vo1r r, ed. 1970.
J o ussc, D., Traiti de la juuic«. criminellt, 1771. Masson, L., La Rivoluiion pinalt en 1791, J 899.
Jucquioc, J., L e Cluhf ran;ais de la mldaille, 4th term, c970. Meir, G. Codina, Aux-.1ourceds t la pldagogit du ]/suites,, 1968.
juillard, M., Bri'gandage et crmrrehandee n ltautJJA. uvergnd aft XJ/1/Je M.1.D.B. (Batencourt),/nstrucu'on mithofl.iqutp o,ir l'Jcolt.p {Jroi.r-siaJlt6, 69.
si«l,; 1937. Mirtermaier, K. )., Trairi de la preu,,,, 1848 (Fr. trans.).
Julius, N".H ., Le;ons sur /es pn'sonst l, 1831 (Ft. trans.). Mogensen, N. \V., Aspecu de la. sociiti augtrorme aux XJ/Jft et XJ7JJ/e
siieft.s, 197I .
Kantorowitz., £., The. J<t'ng'~T wo Bodies, 1959. Mo1Cne,A . de, De l'lrumdm',i du lois uinu'nelles, 1830.
Kropotkin, P., Memoir, ofa Revo/u1i()nis1e, d. 1906. MonfalCon, J. B. J ', . H i.stoirf du ,iuurrec,,ionsa Lyqn 1 r834.
Momgommery, de, La Milieefrar.;9ise, ed. 1636.
Moreau-Christophe, L., Dt la morra!iti et de la falz'e dan.s It rlgimt
Lacenairc, Minu,iru, ed. 1968.
pinr'u.nu'a,'rt,1 839.
Lachhe, 'Discours 3.l a Constituame', 3 June 1791, Areh. par!., XXVI.
Ucre1elle, P, L. de, Di:Scours Jf UT lt.s prijugds dts ptr'nt.s, 'nfomantes, 1784. :M P ou o g li i m ns i9 d u e t .s R p o in q i u t e t~ fo tt r 'a t, i r J ts . , J 1 . 8 , 4 'D 0. iscours a la Cons1ituante', Arch. par!.
La Metherie, C. de, Journal dt physique, XXX, >787.
La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, G. de, Des pri,ons d, Philad,lpAie, 179G. XXVI.
Muyart de Vouglans, P. F., ln.stituts au droit cri'mint!, 1757.
La Salle, J.-B. de, Cooduited es ;,oles ehr1,;,-.,,, B.N. MS. 11759.
Rlfutation du Traiti Jes dilhs et des JNinu, 1767.
Traiti sur /es 0Miga1ionsd u friu.r des lcol& clirelir.nnese, d. 1783.
Les lot'sc rr'mt'rulltstn F ranee,.1 78,o.
Lau]au, R., L'£colc mil;·,a'ired e Paris> 19~0.
Lauvergne, H., Lu For;ats>1 841.
Lawrence, J., A Ht'.storyo fCapi'tal Pt1nt'shme.m1, 931. Nant~, Archives municipales de, F.F. 114.
Uon, A., La Rivoluu'onf ran;a,Se et l'lducau'on uchnii;ut, 19<i8. Navereau, A...,L e Logement rt les u.sttnsilesd u gens dt guerrt de 14.JSJd
u, Peletier de Saint-Fargeau, Arel,.pad., XXVI, 3 June 1791. '71!9, 1924.
u, Roy-Ladurie, E., Ccrnrepoim, 1973. NicolaS, Si la torture es1 un moyett Q >'t.r,'fielre s crimes, 1681.
"L'histoirc immobile', Ann.ales,M ay-June 1974. Noue, F. de la, D,'scoursp olitiques et militairts, 1614.
Lc1'rosnc:, G. 1 Afimoiru .1Ur lu vagabon.tb, 1764.
J/ues sur lajusttCe criminelle, 1777. O\lylfe G., An Essay 10 Prwer« Capital Crime,, 1-73,.
1
Levy,J , P., La Hz'erarchied.t -sp reuvu dans le droics a11andt u Moym Age, Oppenheirn, Rtglement prov,Joirtpour laf ohrique de M.S., 1809,i n Hayem,
J.,
,939. Mimoires u docdmentsp our rtYerti~d .l 'ltistoire du commerce,1 911.
Linguet, S. Nlctsst'td d'unt riforme Jans l'udminz'strationd e lajus1ice, 1764. 'Ordonnacc du 1tr janvier 1766, pour r~gler J'exerdse de l'infanterie'.
1
Locre,L a Ligi.slatiorrd e fa France, XXIX.
Loisel, G. His1oired es minageriu, Il, 1912. Parfou,ru, P., Mimoirts dt la .,ociltl·arclilologiqued 1/lle--et~PilaiM.X, XV,
1
Loyseau, C., C,'nql ivres du drtJit dts oJ/icts,e d. 1613. 1896.
Lucas, C., De la riforme des pri,on.s, 1836. Pastotet, C. E. de, Du lois._plna/e,,1 790.
Pauvre Jacquu, JSt ye.ar, no._;.
Mably, G-.d e, De la lig,$/au'o.n,O euvres co,nplites, IX, 1789. Perrot, MichCle, Delinq~'!Ct et .sy,,bne pbu'1eruiaired e France au XI xi
Mandrou, R., De la cu!turep opulaire aux X V/Jt et X'f/l//e .si'icles,1 964. ,;;cl, (unpublished).
Marat, J. . P . ., Plan de ligis!atio,1" iminell~, 1780. Pction deV illeneuve, J.,' Discours a Ja.Cons'rituante', Arch. parl.,XXVT.
Marchegay, P., Arehiv,~ d'Aajou, Il, 1850. Petrovitch, P., <3rimee, ,11inir1alt'etln FranceX f/J/LXP'/J/e siiele.s1971.
1
330 33'

Phalang,, La, t August 1836; 10 August 1836; 10 January 18J7; r Soulatges>J . A., Traitd du crimes, I, 1762.
Stoobant, L.>i n Anna/es de la Socilti d'lu"s,oited e Garul, III, 1898.
December 1838; 1$ August 1840; 2 October 18-40.
Fi~tel de -~ochemont, C. journal de Gcnive, $ January !'788. Swedish DiJct"pliM,T he, London> 1632 (anon.).
1
Pikes onginalts et proddure.s du prociJ fa.it ci Rokr, ..F ran;ois Damiens,
ill, 1757. Target, G., L' Esprit dts cahiers-prlsentl.s aux .Erat.tg ln!.rau.x, 1789.
Poullain du Pare, A. M., Principes du d,ott franf(U's se.lonk s coutumu de Tamu, R. (ed.), 1.:Enseigntmtnt tt la dijfusi'on Ju sc-icnctt a.u XVI/Je,
Dretagne, XI, 1767-71. 1964.
Praissac, Lu D,'sc()ursm ili,airu, J 613. Teeters, N. K., The Cradle oftlte Peniremiary, 1935.
They were i'n Pri.son, t9J7·
J.,
Tobias, Crime and lndu.1trialS odety, 1¢7 .
.R ad,inovitt, L. The English Criminal Law, II, 1916.
1 Ton, Michel, Q.I., 1974.
Rfal, A., Arch. par/., 2• serie, LXXII, 1 December 1831.
Touquet, H. du, De la condin'ond u cla.ssesp auvru, 1846.
Real, G. A., Motifs du '<:"Odd•ei nstr11~1iocnr imin,!lle, 1808. Trellhard> J.B., Mou'fs Juc <>dde'i.n squction criminelle, 1808.
Regi.Slred es dllt'herau'on.dru hurtau. tk l' HOsel-Diw.
Troncl\ot, R. R., L'Enseigntmtnt m111uti tn France, I (unpublished
'Rcglement de-1743 pour l'infumerie prussienne', Arsenal, MS. 40,6.
rhesis).
Remusat, C,. F. M. de, Arch. par!., LXXU, 1 D«lember 1831. Turnbull, J., Visit< a la prison de Plr11ad,lph,:,1, 797 (Fr. trans.).
Revue de Paris, 7 June: 1836.
"R.ichetD, ., La Franu.moderne, 1974.
Van Meenen, P., 'CongrCS~ nitentiaire de Bruxelles', in Annale.sd e la
Risi, P., Ohun 1aci/Jnss ur !u mau'irt.f dejurispruderzu.c rimindle, i768.
Ch.ariti, 1847.
Rochcmonteix, C. de, Un tollege au XPJJ• sied,, Ill, 1889.
Vauel, E. de, Le Droit dt.1g ens, 1768.
Rossi,P ., Traitl de droit plna/ HT,1 819.
Rousseau,J .-J.,S o,ial Contrac 1 t , ed. 1913 (Eng. ttans.). Vaux, Roberts, ,1Vo1ie 1 e s1S16.
Vermeil, F. M., Essai sur /es riformt.td faire Jans norr e Ugis!ationc rirmi:.elle,
Rousseaud de la Combe G., Traird des maritres crinu'nelle.s,1 741.
1 1781.
Ruclitpopulaire, La,December 1839; August 184,0;N ovember 1841..
Vidocq, F.-E., His1orie de Pidocq raconth par /ui-mime.
Rusche, G. and Ki:ch~eimer, 0., Punishmm_1D Jtd~ oct'aLS truccuru, •~39·
Mlmoires.
Rush, B., An Enquiry into tlu! Effects of Pu/,l,c Pttnulin,enrs upoft Crimi'nals
Vilan XIV, Mlm<>ires ur !es moycn.sd e corrii)t.rk s malfa,'uurs, 1773.
and upon Soc,'eryi 17-87.
Walhausen,
J. J.L,A,,
mi/irairep out l'i,ifar.terie-,1 6t5.
Saim-Edme (E. Bourg), bictionnaire dt pbtaliti, JV, 182j. 1
Saint-Hilaire,E . Geoffroy, Notion.s 1ynrltitt"quiserlti.uori9ueds t pl,i/osoplu'e
Zevaes, A. L, Damit,u It rigicide, 1937.
naturelle, 18)8,
'Saint-'Maur, R~gletnem de la fabritjue de', B.N. MS. Coll. Delamare
m. '
Manufactures
Saxe, Marechal de Lu R,vuiu, 1756.
1
Scigneuxd e Corrcvon, G ,,1 Essai sur l'u.tage, l'ahu.s et /es inconvtni'e.nud e
la IOrture, 1768.
SeligmanE, ., La Justice ,101u la RilloluriDn-I, , 1901.
Se1HnT, horsten, Pioneeri'ngi fl Penology, 1944-
m,
Ser.pillonJF ., Code crim,'nel., 1767.
Servan, J.,L e So!dat.c iroyen, 178,o.
J,
Servan, M., Di.rcaurss ur l'admi'nistratio1dJ e la justice crimintlle, 1967.
Snyders, G.,L a Pedagogi<"' France aux XV/ft er XVIII< siiclu, t9GS,
33l 33}

.I.
maginath,e, illuminating
recl!,o,i ed with by h um.anists, social
scientists an -The New York Times Book Re¥iew
Ba~ytwo tttr years ago a man condemned of attempting
to as:sassin • • _ . France was drawn and quartered in a grisly
.
~pectacle unmedlatcd duel between the violenoe of the
,
crim,inal and~- f the state. This groundbreaking book by the
~~
mosl: irilluent~a , , _•_ _ e r since Sartre compels us to reevaluate our
~ . ,'f
ass.umpti9n~ ' ensuing re"forms In the penal institutions oft.he
~
West. Foras 'ts_ '.nno~ations that rang!) from the abolition of
i•o~orceil labor and the appearance of the mod
er,:, penitentiai,y, icheli:oucault s_ugge.sts that punishment has
shift~d its locus from the pnsoner's body to his soul- and that our very
concern w'ith rehabilitation encourages and refines criminal activity.
Lud"dly reasoned 11nd deft!l marshalling a vast body of research,
0/!l<!lpllnea-nd Pqnish' i~ a genuinely revolutionary book, whose implications
extend t;,eyond-the prison to the minute p~er relations of our society.
"Foucault rsq qlte central to our sense of whe_re we are .... [He] is carrying
ou~ in the noble~ way, the promiscuou~ aim of tr11e culture.''
-The Nation
"Tfoucault] has an alert-and selfsltlve- mind which can ignore the familiar
s,urfaces o.f esta,blls.hed Intellectual codes a~d ask new questions ....
[He] gives,,a drama.tic quality to the movement of culture."
-New YorlcReview of8oolu
U,$, $14.95 CAN. S 16.95
ISBtJ 975-0-679-75255-t,
,i51111fit1r1
111 111 I II