Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 1 of 34
MANAGING PARTNERS
Phillip C. Hamilton, Esq.
Lance A. Clarke, Esq.
November 13, 2022
VIA ECF
The Honorable Judge D.P. Marshall, Jr.
600 West Capitol Avenue, Room B149
Little Rock, AR 72201
Re: United States v. Brittany Dawn Jeffrey
Criminal Docket No. 4:20-cr-288 (DPM)
Dear Judge Marshall,
This memorandum is respectfully submitted on behalf of Brittany Dawn Jeffrey, who is
otherwise affectionately referred to as Dawn in the greater Little Rock community, in order to
explain – i.e., not excuse – her actions during the early morning hours of August 26, 2020. This
memorandum will walk the Court through Dawn’s life using her own words and those who know
her best in order to help the Court gain a better understanding of the history and characteristics of
Dawn, such that a more contextual understanding can be afforded to the underlying nature and
circumstances of the instant offense.
In sum, Dawn has survived chronic violence and abuse at the hands of people she has
trusted, including those tasked with ensuring her safety. Without question, trauma is tightly
woven into the thread of Dawn’s life, and is an overarching theme of this memorandum. The
word “trauma” is frequently used colloquially, and, as such, is commonly diluted or
misunderstood. To this end, we will clarify what trauma is, and its myriad effects, both in the
immediate moment of the instant offense, and the time following it.
Trauma is prevalent and can be both physical and psychological. In the medical context,
trauma refers to serious bodily injury. However, trauma is also the psychological response to
events that are physically and mentally harmful or threatening. The impact of trauma is
www.HamiltonClarkeLLP.com 48 Wall Street, Suite 1100, New York, NY 10005 P. 212-729-0952

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 2 of 34
neurobiological; brain chemistry is altered and the trauma survivor’s brain functions differently.1
Trauma can happen at the individual and collective levels and these events can shatter a person’s
sense of safety and trust.
Prior to the collective national trauma of 2020 to present day (caused by the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic and widespread images of police brutality), 70% of adults across twenty-
four countries had experienced at least one traumatic event in their lifetime.2 Trauma affects how
individuals function and interact with the world after the traumatic event is over. The violently
traumatic experiences that Dawn has survived, which inflicted trauma that has been well-
established as rising to clinical significance, have affected Dawn’s physical health, emotional
health, decision-making, and, quite relatively, her ability to respond to the Court’s interventions
and directives at points throughout the pendency of this case. Dawn has been retraumatized by
the ongoing legal processes and forced separation from her family and community. Accordingly,
we will ask the Court to use a trauma-informed lens when considering the unique circumstances
of Dawn’s life history and actions, and to materially utilize that lens in exercising the discretion
that Congress has afforded the Court to decide her ultimate sentence.
Biography
I. Early Life
Brittany Dawn Jeffrey was born on , to Christine Shaw Jeffrey and Lee
Andrew Jeffrey, Jr. Christine gave birth to Dawn at Grossmont Hospital; a large healthcare
facility in La Mesa, California, in East San Diego County. Dawn would be the first of two
children born to Christine and Lee (followed four years later by her younger sister and best
friend-to-be, Ashley). Christine and Lee were native Arkansans and west coast transplants. After
meeting at the University of Arkansas, they followed Lee’s Navy career to La Mesa. They would
live in La Mesa until Dawn was two years old.
“Early life was blurry,” and from what Dawn remembers, it was filled with more moves
and transitions than most toddlers experience. When Dawn was about two years old, the Navy
transferred Lee to Maine and the small family moved from the near-perfect west coast climate of
Southern California to the easternmost state in the U.S. After a brief period of readjustment,
Dawn, Christine, and Lee welcomed baby Ashley Jeffrey two years later. Soon after becoming a
1 Neurobiology of Trauma. (n.d.). Assault Survivors Advocacy Program at the University of Northern Colorado.
Retrieved November 4, 2022, from https://www.unco.edu/assault-survivors-advocacy-
program/learn_more/neurobiology_of_trauma.aspx
2 Benjet, C., Bromet, E., Karam, E., Kessler, R., McLaughlin, K., Ruscio, A., . . . Koenen, K. (2016). The
epidemiology of traumatic event exposure worldwide: Results from the World Mental Health Survey
Consortium. Psychological Medicine, 46(2), 327-343. doi:10.1017/S0033291715001981
2

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 3 of 34
family of four, Christine and Lee decided to separate. Their separation prompted another move
for Dawn, her third before the age of five. Christine packed up little Dawn and Ashley and they
moved south, closer to family, in Sherwood, Arkansas. While this relocation happened when
Dawn was barely old enough to start school, Dawn’s upbringing in Arkansas would ultimately
shape the rest of her life and lead her to her calling as a community organizer.
II. A Lineage of Service
Dawn credits the people who raised her for both protecting her and teaching her who she
wanted to be growing up. Christine was (and remains) a pivotal figure in Dawn’s life; a mother,
mentor, and role model. Christine raised Dawn and Ashley as a single parent and always did
what it took to ensure Dawn and Ashley had what they needed to thrive. Dawn describes
Christine as self-sufficient and independent and is proud that these traits were passed down. In
addition to Christine and Ashley, Dawn had the benefit of growing up surrounded by extended
family on both her maternal and paternal sides. Dawn says with admiration that each family
member has a strong personality and world outlook; change-makers in their own right. It was
important to them to create, share, and come together as a family. It was family that taught Dawn
the importance of supportive spaces and how such spaces can build capacity in an individual and
community. In addition to being actively involved in Dawn’s life, her family was active in the
broader Little Rock community. Indeed, as Dawn has explained to the undersigned, “Family is
not just an important thing, it is the only thing.” This commitment to family, and service, is what
led Dawn to commit her life to the service of others, because according to Dawn, “the
community is our family.”
Dawn often says that the love and closeness of her family largely shielded her from race-
based violence and oppression in her younger years, though the limits of this protection would
later be realized in adulthood. Dawn’s mother was the head of the house, waking up the girls,
readying them for school, and getting them out the door. In addition to raising her two girls,
Christine worked a full-time job, and eventually went back to school to earn her nursing degree.
Upon earning her degree, Christine took care of countless others as a Registered Nurse (“RN”),
first at a pediatric facility, and then, later, at a mental health facility.
True to their family legacy, Dawn and Ashley were busy kids. Christine relied on a
support network of friends and family to help them stay involved and happy. Each morning on
her way to work around 6:30am, Christine dropped off Ashley and Dawn at their family friend’s
house where they would wait to get onto the bus for school. Ashley would return to the family
friend’s house until Christine finished work, while Dawn participated in a range of after-school
sports. At Parkview Arts and Science Magnet School, “sports were my life,” Dawn recalled. It
was also the place where many of her lasting friendships and foundational leadership skills were
recognized and honed. Dawn was a year-round athlete, participating in soccer, basketball,
3

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 4 of 34
volleyball, and track. While she loved them all, she excelled in volleyball and soccer. Soccer was
her favorite because she loved the feeling of freedom while running on the grass. Unsurprisingly,
Dawn eventually ascended to team captain. In addition to being an athlete, Dawn loved music
(she was a vocal major), writing, and history. When she was younger, Dawn aspired to be a
lawyer, but ultimately, it was activism that called her; and of course, she answered. She often
recalls that decision with a sweet smile stating that, “I wanted to become an attorney to make my
family and community proud, but I always felt that the people on the ground needed me more, so
I chose activism instead.”
Off the field, Dawn’s family taught her how to give back to the wider Little Rock
community through service. In what little spare time she had, Christine was deeply invested in
humanitarian efforts in Little Rock. Oftentimes, she brought Dawn and Ashley along to help and
observe. In Dawn’s family, being in service of others wasn’t just a given, it was a must. It was
instilled in her from a very young age that you are put on this Earth to give, pull, push, and do
what needs to be done in service of those who are not able to do for themselves. Dawn has
supported unhoused people, collected back-to-school supplies for children, picked up trash in
community cleanups, and put together many other community-based and family-led events.
Growing up, Dawn was empowered and expected to make a difference, stating, “I saw a lot of
things that I thought should be different, that should be fairer, that could be done to make the
world a better place.” And while many complain about inequity from the comfort of their
couches, Dawn knew that if she wanted a fairer, more just, equitable world, she could not only
talk about it, she had to be out in the community giving her all to make a difference.
Aside from becoming a budding humanitarian and athlete, Dawn was a pretty typical kid
growing up in Little Rock. In fact, some of Dawn’s closest friends are from her childhood. Dawn
has maintained many of those friendships despite moves, children, losses, and other life
transitions. Dawn’s friend since 2004 (9th grade), Maya Ellington, said this in a letter to the Court
in support of Dawn:
[Dawn] loves her Class of 2008 Parkview Patriots. We are a close-
knit group of individuals; unfortunately, over the past 14 years,
we've had several classmates pass away. Classmates who've left
behind spouses, parents, and children. It was Dawn who would set
up gofundme accounts for our fallen classmates to give to their loved
ones. Because of her initiative, thousands of dollars have been raised
in honor of our classmates. Out of her own pocket, she would
purchase supplies for us to meet at Parkview for a balloon release-
giving us a chance to, one more time, hug each other and say our
"love yous".
4

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 5 of 34
Above all, Ashley was (and remains) Dawn’s best friend; they would watch television, sing
together, listen to music, joke, and “argue a lot” as sisters do. In addition to being Ashley’s
friend, Dawn took her duties as an older sister seriously: “My mom worked a lot, and we didn’t
have my dad in the house. I was the oldest, so I took on extra responsibility.” Following in
Christine’s footsteps, Ashley became a registered nurse and all-around healer, caring for the ill in
her community. Dawn has taken on the responsibility of helping Ashley through some of the
hardest moments of her life, including her survival of domestic violence. Ashley wrote this
testimonial about Dawn’s service to her family, friends, and community, and their willingness to
return her generosity upon her release:
When she began her work in community care, I could not understand
why she cared about the people the way that she did... I came to
understand this is her way of being in service. My mother and I
became nurses. My grandfather and father served in the military.
She is a service member too. In every community you can look and
find the helpers, and that is what Brittany is. Brittany isn’t a danger
to our family or our communities. She is our help..
She has aided me in raising my son
and been a helping hand when I needed it the most. Just as she has
supported me for years, I am committed to helping her as she
transitions back home.
Dawn has a lot of other people who have made an imprint on her life. Dawn often
attended church on Sundays with her paternal Grandmother (“Grannie Annie”) and spent time
together afterward. Grannie Annie turned to religion later in life and was stern, but loving. Dawn
remembers her home was often filled with the sounds of gospel television programs. Grannie
Annie would prepare eggs to eat, soft-boiled to perfection, with salt, pepper, and toast. After
spending time with Grannie Annie, Christine, Dawn, and Ashley often went for a Sunday meal at
Dawn’s Aunt’s house. “Everyone would go over there - my aunt’s kids, me, my sister, my mom,
my papa. We all tried to get together often.” Dawn’s love language, and that of her family, is
cooking. Dawn likes cooking pasta and seafood. Their Sunday tradition is an act of service for
the family; spending quality time and creating something to share that everyone finds
nourishment from. Dawn especially admires her aunt’s macaroni and cheese, “I haven’t mastered
it yet, but everybody tries to get it right.” This is a tradition that goes on today that Dawn yearns
to rejoin.
Dawn’s paternal grandfather (Papa) also played a large role in her life growing up. “He’s
the fun one.” Papa would take Dawn back-to-school shopping and out for rides in his Cadillac.
He was also an inspiration to Dawn. Papa was a community organizer who worked peacefully
5

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 6 of 34
for change as he watched the west side of Chicago burn in the days of Dr. Martin Luther King,
Jr. Dawn notes, “I hope I can get home soon to see him.”
III. College, Parenthood, Grief
Upon graduation from high school in 2008, Dawn decided to pursue her college degree at
the University of Central Arkansas (“UCA”), about twenty minutes away from her home in Little
Rock. Going to UCA afforded Dawn the opportunity to forge her own path, while also staying
comfortably close to her family in Little Rock. Dawn was drawn to helping people and aspired to
become a teacher, while also taking classes in sociology, psychology, communications, and
journalism.
The events of Dawn’s second year at UCA changed her forever. Her friend,
was murdered in a school shooting that took two lives and injured a third. The police
locked down the campus. Dawn rushed to the hospital looking for and was told by his
medical team that the bullet struck close to his heart, but that he was likely to survive; however,
he ultimately didn’t. Dawn was devastated.
After murder, being on campus, at the scene of his death, was physically and
emotionally painful for Dawn. Everything reminded her of and the associated grief
consumed her. Dawn lost interest in school and started regularly experiencing the physical
symptoms of anxiety attacks: knotty stomach, sweaty palms, increased heart rate and shallow
breathing. It was also around this time that Dawn became pregnant with her then-boyfriend;
someone she loved and saw a future with. Pregnancy and her new focus on parenthood gave
Dawn an excuse not to return to UCA, Dawn reflects in hindsight. So, after her second year,
Dawn disenrolled.
On October 1, 2009, Dawn gave birth to a healthy baby girl, While
Dawn and father were dedicated to and in love, it was a tumultuous time in their
relationship and in life. They eventually separated. Dawn was fatigued, angry, and resentful
toward father because he left her to care for a newborn child alone. Dawn fell into a
depression, with symptoms that closely align with postpartum depression, though she was not
aware of it at the time.3 Dawn just knew that she was not happy and not herself. Dawn was also
still coming to terms with losing and feeling the pain and grief of his murder. While her
family was very supportive of her and they did not have the resources or awareness to
push Dawn to seek out professional mental health support. As is common with caregivers,
mental health treatment was shelved for a later date. Although Dawn had already survived
3 American Psychological Association. (n.d.). Postpartum depression: Causes, symptoms, risk factors, and treatment
options. APA. Retrieved November 4, 2022, from https://www.apa.org/pi/women/resources/reports/postpartum-
depression.
6

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 7 of 34
multiple traumatic experiences, it would be years before she learned about it and its connection
to her depression and anxiety.
Following birth, Dawn did what she needed to do to make ends meet as a single
mother. A “Jill” of all trades, Dawn worked in the food industry, a factory, and debt collections.
Dawn was easily bored by desk jobs, though they made better money, and was driven to find
something that would engage her mind and body. She was looking for something that clicked
with her, and that stood out to her as a way to help people. The medical field was the closest she
found. Around 2018, Dawn eventually became a Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA), helping
with the many, often thankless, emotional, physical, and complex tasks for patient care. She
would eventually work in a nursing home and then CHI St. Vincent Infirmary (“St. Vincent’s”);
a hospital and level two trauma center serving Little Rock and surrounding areas.
IV. 2020
The COVID-19 pandemic has been a universally stressful, fear-inducing, traumatic event
of unprecedented magnitude in modern times. Since early 2020, healthcare workers have faced
exceptional demands, both personally and professionally. In 2020, in addition to Dawn’s
community organizing efforts, Dawn was part of the essential healthcare workforce providing
medical care to her community during the COVID-19 public health crisis. Dawn worked on the
medical frontlines as a Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA) in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU).
Dawn’s job was to provide physical, emotional, and spiritual support to patients. CNAs are the
eyes and ears of clinical staff, tasked with alerting doctors and nurses of declines or changes in a
patient’s health. The ICU is a specialty department for patients suffering from severe or life-
threatening injuries and illnesses who require constant supervision and attention to stay alive. In
2020, this unit was flooded with patients suffering from COVID-19. Day in and out, Dawn was
part of the effort to manage a highly infectious and deadly disease with unknown etiology and no
end in sight. Researchers have a preliminary idea of the broad impact this has had on healthcare
workers: increased mental health conditions, substance use, and suicidality.4
Without proper Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) or process from her employer or
the government at-large, and confronted with death daily, multiple times over, Dawn still showed
up to work. She was asked to make decisions about the health of herself and her family every
day before she left for work, and again before she returned home to see her young daughter and
elderly family. At the height of it all, it felt like there was no end in sight, no hope, and only
despair; but still, she pressed forward. She pressed forward because what she was doing was
4 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (August 2020). Mental Health, Substance Use, and Suicidal Ideation
during the COVID-19 Pandemic – United States, June 24-30, 2020. CDC. Retrieved November 4, 2022, from
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/69/wr/mm6932a1htm#T2_down.
7

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 8 of 34
bigger than her, and bigger than her immediate family; indeed, it was what her dedication to
service demanded.
Marginalized communities were hit particularly hard by COVID-19, and countless bodies
were buried across the globe. In Pulaski County, where Little Rock is located, 12,519 community
members passed away due to COVID-19.5 But the toll on the well-being of the community, and
especially medical professionals, remains incalculable.6 The brutality of the day-to-day work
peaked when Dawn was repeatedly asked by her employer to care for patients in the COVID unit
without proper PPE. Dawn struggled with the decision to leave this job, “Money-wise it was a
hard decision. I called my sister and told her what was going on, and within that brief
conversation I decided I was going to quit…I’m not going to accept this…If I accept it this time,
they’ll try to do it all the time. It was rampant. There were so many people dying at the hospital.
At that moment, I made a decision to prioritize my life.”
Amidst all the COVID-related chaos, on May 25, 2020, the world witnessed 8 minutes
and 46 seconds of torture as George Floyd’s murder was recorded and broadcasted across media
outlets. The murders of so many others flashed before Dawn’s eyes: Breonna Taylor, Tamir
Rice, Freddie Gray, Rayshard Brooks, Sandra Bland. Dawn did what she knew best: she
organized, and she was not alone. Across the United States, and eventually, internationally,
human beings with a commitment to humanity and social justice flowed into the streets in
protest, committed to making long-lasting change for a better, kinder, more just world. Estimates
were from 15-26 million Americans that demonstrated in 550 cities, making 2020 the year of the
largest social movement in American history.7 In addition to providing for her family, and caring
for the critically ill inside the hospital, Dawn organized her community to participate in this
movement. In so doing, Dawn absorbed the personal, often traumatic, stories of her fellow
activists and community members, which came to her in a constant stream, as well as the
disturbing media images of protestors being assaulted and Black and Brown people being killed
at the hands of the police.
Trauma and Survival
Trauma can be broadly defined as a physical imprint left on the brain by a terrible
experience; it is a normal reaction to abnormal circumstances.8 The official definition by the
5 The Arkansas Department of Health COVID-19 Update. Retrieved November 13, 2022, from
https://experience.arcgis.com/experience/633006d0782b4544bd5113a314f6268a/
6 Czeisler, M.E., Lane, R.I., Petrosky, E., Mental Health, Substance Use, and Suicidal Ideation During the COVID-
19 Pandemic - United States, June 24-30, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69:1049-1057.
7 Buchanan, L. et al. (2020, July 3). Black Lives Matter May Be the Largest Movement in US History. The New
York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/07/03/us/george-floyd-protests-crowd-sizehtml.
8 American Psychological Association. (n.d.). Trauma. APA. Retrieved November 4, 2022, from
https://www.apa.org/topics/trauma.
8

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 9 of 34
American Psychiatric Association in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-5) defines traumatic events as “An exposure to actual or threatened death, serious injury,
or sexual violence in one (or more) of the following ways: 1. directly experiencing the traumatic
event(s); 2. witnessing, in person, the event(s) as it occurred to others; 3. learning that the
traumatic event(s) occurred to a close family member or close friend. (In cases of actual or
threatened death of a family member or friend, the event(s) must have been violent or
accidental); 4. experiencing repeated or extreme exposure to aversive details of the traumatic
event(s).”
Trauma is common and widespread, and with time the understanding of trauma has
grown more nuanced. Textbook examples of trauma include accident or injury to self or others,
torture, natural disasters, or being in a life-threatening situation.9 Prior to 2020, research
indicated that most people would experience one traumatic event in their lifetime. With the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and violent, often deadly, videos circulating of over-policing and
police violence, that statistic has skyrocketed for the general population. Given the exceptional
experiences that Dawn has endured, it is essential to unpack and understand the intersection of
the multiple trauma, both chronic and acute, Dawn has and continues to experience. No one,
including Dawn, is immune to the effects of the trauma they experience.
On the individual level, Dawn has survived physical trauma at the hands of others. She
has been attacked and violently threatened at peaceful protests, and at times, been made to fear
for her life. For example, in July 2020, Dawn was hit, punched, and kicked at the Arkansas state
capitol while organizing a peaceful protest. As Dawn’s friends and family have attested, it was
not uncommon for the peaceful events Dawn organized to be interrupted by white supremacists
carrying out violence and other intimidation tactics. Pastor Carissa Rodgers, a fellow activist,
wrote the following to the Court about the abuse Dawn has experienced:
Dawn has protested different issues causing her direct interaction
with known white supremacists and law enforcement alike, both
have, in different ways, targeted, harmed and attacked her. There are
documented targeted stops by law enforcement showcasing their
mistreatment even on record with the Little Rock Police
Department. There have also been peaceful events Dawn has
organized that were targeted and interrupted by white supremacists
that resulted in a physical attack on her where police were present
but stood by idly watching and did not intervene. In a world where
most African Africans or others who identify as black experience
9 National Alliance on Mental Illness. (n.d.). Posttraumatic Stress Disorder. NAMI. Retrieved November 4, 2022,
from https://www.nami.org/About-Mental-Illness/Mental-Health-Conditions/Posttraumatic-Stress-Disorder.
9

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 10 of 34
post-traumatic stress disorder by definition based just on our normal
occurrences with law enforcement as well as systems of white
supremacy, hers is likely compounded with a substantial number of
triggers. Her medical diagnosis should be indicative of that.
Collective (or “community”) trauma has also been an influential force in Dawn’s life.
Collective trauma can be described as the psychological reaction to a tragic event that lives in the
collective memory of a group; a memory that the group continues to reconstruct to make sense of
it. The attack on Dawn at the state capitol in July 2020 is just one of many examples of this.
Unlike an individual trauma, this collective trauma extended far beyond those directly affected;
the legal bystanders and fellow activists now report mental health diagnoses of PTSD. Friend,
lawyer, and fellow Little Rock activist Amy Pritchard wrote about her experience:
I also experience post-traumatic stress disorder (from related and
unrelated events). One aspect of my PTSD is flashbacks that cause
me to dissociate in response to new traumatic events. I was in a state
of fight or flight for days after I spoke out against white supremacy
to a crowd comprised of both local community leaders and armed
white supremacists. Even remembering and writing about the events
of the past years takes an indescribable toll on my nervous system.
When experienced constantly, collective trauma compounds in communities that have
historically suffered from the effects of structural racism (e.g., police violence). In Dawn’s life,
she is both the victim of it and a leader seeking to protect and heal her fellow community
members from the effects of it.
Many of the incidents previously described would fall under the umbrella of vicarious
trauma. Vicarious trauma, also called “compassion fatigue” or “secondary trauma”, describes
when the effects of trauma transmit from the primary victim to a secondary person.10 Although
the secondary person does not directly experience the traumatic event, interactions between the
primary victim and secondary person (such as storytelling, or being a bystander to violence) lead
to the development of similar trauma symptoms. As a leader in her community, it was important
to Dawn to lend an ear to her fellow community members. She listened compassionately and
sympathetically to the stories of hardship and abuse her friends and neighbors suffered, many
similar to her own, and offered what advice she could to help mitigate the harm. For example,
Dawn learned the importance of going through the official channels to file complaints when she
suffered abuse at the hands of the police, or to submit FOIA requests for recordings and reports.
10 Rainville, C. (2015, September 1) Understanding Secondary Trauma: A Guide For Lawyers Working with Child
Victims. American Bar Association (Resources - Child Law Practice Today). Retrieved November 4, 2022, from
https://www.americanbar.org/groups/public_interest/child_law/resources/child_law_practiceonline/child_law_practi
ce/vol-34/september-2015/understanding-secondary-trauma--a-guide-for-lawyers-working-with/
1 0

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 11 of 34
“People approach me in the community and message me on Facebook to tell me their
problems…Sometimes I would see stuff going on in my area and reach out to that person to let
them know I was available to talk to…To let them know how to go through the proper channels
to file things and get exposure and if you get hurt speak up.” While these lessons felt necessary
to share, absorbing these trauma narratives did not come without cost to Dawn. Relatedly, given
Dawn’s family’s history of activism for the greater good, intergenerational trauma cannot be left
out of the conversation. Especially in circumstances of political violence or turmoil, trauma
experienced by one generation can “pass” to the next generation. For example, trauma symptoms
can be passed through storytelling and heightened levels of stress due to trauma.11
Dawn has faced discrimination and trauma due to aspects of her identity, especially her
identity as a Black woman. Racial trauma is the stress related to racism, racial discrimination,
and race-related stressors, such as being affected by stereotypes, hurtful comments, or barriers to
advancement.12 Dawn has experienced racial trauma both acutely and ongoingly, directly, and
indirectly. Racial trauma can lead to physical and mental health consequences, like stress,
anxiety, depression, or PTSD. Experiencing racial discrimination can lead to worsening sleep
and concentration, and an increased feeling of being on high alert. Indeed, Dawn has described
feeling increasingly “paranoid and anxious” in 2020 and 2021, and according to the U.S.
Department of Veteran’s Affairs official statement on racial trauma, this is a normal and
understandable response to her environment.
There are many possible reactions to a traumatic situation, such as fear, shock, or panic.
This is the human body’s natural, fine-tuned instinct to protect itself kicking into gear, often
referred to as the “fight or flight response.” Once the threat is removed and safety is regained, it
is typical to experience short-term symptoms, which most people recover from soon after.13
However, some may continue to feel stress or fear, even when the threat no longer exists. When
these feelings persist and symptoms become chronic, they might rise to clinical significance and
be diagnosed as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The DSM 5 outlines multiple, specific,
well-studied diagnostic criteria for PTSD that, at the most basic level, amount to trauma
symptoms that last over one month that interfere with relationships and activities of daily living.
Such symptoms could include rigid, black-and-white, thinking, bad dreams, difficulty sleeping,
flashbacks, loss of interest, and trouble remembering even key features of the trauma event.14
11 Weingarten K. Witnessing the effects of political violence in families: mechanisms of intergenerational
transmission and clinical interventions. J Marital Fam Ther. 2004 Jan;30(1):45-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-
0606.2004.tb01221.x. PMID: 14763208.
12 PTSD: National Center for PTSD. (n.d.). Racial Trauma. U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. Retrieved
November 4, 2022, from https://www.ptsd.va.gov/understand/types/racial_trauma.asp.
13 National Institute of Mental Health. (2022). Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. NIMH. Retrieved November 2,
2022, from https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/post-traumatic-stress-disorder-ptsd
14 Id.
1 1

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 12 of 34
When speaking with Dawn about trauma, she says she understands the concept of trauma
“a bit,” crediting the one therapy session she was able to attend with therapist Monique Randle,
LCSW, RIST, BC-TMH, on June 22, 2021, three days prior to her bond revocation, which led to
her instant incarceration. (Ironically, and unfortunately, she was scheduled to start continuous
therapy the following week and has not been able to access therapeutic support since.) The
concept and consequences of trauma resonate for Dawn and she can describe and immediately
recognize some of the ways trauma symptoms have manifested in her life. One of the first major
traumatic events Dawn remembers experiencing was the loss of her friend, The visual
cues, like the building on campus where he was murdered, were trauma triggers for her. She
eventually developed sudden onset symptoms that she describes as “attacks”, likely panic
attacks: her heart beats fast, she tenses up. She spirals when she starts thinking about “what could
happen” to her; a feeling of disembodiment, pure survival mode. Survival mode is also activated
when Dawn sees police lights in the rearview mirror. Dawn’s response is valid and normal,
given the trauma she has suffered at the hands of the police. While the typical response to police
lights in the rearview mirror could be minor distress due to fear of reprimand or financial
penalties, when Dawn sees police lights in the rearview mirror, she is thrust into a state of
literally fearing for her life. Death is the worst, and very possible, case, Dawn has learned over
the past few years.
Activism
I. “She is who the moment needed.”
Dawn has a striking presence; she speaks and moves with intention. Like some of the
most effective change-makers in history, if the action doesn’t change the answer, Dawn is not
interested in pursuing it. While some might categorize this as impatient or unrelenting, a more
accurate description is intentional. It is no surprise that with this sharpened skill, Dawn has
helped create a movement within Little Rock and become one of the most well-recognized,
resilient faces of community organizing and protesting across the state. This has also made Dawn
a target for anti-Black, or white supremacist, figures.
Community organizing and protesting are not subversive, or even radical, acts. Protesting
is as American as it gets, enshrined in the U.S. Constitution.15 In fact, many of the liberties and
protections we currently enjoy today are the result of generations of resistance and struggle
against the U.S. government. We rely on activists and freedom fighters to spark the change
necessary to push forward our country’s evergreen quest to create a more perfect union.
Resistance leaders are often upheld posthumously in a halo effect that, at the time of their
struggles, they were not granted (e.g., Frederick Douglass, Harriet Tubman, Dr. Martin Luther
15 U.S. Const. amend. I.
1 2

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 13 of 34
King, Jr; the list goes on). They all recognized that the American Dream of freedom and
opportunity looked great on constitutional paper but had not been achieved, so they responded to
the moment. Historically, community organizing was a response to the many forces that created
inequality in our society. Community organizing is also a form of community support; the goal is
to construct a system of support that cultivates individual and community well-being.
Dawn is a pioneer for social good and has studied with some of the greatest living change
makers. Activism is not only her job, but her passion and purpose in life. “I started by noticing,
then filling, the gaps,” Dawn modestly said. Holly Dickson, Executive Director of the Arkansas
Civil Liberties Union, extolled Dawn’s natural leadership abilities and love for her city, state,
and country in her letter to the Court:
Dawn is a Little Rock native and solid person, who I have known to
exercise strong, sound judgment and to thrive on positive service to
others. She is an incredibly intelligent, honest, reliable person who
honors her commitments and has worked hard to support her
community and improve the lives and experiences of everyone she
encounters. A natural servant leader, she has grown in her leadership
and skills both before, and after the incident at issue in the case
before the court.
Dawn has been the face of community organizing and community-based systems of
support in Little Rock since 2019 when she founded Nayborhood Activists. Dawn’s call to action
in 2020 came after the death of George Floyd. In conversations with defense counsel, fellow
activists described Dawn as, “who the moment needed.” Dawn saw protestors flooding streets
across the nation and wondered what, if any, legal protections they had access to. Dawn started
by collecting money to donate toward legal fees, then built systems of communication that would
connect protestors to attorneys who could offer representation. Little Rock Freedom Fund
responded to the needs of the Little Rock community by evolving to become a community
resource hub; “If we can find a way to connect you with a resource, we will” she says, and not
just for residents in acute crisis. The Freedom Fund also creates spaces to alleviate stress, uplift,
and empower the Little Rock community. As Dawn’s many supporters and champions attest, she
is who Little Rock needs in these times of social and political volatility.
Dawn is also a board member of DecARcerate, an Arkansas-based group working to end
mass incarceration. Dawn’s relentless pursuit of justice has not gone unnoticed by her peers. In
2018 she was honored for community outreach by ML Community and Lifestyle Magazine and
in 2020 she was given the Community Leadership Award from the Bradley Blackshire
Foundation. In 2021 Dawn was honored with the Good Trouble Award from the Just
Communities of Arkansas; this award was a special recognition of Dawn’s unique community
1 3

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 14 of 34
leadership considering the COVID-19 pandemic and in the spirit of the late civil rights icon,
Congressperson John Lewis. While detained, Dawn has continued to organize. On the same day
as her own bond revocation, Dawn organized the bond and release of two women. Dawn also
successfully advocated for books and common-sense public health measures for herself and other
detainees, such as menstrual supplies and COVID-19 isolation measures.
II. The Incident at Hand: August 26, 2020
For Dawn, the story of the early morning hours of August 26 started long before that
date; in a sense, it started in 2012 when an unarmed Trayvon Martin was killed, or in 2015 when
an unarmed Walter Scott was murdered after being shot in the back multiple times by law
enforcement, or in 2020 when an unarmed Breonna Taylor was killed after law enforcement
broke into her apartment in the early morning hours under controversial justifications and shot
her multiple times. The “or’s” can go on and on, but the most contemporaneous trigger
underlying Dawn’s community organizing and activism at that time was the senseless murder of
George Floyd.
Dawn’s ability to clearly recall the events leading from the night of August 25, 2020 into
the early morning of August 26, 2020 is limited by the stress she was under; indeed, the
psychological warfare that was inflicted on Dawn by structural and local actors is well-
documented both in the instant filing and by news outlets.16 Dawn endured situations and abuse
that were out of her control and that many of us have not ever, and will not ever, experience. A
more complete, clear picture of that time comes from those who knew her best and were with her
in the lead-up to the incident at issue. These same people believe that Dawn was emotionally
overwhelmed and in a state of crisis with no clear beginning, middle, or end. It is now clear to
Dawn and those who know her best that her decisions leading up to the incident of August 26,
2020 were anomalous; they are not decisions she would make again, in a healthier state. As
Dawn’s colleague and friend, Amy Pritchard, said, “While I was not with Dawn on the night of
August 26, 2020, several people who know Dawn and saw her that night indicated she was not
acting like herself and seemed severely traumatized.” Dawn’s family was also struck by the
changes they saw in Dawn’s affect and emotions. In his letter to the Court, Lee Jeffrey Sr.,
Dawn’s Papa, described her as a nonviolent peaceful protestor struggling with her mental health
and seeking support for it. Respected legal scholar and Columbia University Law School
Professor Omavi Shukur said this about Dawn in his letter to the Court, “Over the past twenty
years, I have known Brittany Dawn Jeffrey...Dawn has painstakingly endeavored to construct a
safe, just society in Little Rock; the actions she has admitted to committing...are little more than
aberrational exceptions.”
16 See generally, Cantu, Aaron M., et al. (2022, November). How to Crush a Movement for Social Justice. The
Nation. https://www.thenation.com/article/society/movement-racial-justice-police-arkansas/.
1 4

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 15 of 34
While Dawn is brave in her activism, she is also strategic. When Dawn organizes, it is to
get results and it is based on previous experiences and logic. Her priority is to attract attention
and to preserve life. However, Dawn was not acting logical during those early morning hours of
August 26; in fact, she was a far departure from typical decision-making. Primarily because 2020
traumatically broke her. Dawn’s friend, Tien Estelle, recalled and discussed the distinctive,
anomalous effects of 2020 upon Dawn and how it affected her decision-making in the days
leading up to August 26, 2020:
That summer there was so much death. She was constantly enduring
death threats and harassment…She had a constant, every day,
founded fear for her life…Some days we would just sit in silence
and Dawn’s silence said everything.
According to Dawn, the events of that morning started with a peaceful protest in front of
Mayor Frank Scott, Jr.’s house during the late evening hours of August 25, 2020. When the
police arrived to break up that protest, “they sent us on our way,” Dawn said. The group turned
to Dawn for guidance, where she recalls that “I didn’t want anyone to get arrested, so I wrapped
it up.” That move, although an intelligent one under the circumstances, did not quell the
emotional frustration and hopelessness that continued to build amongst many, including Dawn,
who were literally exhausted from advocating for governmental change, but not really seeing any
of it.
Upon leaving the mayor’s house, some members of that group reconvened at Dawn’s
house. After talking for a bit, some members of the group brought up vandalism tactics as a way
for protestors in Little Rock to be taken more seriously regarding their demands for equity,
fairness, and change. During the relevant discussion that Dawn took part in, she agreed with said
tactics, insofar as formulating a plan to vandalize police cars by puncturing tires and/or breaking
windows. As more specifically stipulated to in Dawn’s plea agreement17:
On or about August 26, 2020 . . . Brittany D. Jeffrey [and five] others
met at Ms. Jeffrey's residence and agreed to commit acts of
vandalism on government buildings and damaging police cars by
puncturing tires and/or breaking windows. The six individuals
formulated a plan to vandalize police vehicles in the central
Arkansas area. During the gathering, one individual went to buy
gasoline to manufacture Molotov cocktails at Ms. Jeffrey's home.
Two Molotov cocktails were made while at Jeffrey 's residence with
gasoline, Stella Artois bottles, and bed sheets. The six individuals
got into a vehicle belonging to the driver. Ms. Jeffrey was in the
front passenger seat. They drove throughout the Little Rock Metro
17 See Doc. No. 203 (Plea Agreement, Paragraph 5(F)).
1 5

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 16 of 34
Area looking for police cars to vandalize. . . . While at the 12th Street
Substation, four individuals, including Ms. Jeffrey . . . got out of the
vehicle. As [Ms. Jeffrey] broke patrol vehicle windows and slashed
tires, [others] threw the Molotov cocktails at Little Rock Police
Department patrol vehicles. According to surveillance video at
approximately 2:30 a.m., one Molotov cocktail was lit but burned
out as it was being thrown over the fence.
Coping With It All
I. Life Post Arrest: Living with the Consequences
On December 14, 2020, Dawn was presented before the Honorable Magistrate Judge Joe
J. Volpe and released on a bond to begin defending herself in the instant case. By early 2021,
considering all the trauma that Dawn experienced in 2020, coupled with the multiple federal
charges she now faced with steep mandatory minimums exposing her to twenty to thirty years of
incarceration, Dawn was struggling to say the least. As she has stated, “I had to be a mother and I
had a job to do…I [just] didn’t know how to cope with it and I didn’t want to fall into a
depressive state.”
For those reasons, Dawn ultimately sought help from a doctor who prescribed her an
Arkansas medical marijuana card. Marijuana helped Dawn complete basic activities of daily
living: relaxing, sleeping, eating. She no longer felt paralyzed by her night terrors and stomach
issues. Indeed, from a therapeutic perspective, Marijuana’s medical properties relieve pain and
suffering without debilitating side-effects, and have been studied for decades by leading medical
bodies and journals.18
Dawn acknowledges that her pretrial conditions of release precluded her from smoking
marijuana, and she apologizes to the Court for her actions centering around her usage of
marijuana at the time. She remains steadfast, however, that her use of marijuana to ease her
symptoms was never a passive-aggressive rebellion against the Court. As many of us do, she
entrusted her doctor with clinical decision-making, without a true appreciation for the fact that
this trauma-coping lifeline, legally prescribed to her, would turn into seventeen months in jail
after her bond was revoked. Of course, since Dawn’s incarceration in June 2021, she has not had
access to marijuana and is proud to have developed alternative coping skills to manage her
PTSD, including meditation, yoga, and spirituality.19 Moreover, upon her release from custody,
she eagerly yearns to restart professional mental health treatment with a licensed provider.
18 Drug Policy Alliance. Marijuana Facts. A Drug Policy Alliance Release (2016). Retrieved November 4, 2022,
from https://drugpolicy.org/sites/default/files/DPA_Marijuana_Facts_Booklet.pdf
19 See PSR ¶ 36.
1 6

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 17 of 34
II. Trauma-Informed Care
Several evidence-based services and therapeutic interventions exist as treatment options
for survivors of trauma,20 and will be available to Dawn when she re-enters the community. The
goal of these services is to help trauma survivors understand how their past experiences impact
their current behaviors and shape their coping skills. Dawn has received exactly zero of this
critical support since she became involved with the Court in December 2020; however, she has
identified a local provider whom she trusts, and, most importantly, she has a strong desire to re-
engage in the healing process for several reasons. While Dawn has shown incredible strength
navigating provocative, chaotic situations with admirable poise, it has come at the cost of
emotional awareness, as she notes that, “I can never really pay attention to how I’m feeling,
unless it’s so intense that I’m having a panic attack...It’s hard to describe your feelings when you
haven’t had the practice of it.” Until Dawn is afforded the opportunity of professional mental
health support, she will unfortunately be left to identify and analyze her feelings all on her own.
Moving Forward
I. A sentence of time served is sufficient, but not greater than necessary to
serve the ends of justice.
Dawn has been incarcerated since June 25, 2021, which will amount to a period of 529
days on the date of her currently scheduled sentencing hearing (December 6, 2022). Over this
time, she has missed birthdays, holidays, and a significant stretch of childhood. While
incarcerated, Dawn has experienced profound loss, including being forced to grieve Grannie
Annie’s death hundreds of miles away from her family and all by herself. Dawn's horrific
experience in Greene County Jail, as previously documented in prior defense applications for her
release, was an example of this. Daily, Dawn faced verbal abuse, often racial slurs, by other
inmates, the majority of whom were white. While their words were hurtful, Dawn knew better
than to act on their provocations. Dawn turned her energy toward community education, “I tried
to semi-educate the others, I tried to tell them about the effects of the words they were calling
me. Some people stopped, said they didn’t realize it bothered me. But some were not open to
changing. It’s hard to erase the hate in people’s hearts.” Dawn’s friend and fellow detainee,
Hazel Write-Miller, came to know her while detained in Greene County and wrote a letter to the
Court on her behalf:
20 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, SAMHSA’s National Center on Trauma-Informed
Care and SAMHSA’s National GAINS Center for Behavioral Health and Justice: Essential Components of Trauma-
Informed Judicial Practice. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 2013.
1 7

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 18 of 34
I was raised in an Aryan family with hate and racism for anyone who
didn’t look or believe the way my family did...I married a man who
was part of the Aryan brotherhood...When I met Ms. Jeffreys [sic] I
had already made up my mind that me and her would never be
friends. But Dawn grew on me and showed me kindness and a
sisterhood that I didn’t even receive from my own blood family.
Dawn showed me that the color of a person’s skin does not depict
their value in life...I believe that if Dawn was given the chance she
could be a great asset and ally to any community she comes in
contact with...She could work miracles in this country...Please show
her grace and mercy in court.
Dawn has expressed sincere regret in her participation of the early morning events of
August 26, 2020, including ultimately moving forward with the plan to vandalize police vehicles
once she knew that other coconspirators had made and intended to throw incendiary devices at
said vehicles as part of the plan. Rizelle Aaron, Dawn’s friend, a member of the clergy, and
fellow civil rights advocate, wrote a letter to the Court where he summarized his visits with
Dawn by saying, “her remorse to society is only overshadowed by the grief she has caused her
family.” Objectively speaking, Dawn caused relatively little harm regarding her specific offense
conduct. Indeed, no people were hurt, and the risk of that happening was very low considering
the early morning hours that they went to the 12th Street Substation. Further, she caused minimal
financial loss, as the government alleges that Ms. Jeffrey “will be joint and severally liable for
$523.91 for the damage to the LRPD tires.” See Exhibit A.
As the Court is aware, “[u]nder the post-Booker advisory system, the Federal Sentencing
Act requires a sentencing court to consider Guidelines ranges, but it permits the court to tailor
the sentence in light of other statutory concerns as well.” U.S. v. Archuleta, 412 F.3d 1003, 1006
(8th Cir. 2005) (quoting United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220, 125 (2005)). Accordingly, post-
Booker, this Court is required to consider the factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a), and to
impose a sentence “sufficient, but not greater than necessary,” to ensure justice. Id.
The Guidelines currently recommend a sentence of somewhere between 27 to 33 months
for Dawn’s offense conduct,21 although said range could decrease to 24 to 30 months if the
government determines that Dawn is eligible for a third level reduction at sentencing considering
her prior acceptance of responsibility.22 At this point, however, we respectfully submit that the
amount of time that Dawn has spent incarcerated has been greater than necessary to serve the
ends of justice. Particularly in light of comparative cases and offense conduct that arose across
the country in 2020 in the wake of George Floyd’s death:
21 PSR ¶ 51.
22 See Doc. No. 203 (Plea Agreement, Paragraph 5(C)).
1 8

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 19 of 34
• In U.S. v. Mohamed Hussein Abdi, 20-cr-113(3) (DSD/BRT) (D. Minn.), the
defendant pled guilty to Conspiracy to Commit Arson after he set fire to a high
school in St. Paul, MN in the immediate wake of George Floyd’s death, which
caused more than $34,000.00 worth of damage. On February 3, 2022, he was
sentenced to sixty months of probation and restitution by the Hon. Judge David S.
Cody, who astutely noted that “A sentence must ‘fit the offender and not merely
the crime,’” citing directly to Pepper v. United States, 562 U.S. 476, 488 (2011).
• In U.S. v. McKenzy Ann DeGidio Dunn, 20-cr-129(2) (NEB/HB) (D. Minn.), the
defendant pled guilty to Conspiracy to Commit Arson after she joined a small
crowd of people in a strip mall who set fire to a nutrition store in the immediate
wake of George Floyd’s death causing over $31,000.00 worth of damage. On
May 10, 2021, she was sentenced to three years of probation and restitution by the
Hon. Judge Nancy E. Brasel.
• In U.S. v. Elaine Carberry, 20-cr-544(2) (LJL) (S.D.N.Y.) and U.S. v. Corey
Smith, 20-cr-544(1) (LJL) (S.D.N.Y), both defendants pled guilty to Conspiracy
to Commit Arson after they twice set fire to the same New York City Police
Department (“NYPD”) vehicle in the summer of 2020 during the height of New
York City’s civil rights protests, in the densely populated Greenwich Village
Section of the city, causing over $72,000.00 worth of damage. On February 18,
2022, both defendants were sentenced to six months of imprisonment followed by
three years of supervised release by the Hon. Judge Lewis J. Liman.
• In U.S. v. Urooj Rahman, 20-cr-203 (BMC) (E.D.N.Y.), the defendant, a Fordham
Law School alumna and licensed public interest attorney in New York, recently
pled guilty to Conspiracy to Commit Arson and to make and possess an
unregistered destructive device after she threw a Molotov cocktail into an NYPD
vehicle during New York City protests in the immediate wake of George Floyd’s
death, allegedly causing more than $30,000.00 worth of fire damage. Although
the defendant has yet to be sentenced,23 and she has stipulated that a Guidelines
sentence would be the statutory maximum of five years imprisonment, the
government, in its sentencing memo,24 is recommending a below-guidelines
sentence of 18 to 24 months based in part on the history and characteristics of the
defendant that, like Dawn, include working to help underserved communities and
indigent criminal defendants.
23 Ms. Rahman’s sentencing hearing is currently scheduled for November 18, 2022, before the Hon. Judge Brian M.
Cogan of the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York.
24 See Exhibit B.
1 9

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 20 of 34
• In U.S. v. Lateesha Richards, 20-cr-00182 (DBB) (D. Utah), the defendant pled
guilty to Civil Disorder after throwing a t-shirt onto a fire that was burning upon a
Salt Lake City Police Department Vehicle, rekindling the fire into a larger fire
during the midst of protests immediately following George Floyd’s death. On
August 2, 2021, she was sentenced to twenty months of imprisonment by the Hon.
Judge David Barlow.
In considering the totality of the harm inflicted by Dawn – who never set any property on fire,
certainly did not attempt to do so during an active and/or chaotic protest, and who caused
minimal financial damage to property as compared to the aforementioned cases with defendants
who received much less prison time than Dawn has already served, if any prison time at all – we
ask that the Court sentence Dawn to time served.
We further ask the court to recognize the ongoing collective trauma that Dawn’s absence
has had on the Little Rock community, “[n]one of whom she’s harmed, many of which she has
helped beyond measure,” as Professor Shukur correctly asserted in his letter of support. The
consequences of Dawn’s incarceration on the lives of the people who love her most have been
profound. Dawn is a beloved and appreciated part of her family and community, who desperately
miss her and plead for her release. Dawn has received over sixty letters of support from her
family, friends, and community members, highlighting her strengths and the great influence she
has had on their lives, describing her as a healer, beacon of hope, and friend to the vulnerable.25
They have offered their homes to her upon her release as well as wrap-around support. The sheer
volume of support Dawn has received from her community is a testament to what she has given
of herself.
II. Conclusion
The Court now has a singular opportunity to begin to repair this damage. In the case of
compounded collective trauma, human rights experts suggest starting by soliciting input from the
community directly about their needs. In this case, the Court does not need to form a community
coalition or the like to hear directly from the citizens of Little Rock. The citizens of Little Rock
have made their pleas clear by submitting testimonials in support of Dawn’s release. As Dawn’s
life work demonstrates, the people of Little Rock are desperate for their needs to be seen, heard,
and acted upon. To sentence Dawn to time served on the date of her sentence would demonstrate
the Court’s commitment to justice, the people of Little Rock, and the reparative process.
25 See Appendix A.
2 0

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 21 of 34
Respectfully submitted,
_________________________________
Hamilton Clarke, LLP
By Phillip C. Hamilton, Esq., and for Lance A. Clarke, Esq.
2 1

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 22 of 34
Exhibit
A

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 23 of 34

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264 Filed 11/14/22 Page 24 of 34
Exhibit B

Case 1C:2a0se-c 4r-:02002-c0r3-0-B0M28C8 - DDPoMcu m Deonctu 9m4e nFt il2e6d4 0 9 F/2ile2d/2 121 /P14a/g2e2 1 Poaf 1g0e P25a goef I3D4 #: 553
U.S. Department of Justice
United States Attorney
Eastern District of New York
DMP:ICR/JEA 271 Cadman Plaza East
F. #2020R00508 Brooklyn, New York 11201
September 22, 2022
By Hand and ECF
The Honorable Brian M. Cogan
United States District Judge
Eastern District of New York
225 Cadman Plaza East
Brooklyn, New York 11201
Re: United States v. Urooj Rahman
Criminal Docket No. 20-203 (BMC)
Dear Judge Cogan:
The government respectfully submits this memorandum in advance of the
sentencing hearing in this case for defendant Urooj Rahman (“Rahman”), which is currently
scheduled for September 29, 2022. For the reasons detailed below, the government respectfully
submits that the Court should sentence Rahman to a term of 18 to 24 months’ imprisonment.
(Revised Presentence Investigation Report (“Revised PSR”) ¶¶ 4, 107).
I. Facts
The Revised PSR accurately describes the offense conduct in this case. See
Revised PSR ¶¶ 7-34. On May 25, 2020, Minneapolis Police Department Officer Derek Chauvin,
a white man, murdered George Floyd, an African American man, by kneeling on his neck and
asphyxiating him for nine minutes while arresting him for using counterfeit U.S. currency. George
Floyd’s murder by a police officer galvanized large nationwide protests focused on police brutality
against African Americans.
As outlined in the Revised PSR, in group chats on the evening on May 28, 2020,
Rahman sent a message to various individuals, including co-defendant Colinford Mattis
(“Mattis”), to announce a protest at the Barclays Center in Brooklyn that was planned for the
evening of May 29, 2020. In the early morning hours of May 29, 2020, just hours after the
Minneapolis Third Precinct stationhouse was overrun and burned by rioters, Mattis and Rahman
used a separate group chat to discuss the use of weapons and violence to pursue social change. In
their discussion, Rahman expressed the view that “all the police stations” and “probably all the
courts” “need[ed]” to be burned down.
Over the course of the evening, Rahman and Mattis sent many group chat messages
in which they, among other things: discussed the burning of Minneapolis’s Third Precinct;

Case 1C:2a0se-c 4r-:02002-c0r3-0-B0M28C8 - DDPoMcu m Deonctu 9m4e nFt il2e6d4 0 9 F/2ile2d/2 121 /P14a/g2e2 2 Poaf 1g0e P26a goef I3D4 #: 554
expressed support for burning police stations and One Police Plaza, the headquarters of the NYPD;
detailed acts of violence and property damage targeting the NYPD, including the use of fireworks
and Molotov cocktails (improvised incendiary devices) to set fires1; encouraged others to engage
in violence2; mocked reportedly injured police officers; and disparaged law enforcement generally,
writing “Fuck 12”3 and referring to police officers as “pigs.”
At one point, Mattis, who was not with Rahman at the time, indicated that he wanted
to meet up with her to participate in the events she was reporting to the group. Mattis announced
he would stop by a gas station for supplies en route to meeting up with Rahman, referring to the
purchase of gasoline that could be used to burn additional NYPD vehicles. Rahman reported that
rioters were attempting, once again, to set fire to an NYPD van, and that projectiles and gasoline
to set more fires were needed.
Shortly before 11:00 PM, Rahman and Mattis began messaging with each other
one-on-one. Mattis thereafter attempted to purchase gasoline at a Mobil gas station on Conduit
Boulevard, but that gas station had closed, so he proceeded to a BP gas station on Atlantic Avenue.
Mattis purchased a red gas can and a few gallons of gasoline. Thereafter, while Mattis made his
way to meet Rahman, Rahman sent messages to the group chat asking for information about which
Brooklyn NYPD precincts were still under siege from rioters. Just before midnight, Mattis met up
with Rahman in the vicinity of a 7-Eleven convenience store on the Flatbush Avenue Extension
where they purchased two six-packs of Bud Light beer and toilet paper for use in building Molotov
cocktails.
Inside the 7-Eleven, Rahman encountered two independent journalists from “Loud
Labs News NYC” who had been livestreaming the protests to their YouTube channel and agreed
to an interview.4 During this interview, Rahman made clear that she believed the destruction of
1 In one exchange, Rahman stated “[T]hrowing bottles and tear gas... lit some fires
but were put out... fireworks goin and Molotovs rollin.” Rahman also sent the group chat
photographs depicting a group of rioters damaging and burning a marked NYPD van in the
vicinity of Fort Greene Park, and videos showing firefighters arriving to extinguish the flames.
In another exchange, Mattis responded to a video sent by Rahman of a group of people
surrounding a damaged and burned-out NYPD van, stating “[b]ring it to their neck.” In others,
Rahman described throwing a rock at the NYPD van, and she and other members of the group
chat celebrated reports that the NYPD had been forced out of the 88th Precinct stationhouse.
2 Rahman sent a video of rioters standing in Fort Greene Park on the embankment
above Dekalb Avenue pelting NYPD officers with projectiles while Rahman can be heard yelling
“Keep throwing at ‘em.” After sending the video to the group, Rahman announced with a smiley
face emoji that her rock had struck a police officer.
3 The phrase “Fuck 12” is a derogatory anti-police slogan equivalent to “Fuck the
police.”
4 Rahman’s interview is publicly accessible on the Loud Labs News NYC
livestream’s YouTube page. See https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6FElgw5_wUE&t=16264s.
2

Case 1C:2a0se-c 4r-:02002-c0r3-0-B0M28C8 - DDPoMcu m Deonctu 9m4e nFt il2e6d4 0 9 F/2ile2d/2 121 /P14a/g2e2 3 Poaf 1g0e P27a goef I3D4 #: 555
property was justified by the rioters’ anger about police brutality against African Americans,
asserted the belief that nothing would change without violence, stating “[t]his shit won’t ever stop
unless we fucking take it all down.” Later in the interview, Rahman falsely denied witnessing acts
of violence against police officers and asserted that individuals were “targeting the precincts,”
specifically “property,” and stated that “the Mayor should have pulled [] . . . his police department
back” and if he “cared about his police officers, he should have realized that it’s not worth getting
them hurt.” Rahman concluded by asserting that “it’s not going to be enough until they defund
the police. Police are in general systemically the problem.”
Rahman and Mattis then made the two-mile drive to the NYPD’s 88th Precinct
Stationhouse on the corner of Classon Avenue and Dekalb Avenue in Brooklyn. There, Mattis’s
minivan stopped on the street in front of a parked NYPD sedan, specifically a 2013 Ford Fusion
hybrid bearing NYPD auxiliary livery, which had been significantly damaged by a crowd
marching down Dekalb Avenue earlier in the evening (the “NYPD sedan”). When Mattis’s
minivan pulled up to the NYPD sedan, a few civilians were in the area taking photographs of the
damaged NYPD sedan and other vehicles on the street. One of those individuals (“Witness-1”)
was recorded by an NYPD surveillance camera at the 88th Precinct taking a photograph of the
NYPD sedan as Mattis’s minivan approached it shortly before 1:00 AM on May 30, 2020.
According to Witness-1, Mattis’s minivan pulled up near him as he was taking
photographs of vehicles on the street. Both the driver, Mattis, and the passenger, Rahman, spoke
to Witness-1 and coaxed him to throw a bottle that Rahman was holding. Witness-1 declined, and
instead took three photographs of the pair and later reported the incident to the police. Witness-1
provided the three photographs to law enforcement, which depict Rahman holding a Molotov
cocktail in her right hand, with Mattis partially visible behind her in the driver seat.
Mattis’s minivan returned to the NYPD sedan at approximately 1:00 AM.
Rahman got out of the front passenger seat of Mattis’s minivan and ignited the Molotov cocktail.
A second later, with at least two other people in the immediate vicinity of the NYPD sedan,
Rahman threw the lit Molotov cocktail through the smashed window of the NYPD sedan,
starting a small fire in the center console of the NYPD sedan, before she ran back to Mattis’s
waiting minivan. Mattis then drove the minivan away at a high rate of speed while the center
console of the NYPD sedan began to burn. Within two minutes, responding police officers
extinguished the flames.
The defendants were arrested a short time later on Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn.
Photos of Mattis’s minivan taken by the NYPD after Mattis and Rahman’s arrests show a
completed Molotov cocktail comprised of a 12-ounce bottle of Bud Light filled with gasoline and
a toilet paper wick sitting on the front passenger seat of Mattis’s minivan with two BiC lighters,
two open bottles of Bud Light on the floor of the front passenger seat in a cardboard Bud Light
six-pack container, and a third open Bud Light bottle lying on the floor next to the container.
Officers also observed a funnel in the glove box. In the rear of Mattis’s minivan, police officers
found a half-full red gas can, a Poland Spring water jug half-filled with a brown liquid, several
rolls of toilet paper, and several Bud Light bottles. The defendants were charged shortly thereafter.
3

Case 1C:2a0se-c 4r-:02002-c0r3-0-B0M28C8 - DDPoMcu m Deonctu 9m4e nFt il2e6d4 0 9 F/2ile2d/2 121 /P14a/g2e2 4 Poaf 1g0e P28a goef I3D4 #: 556
On October 20, 2021, the defendant pleaded guilty pursuant to a plea agreement to
Count Seven of the indictment, which charged her with knowingly receiving, possessing, and
making an improvised incendiary device which was not registered to the defendants in the National
Firearms Registration and Transfer Record, in violation of 26 U.S.C. §§ 5861(d) and 5861(f).
Revised PSR ¶ 1. On June 3, 2022, the defendant plead guilty to a superseding information, which
charged the defendant with conspiracy to commit arson and to make and possess an unregistered
destructive device, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 371. Revised PSR ¶ 4.
II. Applicable Law
Title 18, United States Code, Section 3553(a) requires a sentencing court to
“determine in each case what constitutes a sentence that is ‘sufficient, but not greater than
necessary,’ to achieve the overarching sentencing purposes of ‘retribution, deterrence,
incapacitation, and rehabilitation.’” Rosales-Mireles v. United States, 138 S. Ct. 1897, 1903
(2018) (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) and Tapia v. United States, 564 U.S. 319, 325 (2011)). “[I]n
determining the particular sentence to be imposed” the Court is required to consider both the
sentencing factors set forth at § 3553(a)(2), as well as the sentencing range established by the
Sentencing Commission for the applicable category of offense and offender. See 18 U.S.C.
§ 3553(a)(4). Thus, “[a] district court is procedurally obligated to calculate and consider the
Sentencing Guidelines in reaching an independent decision as to sentence,” United States v. Awan,
607 F.3d 306, 312 (2d Cir. 2010), and “[a] district court should normally begin all sentencing
proceedings by calculating, with the assistance of the Presentence Report, the applicable
Guidelines range,” which “provide the ‘starting point and the initial benchmark’ for sentencing.”
United States v. Cavera, 550 F.3d 180, 189 (2d Cir. 2008) (en banc) (quoting Gall v. United
States, 552 U.S. 38, 49-50 (2007)).
Although the United States Sentencing Guidelines (“U.S.S.G.” or the “Guidelines”)
are advisory, see United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220 (2005), “sentencing judges remain under
a duty with respect to the Guidelines . . . to ‘consider’ them, along with the other factors listed in
section 3553(a)” in determining what sentence to impose, see United States v. Crosby, 397 F.3d
103, 111 (2d Cir. 2005). Thus, while a district court retains wide discretion in sentencing a
defendant, that discretion applies not to the calculation of the Guidelines but rather to the
subsequent decision whether “to deviate from the Guidelines once properly ascertained.” See
United States v. Thomas, 628 F.3d 64, 71 (2d Cir. 2010); accord, e.g., United States v. Dorvee,
616 F.3d 174, 180 (2d Cir. 2010) (“Once the proper Guidelines sentence has been ascertained, a
sentencing court should consider the § 3553(a) factors to determine whether a non-Guidelines
sentence is warranted.”).
III. Sentencing Guidelines
Applying the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual to the facts detailed above, the
government, the defendant and the Probation Department have each independently determined that
4

Case 1C:2a0se-c 4r-:02002-c0r3-0-B0M28C8 - DDPoMcu m Deonctu 9m4e nFt il2e6d4 0 9 F/2ile2d/2 121 /P14a/g2e2 5 Poaf 1g0e P29a goef I3D4 #: 557
the applicable Guidelines range for the defendant is 60 months’ imprisonment. As part of her plea
agreement, the defendant stipulated to the Guidelines calculation set forth below.
The government submits that the Revised PSR sets forth the applicable Guidelines
calculation, which is reflected below:
Base Offense Level (U.S.S.G. § 2K2.1(a)(5)) 18
Plus: Offense Involved Destructive Device
(U.S.S.G. § 2K2.1(b)(3)(B)) +2
Plus: Used or Possessed Firearm In Connection With
Another Felony Offense (U.S.S.G. § 2K2.1(b)(6)(B)) +4
Plus: Terrorism Enhancement (U.S.S.G. § 3A1.4(a)) +12
Less: Acceptance of Responsibility (U.S.S.G. § 3E1.1(a)) -2
Less: Acceptance of Responsibility (U.S.S.G. § 3E1.1(b)) -1
Total: 33
Revised PSR ¶¶ 39-57. The defendant does not have any prior criminal convictions, and thus her
criminal history category would ordinarily be set at Category I, but under Section 3A1.4, the
defendant’s criminal history category is automatically set at Category VI. See U.S.S.G.
§ 3A1.4(b). At Criminal History Category VI, an offense level of 33 carries an advisory
Guidelines sentencing range of 235 to 293 months in custody, but because the minimum of the
applicable sentencing range exceeds the statutorily authorized maximum sentence of five years’
imprisonment for the defendant’s offense of conviction, the statutorily authorized maximum
sentence of 60 months’ imprisonment is the advisory Guidelines sentence.5 See U.S.S.G.
§ 5G1.1(a).
As part of her plea agreement, the defendant has stipulated to this calculation, and
waived any right to a hearing regarding the Probation Department’s Guidelines determination.
(See Plea Agreements ¶ 2; Revised PSR ¶ 4.) Nevertheless, the defendant objects to the Revised
PSR’s application of the base offense level for arson, Guidelines § 2K1.4(a)(1), because the
defendant argues that she did not knowingly create a substantial risk of death or serious bodily
injury to other persons. See Rahman Revised PSR Objections, ¶ 6. The defendant correctly notes
that she waived any objection to the Guidelines calculation and that her objection “has no effect
on the ultimate applicable Guidelines range.” Id. Still, the government agrees with Probation that
5 The Guidelines would still advise a sentence of 60 months’ imprisonment even if
the defendant’s criminal history category were set at Category I, because even at Category I,
offense level 33 carries a Guidelines sentencing range of 135 to 168 months’ imprisonment, and
thus the minimum of the Guidelines range would still be above the statutorily authorized maximum
sentence.
5

Case 1C:2a0se-c 4r-:02002-c0r3-0-B0M28C8 - DDPoMcu m Deonctu 9m4e nFt il2e6d4 0 9 F/2ile2d/2 121 /P14a/g2e2 6 Poaf 1g0e P30a goef I3D4 #: 558
the application of Guidelines § 2K1.4(a)(1) is appropriate as the potential danger of the fire from
the Molotov cocktail in the NYPD vehicle could have caused an extremely dangerous situation for
fire fighters and emergency personnel if the fire had spread to the gasoline in the targeted NYPD
vehicle or other vehicles nearby. Indeed, that the fire did not spread was due to the quick actions
of the first responders, including NYPD officers. See United States v. Honeycutt, 8 F.3d 785, 787-
88 (11th Cir. 1993) (holding that the district court did not err in applying Guidelines § 2K1.4(a)(1)
where an arsonist set a fire in the proximity of “hazardous materials and cars containing gasoline,
creating a serious threat to the responding fire fighters.”) Thus, the government agrees with the
Revised PSR that the base offense level for arson is 24. See Revised PSR ¶ 39.
The defendant also stipulated as part of her plea agreement to the application of the
Guidelines’ Section 3A1.4 enhancement. See Plea Agreement ¶ 2. The Probation Department
likewise determined in the PSR that Section 3A1.4 applies to the defendant’s conduct. That
enhancement applies because the defendant’s offense of conviction—conspiracy to commit arson
and to possess and create unregistered Molotov cocktail improvised incendiary devices—involved
two felony offenses enumerated at 18 U.S.C. § 2332b(g)(5)(B): (1) conspiracy, attempt and use of
a weapon of mass destruction, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 2332a; and (2) attempted arson of
property used in and affecting interstate commerce, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 844(i), and because
the evidence set forth above—including the defendant’s text messages and her Loud Labs
interview—demonstrates that her conduct was calculated to influence or affect the conduct of the
NYPD and New York City government and/or to retaliate against the NYPD and the City of New
York for the NYPD’s performance of its duty to maintain and restore order during the protests and
to cause the City to order the NYPD to retreat from the streets. In the alternative, the defendant’s
conduct was intended to promote a crime enumerated at 18 U.S.C. § 2332b(g)(5)(B). In any event,
however, the sentence recommended by the government is lower than the Guidelines calculation
without the Section 3A1.4 enhancement, therefore the Court need not determine whether the
enhancement applies.6
IV. The 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) Sentencing Factors
The defendant’s targeting of NYPD property with homemade firebombs is
extremely dangerous criminal conduct that warrants a serious sentence. Both in selecting an
appropriate charge to resolve this prosecution by plea agreement, and in recommending an
appropriate sentence, the government has given careful consideration to the full range of
aggravating and mitigating factors that the Court must consider at sentencing under 18 U.S.C.
§ 3553(a). Particularly in this case, which presents numerous facts and circumstances that could
reasonably be viewed as both mitigating and aggravating, the government is mindful of the Second
Circuit’s guidance that “‘facts may frequently point in different directions so that even
6 In Crosby, the Second Circuit observed that there may be cases in which a
sentencing court “makes a decision to impose a non-guidelines sentence, regardless of which of
two [Guidelines] ranges applies.” 397 F.3d at 112. In such cases, although the government must
inform the court of the applicable Guidelines range, if relevant facts that would affect the
Guidelines calculation are contested by the defendant, the court need not resolve such factual
disputes if it determines that a non-Guidelines sentence is warranted under 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a).
Id.
6

Case 1C:2a0se-c 4r-:02002-c0r3-0-B0M28C8 - DDPoMcu m Deonctu 9m4e nFt il2e6d4 0 9 F/2ile2d/2 121 /P14a/g2e2 7 Poaf 1g0e P31a goef I3D4 #: 559
experienced district judges may reasonably differ, not only in their findings of fact, but in the
relative weight they accord competing circumstances.’” United States v. Broxmeyer, 699 F.3d
265, 289 (2d Cir. 2012) (quoting United States v. Jones, 531 F.3d 163, 174 (2d Cir. 2008)).
Based on the unique set of facts and circumstances presented in this case, the
government is confident that the statutory range of zero to 60 months’ imprisonment for the
defendant’s violations of 18 U.S.C. § 371, affords the Court sufficiently broad discretion to select
and impose sentences that serve the statutory purposes of sentencing set forth at 18 U.S.C.
§ 3553(a)(2). In the government’s view, and for the reasons discussed below, the government
respectfully submits that a sentence of 18 to 24 months’ imprisonment, below the Guidelines
sentence of 60 months’ imprisonment, would be sufficient, but not greater than necessary, to
achieve the purposes of sentencing in this case. See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a).
A. The Nature and Circumstances of the Offense
A sentence of 18 to 24 months’ imprisonment would accurately reflect the
seriousness of the defendant’s conduct in creating Molotov cocktails that she used to firebomb an
NYPD vehicle. Here, Rahman and Mattis acquired the components to build a Molotov cocktail
destructive device. Specifically, Mattis went to two different gas stations, and then, with Rahman,
to 7-Eleven, acquiring a gas can, gasoline, Bud Light bottles to use as a vessel for the gasoline and
toilet paper to use as a wick to ignite it. Rahman and Mattis constructed Molotov cocktails and
first attempted to distribute one to Witness-1 and encouraged him to use it against the NYPD sedan,
before doing so themselves.
Rahman and Mattis had also built a second Molotov cocktail and were equipped
with the components to make several more when they were arrested, thus indicating that their
arrests had disrupted a plan to cause even more extensive damage. The fact that Rahman and
Mattis were arrested and prevented from continuing their attacks on NYPD property does not
mitigate their conduct.
Second, the defendant’s weapon of choice—fire—presented a particularly severe
risk of danger because she could not control who or what would be harmed by the fire once set.
Rahman could not know whether the NYPD sedan contained within it combustible or explosive
materials, such as ammunition. Nor could Rahman foresee or control the damage that a spreading
fire would cause once set. As evident in the surveillance video, when Rahman attempted to light
it on fire the NYPD sedan was parked near several other vehicles, directly under the boughs of a
large tree, and at least two other people were near the sedan. Had the NYPD not quickly
extinguished the flames, the fire could easily have spread, causing more damage to property and
threatening human life.
B. The History and Characteristics of the Defendant
Assessing Rahman’s history and characteristics presents a uniquely difficult task
for the government in recommending sentence, and ultimately for this Court in selecting the
sentence to impose, because the relevant facts and circumstances point in sharply opposite
7

Case 1C:2a0se-c 4r-:02002-c0r3-0-B0M28C8 - DDPoMcu m Deonctu 9m4e nFt il2e6d4 0 9 F/2ile2d/2 121 /P14a/g2e2 8 Poaf 1g0e P32a goef I3D4 #: 560
directions that are difficult to reconcile. Indeed, the defendant’s history and characteristics present
at least two highly significant mitigating factors:
First, the government’s investigation has not revealed evidence that before May 29,
2020, the defendant had ever used, attempted, planned, or advocated the use of violence,
intimidation or coercion to affect or retaliate against government conduct.
Second, the defendant has successfully completed advanced degrees, and recently
entered a profession that offered a future of gainful and meaningful employment. The government
has no contrary evidence or reason to dispute the additional information provided by defense
counsel regarding the defendant’s pro bono and public interest contributions as an attorney and
counselor-at-law to underserved communities and indigent clients, both within the United States
and abroad.
But these factors can also be viewed as aggravating.
First, it is both unusual and troubling that Rahman mobilized to commit violent acts
targeting law enforcement in less than 24 hours, without having previously expressed any interest
in participating in violent activity targeting law enforcement.
Second, in choosing to commit serious crimes, Rahman cast aside her ties and
responsibilities to her community, family and profession with little apparent thought for the severe
consequences of that decision. Any person’s decision to violate the law and engage in criminal
conduct is wrong and worthy of punishment, but it is troubling as an attorney licensed by the State
of New York. Even more significantly, her crime involved targeting a law enforcement agency
charged with enforcing the same law that, as an attorney, she had sworn to uphold.
C. The Purposes of Sentencing
The government respectfully submits that a sentence of 18 to 24 months in the
custody of the Attorney General is necessary to reflect the seriousness of the defendant’s offense,
to promote respect for the law, and provide just punishment. See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(A). The
defendant’s criminal conduct is extremely serious. Rahman and Mattis’s decision to make and use
firebombs to target NYPD property created a severe risk of danger and could easily have resulted
in the destruction of more property and harm to human life.
There remains the risk that the mix of factors that led the defendant to throw a
firebomb at an NYPD sedan will reoccur, and that others will follow the defendant’s example and
use force against law enforcement and other government officials in an effort to coerce government
conduct. In the Court’s consideration of both specific and general deterrence, sentencing Rahman
within a range of 18 to 24 months’ imprisonment will afford adequate deterrence of the defendant
and others from engaging in similar conduct by sending a message that the Court views these
crimes as deserving a significant sentence. See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(B).
While there are aspects of Rahman’s conduct that raise concerns about her risk to
re-offend, including the fact that the defendant had significant community, family and professional
8

Case 1C:2a0se-c 4r-:02002-c0r3-0-B0M28C8 - DDPoMcu m Deonctu 9m4e nFt il2e6d4 0 9 F/2ile2d/2 121 /P14a/g2e2 9 Poaf 1g0e P33a goef I3D4 #: 561
ties that should have restrained her from engaging in these crimes in the first place, Rahman’s
acceptance of responsibility, expression of remorse, and agreement to make restitution to the
NYPD by paying an amount equal to the replacement value of the NYPD sedan, suggests that her
arrest and conviction has at least partially mitigated the risk of future dangerousness. Thus, the
government believes that a sentence of 18 to 24 months’ imprisonment is a punishment sufficiently
severe to assure that she will not re-offend. See 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(C).
Finally, a sentence of 18 to 24 months’ imprisonment is broadly consistent with
similar sentences imposed for similar offense conduct committed during civil disorder. See 18
U.S.C. § 3553(a)(6); see also United States v. Robinson, et al., No. 20-CR-181 (D. Minn.) (Four
defendants were convicted of conspiracy to commit arson, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 371, for their
roles in the arson of the Minneapolis Police Department’s Third Precinct on the night of May 28,
2020. The defendants were sentenced to 48 months’, 41 months’, 36 months’, and 27 months’
imprisonment based on their respective levels of involvement it the attack.); United States v.
David-Pitts, 20-CR-143 (W.D. Wa.) (the defendant was convicted of conspiracy to commit arson,
in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 371, for his role in starting a fire against a police precinct door to
prevent police officers from exiting the precinct. The defendant was sentenced to 20 months’
imprisonment.); United States v. Jackson, 20-CR-148 (W.D. Wa.) (Defendant was convicted of
two counts of unlawfully possessing Molotov cocktails in violation of 26 U.S.C. §§ 5861(d) and
5845(a)(8) and sentenced to 40 months’ imprisonment. The defendant created and used two
Molotov cocktails against Seattle Police Department vehicles during a protest on May 30, 2020.).
Further, the defendant’s reliance on United States v. Carberry, et al., No. 20-CR-
544 (S.D.N.Y.) as an analogous case is misplaced. In Carberry, two defendants set fire to an
NYPD homeless outreach van in July 2020 and were sentenced to 6 months’ imprisonment. There,
the sentencing record in Carberry was entirely devoid of any evidence that the defendants planned
the arson attack before they set the van on fire. See 20-CR-544, ECF No. 77. Even more, here
the defendant and Mattis not only methodically collected components to make a destructive device,
but actually constructed at least two, and offered one to a witness to throw before Rahman threw
the Molotov cocktail and set fire to the NYPD sedan. Moreover, in contrast to Carberry, Mattis
and Rahman’s targeting of the NYPD happened in the midst of an active protest, creating a more
dangerous situation for law enforcement, emergency personnel and others in the area.
The government also requests that the Court, consistent with the plea agreement,
impose restitution in the amount of $30,137.00, which was the total cost to the NYPD of acquiring
the NYPD sedan, including outfitting the vehicle with specialty police equipment.
9

Case 1C:2a0s-ec r4-0:2002-0c3r--0B0M2C88 - DDoPcMu m Denotc u9m4 e Fntil e2d6 40 9 /F2i2le/d2 21 1 P/1a4g/2e2 1 0 P oafg 1e0 3 P4a ogfe 3ID4 #: 562
V. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, the government respectfully requests that the Court
sentence Rahman to a below-Guidelines term of 18 to 24 months’ imprisonment.
Respectfully submitted,
BREON PEACE
United States Attorney
Eastern District of New York
By: /s/
Ian C. Richardson
Jonathan E. Algor
Assistant U.S. Attorneys
(718) 254-7000
cc: Clerk of Court (BMC) (by Hand and ECF)
Shayna Bryant, Senior United States Probation Officer (by Email)
Peter W. Baldwin, Esq. and Rita K. Maxwell, Esq. (counsel to defendant Rahman) (by
ECF and Email)
10

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 1 of 77
Appendix A

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 2 of 77
ASHLEY JEFFREY
August 30, 2022
Ashley Jeffrey
Dear Honorable Judge Marshall,
I am writing this letter on behalf of my sister, Brittany Jeffrey. I have known Brittany my
whole life as she is my older sister. Watching her over the years, she has grown to be a
great mother, trusted community member, and true friend to all who call on her.
When she began her work in community care, I could not understand why she cared about
the people the way that she did. I did not understand why she had to be the one leading
community members to clean up their neighborhoods, especially when she didn’t even
live there. I could not understand why she had to be the one to organize backpack drives
or host education classes for the community. I truly could not understand how she could
do all of this and still find the energy to work, pick kids up from school, make them dinner,
give them bathes, and wake up the next day to do it again. I came to understand this is her
way of being in service. My mother and I became nurses. My grandfather and father
served in the military. She is a service member too. In every community you can look and
find the helpers, and that is what Brittany is. Brittany isn’t a danger to our family or our
communities. She is our help.
She has blessed me so much throughout my life.
She has
aided me in raising my son and been a helping hand when I needed it the most. Just as
she has supported me for years, I am committed to helping her as she transitions back
home. Our family is very loving and supportive. We are all committed to doing whatever it
takes to keep her home. We are deeply hurt by her absence, and are ready for her return.
Sincerely,
Ashley M Jeffrey

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 3 of 77
Ashley Jeffrey

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 4 of 77
Omavi Shukur
Associate Research Scholar &
Lecturer in Law
435 West 116th Street,
August 18, 2022
Judge D.P. Marshall, Jr.
600 West Capitol Avenue, Room B149
Little Rock, AR 72201
Re: United States v. Brittany Dawn Jeffrey, 4:20-cr-288 (DPM) (JJV)—Sentencing
Dear Judge Marshall:
Over the past twenty years, I have known Brittany Dawn Jeffrey: first, as her schoolmate at Parkview High
School, and later as her colleague in Little Rock’s public service community. During this time, I have seen
Dawn grow from a bubbly teenager to a compassionate woman, determined to serve her community to the
best of her ability. I have seen the joy and hope that Dawn has brought to people who too often are
overlooked and silenced. And for the past year, I have seen Dawn’s community in despair over her
conspicuous absence. Thus, I am writing to urge the court not to sentence Brittany Dawn Jeffrey to serve
any time in prison.
Dawn does not pose a danger to the community. Her record of serving the needy demonstrates that she is
committed to ensuring that people are safe: safe from deprivation, safe from violence, and safe from
persecution. I have seen Dawn make sure that children have adequate school supplies, that victims of police
violence feel supported, and that those sentenced to die in prison and their loved ones never lose hope. As
a rule, Dawn has painstakingly endeavored to construct a safe, just society in Little Rock; the actions she
has admitted to committing related to the above-captioned case are little more than aberrational exceptions.
Dawn has strong family and community bonds. She is not a menace to society. Instead, she is a healer to
all she knows. She is a beacon of hope. Having gone through this ordeal, Dawn understands how crucial
her presence is in the lives of so many—such as her daughter, her peers in the public interest community,
and the people she serves. To detain her, to withhold her, for any longer would not just punish her, but will
also punish her community, none of whom she’s harmed, many of whom she has helped beyond measure.
Obviously, Dawn’s presence is desperately needed in Little Rock. Dawn has the skill, dedication, and
knowhow necessary to ensure that the downtrodden get the help they need. There are people whose plight
has been exacerbated due in great part to Dawn’s absence. And yet there are even more needy people who
stand to be helped if Dawn is released directly. For these reasons and others, I implore you to not sentence
Dawn to serve any additional time in prison and to give her the least restrictive sentence possible.
Best,
Omavi Shukur

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 5 of 77
Dr. Anika T. Whitfield
September 10, 2021
To Whom It May Concern,
I would like to speak to the positive impacts I have experienced by the actions of B.
Dawn Jeffrey.
I’ve witnessed above her community organizing and activism, a mother who deeply
loves her daughter and works hard not only to provide for her, but to stand up for and
protect her best interest. Dawn has engaged in community sports and fun with her
daughter and her peers. Her detail and attention to her daughter and family is
admirable.
Dawn has worked tirelessly and sacrificially to help reduce harm to people because of
systemic racism, poverty, and discrimination based on identity.
Dawn has given of her own personal resources and raised resources to help provide
support and justice for persons who are/have been incarcerated as well as their
families.
Dawn has helped mother’s and father’s who have been detained in county detention
centers for non violent crimes to be released through community organizing
and fundraising.
Dawn has also helped to give back in/with community creating opportunities for persons
to learn about their human and civic rights, supporting local artists and organizers, and
by offering testimony of her own experiences.
It is my hope that you will take into strong consideration that before Dawn was an
activist, and an organizer, she was/is an amazing mom who needs to be reconnected
with her daughter and family.
It is my prayer that you will find ways to support her in her release, rather than continue
to hold her hostage, away from her beloved child, family, and community that depend
on, love, and need her presence.
Peace and Blessings,
Dr. Anika T. Whitfield

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 6 of 77
To Whom This May Concern:
September 9, 2021
My name is Marilyn, today I’m writing this letter on the behalf of Ms. Dawn Jeffery. I met Ms.
Jeffery back in 2019. I was a sponsor at an event that was held at the Little Rock Pulaski
County Jail. The event was called Mother’s Day Bail Out. The bail out was to help mothers be
reunited with their children. Some mothers may have a bond for something simple as a traffic
ticket. Yet, didn’t have the money to bond out. Which cause some mothers to be away from their
kids for 30days or more. A total of 9 mothers was bailed out due to the event that was held. That
was something I had to be apart of. Not every person is a criminal. 2018 Ms. Jeffery received a
Spirit award from AR18Release for Community Outreach for all that she has done in the
community. Not only that, in 2016 Ms. Jeffery organized a 10 Block Challenge for the
community. She and others picked 10 neighborhoods to clean up. Which included children and
adults. Trying to give back while also cleaning our community. She stood up against police
brutality within the black community. She spoke up and held rallies for families of the voiceless.
She spent countless days and nights going to meetings to speak about the oppressions on
people of color (POC). Ms. Jeffery has NEVER been a violent person. She would give you the
shirt off her back. Ms. Jeffery stood for equality and integrity. If you were to ask me, I would say
“Ms. Jeffery strides for equality, integrity and equity, (POC) people of color have been written off
whenever they’ve decided to mobilize for change. Accounts of lived experiences from (POC)
people if color are ignored, taken for game and depoliticized. The irony lies in the response of
those who then discourage their sense of urgency and/or passion and mistake it for aggression.
While anger and other emotions are expected of those who have faced oppression, we instead
censor our emotions and attitude towards certain topics, so we don’t offend people. The
community needs more leaders like Dawn Jeffery. I hope that the court see that Ms. Jeffery is a
pillar to our community.
Dawn Jeffery to me is:
Having integrity that you live in accordance to your deepest values, you're honest with
everyone, and you always keep your word. Integrity is a highly valued trait, especially in leaders.
Sincerely,
Marilyn

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 7 of 77
Brittany Wright
Little Rock, AR
3 August 2022
To the Honorable Judge Marshall,
My name is Brittany Wright. I know Dawn through mutual friends. She is a great friend
and an even better mother. She has helped me with my domestic case. Dawn made me
believe that I am more than a victim of domestic abuse. She provided resources and a
listening ear. I believe Dawn should be released as she is not a danger to anyone. She
is a light in a community where no one wants to help until it's too late. I know that I
would not be here today if it weren't for Dawn.
Sincerely,
Brittany Wright

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 8 of 77
Honorable Judge Marshall,
My name is Marie Langston. I am Brittany Dawn Jeffrey’s grandmother. I am writing this letter
as I serve as an advocate for her life, mental health, and freedom. I am her mother’s mother
and have had a hand in raising her from a child.
Our entire family has always been proud to serve our community in one way or another. This is
the culture Brittany was raised in. Being a caregiver within the community she lives was
purposely engrained in her by her us, her family. We are very proud of the leader she has
become. She has never been violent and never been accused of violence against the
government. She, as we all do, speaks out against the injustices that we see. It. Is not out of
hate for the government, it is out of love for hurting people in our communities.
She is a good mother, aunt, cousin, niece, and grandmother. She has taken the role of the main
caregiver for her daughter, stepdaughter, and nephew. The family has been out of balance for
the last three months as she has been removed from us. Being a part from her family has
pained her, just as it has pained us. It is a sickening pain, that we wish to stop experiencing.
Her physical presence is important and we not only want her around, but we need her. She has
support in her family first, and her community closely following. We speak up for her because
we were first given the responsibility for caring for her. We care for her, seek to protect her, and
lover her. She would do the same on our behalf.
She is a caring grandchild to me. She is compassionate to all. Please seek to understand the
value she has within her community and the suffering our family and our community has been
facing in her absence. We value her life. I stand up for her in love and support and advocate for
her release.
Thank you for your time and consideration,
Marie Langston

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 9 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 10 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 11 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 12 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 13 of 77
I first met Dawn Jeffrey while volunteering on a candidate’s campaign for a state legislative
office. I was there to knock on doors that Saturday morning, but Dawn was a core volunteer on
the team. It was obvious she was passionate about improving our community, and willing to
step up to make positive change. While our candidate ultimately lost the race, I was impressed
by Dawn’s tireless work to work for the person we all believed would be the best
representative for our community.
That same passion and drive was on display again when she began advocating for reform
following the murder of George Floyd by a group of police officers. In addition to working and
caring for her child, Dawn also began organizing and educating the community about police
brutality and the grave injustices inflicted upon people of color in this country.
In addition to her advocacy work, Dawn began organizing community cleanups and offering
other services to the people in her neighborhood, including food and hygiene item distribution.
Again, she was doing what she could to make her community a better and safer place. I hope
she will soon be returning to continue her good work. Thank you for your time, and thanks to
Dawn for her service to our community.
Sincerely,
Kyle Leyenberger

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 14 of 77
Carmen Thompson
To whom it may concern,
I have known Dawn Jeffrey for over 15 years. Although I met her as my friend’s sister, she
quickly became like a sister to me. She treated me like I was a sister of hers, which is not easy
for a teenager to do but she did it. Needless to say, my introduction to Dawn’s character was a
special one that allowed me to witness her growth in love and passion for others and community.
As a young adult Dawn has always spoken up for the community and that voice transitioned into
community work and activism. She has advocated for the oppressed and demanded justice where
injustice is ever present in our lives. Her hand in community clean ups, community programs, the
Know Your Rights tour, and several peaceful protests is no happenstance, it is by design. Dawn
has passion to work for people with no expectation of recognition, monetary gain, or malicious
intent which is why she is valuable and needed in the community.
Dawn Jeffrey is a mother, daughter, sister, friend, advocate, humanitarian, activist, citizen, and
human. I advocate for her rightful release back to her family, friends, loved ones, and
community.
Sincerely,
Carmen Thompson

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 15 of 77
Osyrus Bolly
September 9, 2021
Honorable Judge Marshall,
Hello my name is Osyrus Bolly. I’m writing to tell you about my friend Brittany Dawn
Jeffrey, but I've always called her Dawn. I met Dawn about 5 years ago volunteering on
a community project, from there we formed a strong bond, friendship and working
relationship. Dawn has had an active hand in helping developing leaders in our
community by challenging them to be active citizens in our communities and to remain
civically engaged. Over the years we've worked together on numerous efforts to
encourage grassroots involvement from people throughout Arkansas and to advocate
for a collectivist model of leadership. Dawn believes that people can be strong leaders
with the proper knowledge, empathy and resources. Dawn has led voter registration
drives in 2018 and 2019 with a coalition of groups that include Citizens First Congress,
Vote Forward and Arkansas Poor People's Campaign. She believes in being an
active participant in the political process and being present on the local
government level attending city hall meetings and community forums while encouraging
others to do the same. In 2019 and 2020 Dawn organized Know Your Rights workshops
in Little Rock, North Little Rock and Monticello to help people have a healthy
understanding of their rights and freedom while collaborating with ACLU of Arkansas,
CFC, Seeds of Liberation and numerous lawyers/attorneys to offer free legal advice.
Every year I've witnessed Dawn as she has taken the initiative to do a weekend
community cleanup in her neighborhood, feed the less fortunate, organize or support a
back to school drive and encourage the youth to lead by example through her events.
Dawn is an asset to our city, state and country because she has the heart to help others
and strategize with people so that we all are more solution based thinkers. Dawn is also
a great mother and very family oriented, mothers are the glue that holds our families
together. I could talk for hours about how Dawn has been a blessing to so many, it's
immeasurable through words to know the amount of love she has shown our community
and that's why it's an honor to show a token of my gratitude by writing this letter for her.
Sincerely
Osyrus Bolly

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 16 of 77
September 13, 2021
Honorable Judge Marshall,
I met Dawn in college. We played intramural volleyball together. I remember saying casually, “I
miss playing volleyball- I’d like to get a team together.” She overheard me and immediately
started asking questions- in true Dawn form. “Are you any good?” “Now, you know I play for
real.” I laughed and responded quite confidently, and from there, she took over. She recruited
members, organized our practice schedules, got us uniforms, and kept us informed of game
days. Fast forward to 10 years later, and I walk into a church building only to see Dawn setting
up telephones to make calls to local residents in order to ensure that they get a fair chance to
make a difference in their community, scheduling neighborhood tours to inform people of who
they were voting for, pressuring governments and elected officials to be held accountable for
injustices and abuses of power, and creating safe spaces for underrepresented children by
tackling park and playground clean up efforts. Looking back at our old days of amateur
volleyball, I realize that at her core, this is who she is- an organizer, and a way maker. While
everyone sat and talked about what it was that they’d like to do to make a change, Dawn
“played for real”. After Derek Floyd’s murder, Dawn peacefully organized marches and rallies.
Often times, she would lose her voice from chanting for miles and miles alongside emotionally
and physically exhausted crowds. Whether there are 20 or 200 people, when she speaks- we
listen. She is a true leader and a true protector. Dawn knew this day would come where she
would have to appear before a judge for crimes she did not commit. She would tell us constantly
how she and her family were being harassed, and although I believe that her humanness felt
some fear for her and her loved one’s lives- the soldier in her would never allow anyone to see
that aspect of her being. A few months before her arrest, she went on a vacation to get some
much needed rest. When she and Miranda returned, they bought my family a tiger’s eye. The
purpose of this stone is for protection from any forces, physical or spiritual, that may come
against us. I still think now how selfless it was that she, in her time of rest, was still thinking of
how she could protect her friends and family. Dawn is not a criminal; she has too much
knowledge of the law and too much to lose to ever be careless with people’s lives. I urge you to
see the woman that we all see when we look at Dawn Jeffrey, a dedicated mother, an honorable
partner, a cheerleader, an advocate, and the woman who kept hope alive in our city.
Sincerely,
Kabrelyn G. Boyce

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 17 of 77
Christine Jeffrey -Mother of (Brittany Dawn Jeffrey)
9/10/2021
Honorable Judge Marshall
Your Honor,
I am writing on the behalf of Brittany Jeffrey, my daughter who is appearing before your
court due to a violation with her using marijuana in which she has a medical marijuana
card for her PTSD.
Brittany Jeffrey has PTSD and has been seeking help with a counselor at Argenta
Counseling. Brittany has been involved in her community for many years, backpack
program for back to school kids, scheduling clean up of neighborhoods in minority
communities, providing meals and hygiene products to the homeless. These are just a
few of the community based projects she created.
Brittany has a daughter who needs and love her dearly. This has had a
great impact on her since her mother was taking away from her. She cries every day
and every night for her mother to come back home. This has taken an emotional toll on
her daughter. Brittany is a single mother of and had her at the age of 21. She
has done her best in the midst of her MH challenges. We are a family of Registered
Nurses and we have served and continue to serve our communities.
Brittany, has made many changes in her life and she has a goal to achieve many things
in her life by helping people. She’s caring and loving and is dedicated to restoring the
communities in Little Rock. Brittany has made an sincere effort to try and pull her life
together.
As her mother, I am asking the court to please let her come home to her family. We love
her. Please allow her to come home so she can continue to receive the MH treatment
so that her mind can heal. I hope that you will consider the self-awareness and courage
of this wonderful person God has made and blessed us with. This has been a difficult
period for her daughter and our family. We as her family, do not take it for granted. We
are a family of Registered Nurses and we have been here for the MH veterans who are
mentally ill and for the critical patients during this COVID period. We are asking for her
to come home,so that she can be mentally whole with help from the Providers in her
community.
Sincerely,
Christine Jeffrey (mother)

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 18 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 19 of 77
Coffy Davis
September 10, 2021
To whom it may concern,
My name is Coffy. I am a community leader and teacher in Little Rock. I often do work
with marginalized youth and women. I met Dawn Jeffrey several years ago thru a
mutual friend. I was immediately drawn in to her passion for the community and her
willingness to educate and inform through love action.
Her and my mutual friend would host informative workshop series aimed at educating
the community and I would occasionally come to speak. She knew I was a struggling
artist and would create a space for me to sell my art as well. She was always concerned
with the greater good of regular people in our community and empowerment of the
individual so that you can be your best self. She knew the community lacked resources
and knowledge and she spent countless hours giving both out selflessly. She was
always very loving to a community that often times does not feel loved. She was also
able to articulate the pain of the community and educate on how to become more
involved in the betterment of Little Rock. She was very inclusive and embraced anyone
who was willing to work toward a vision of a better Little Rock. This was evident in the
fact that people from all walks of life were drawn into her and would assist with food
drives, workshops and educational series. Dawn did these things in the community
freely. There was no compensation.
In 2021 I decided to do a March for Black women and girls at the Bernice Gardens. The
March was a festival of a sort that celebrated women of color while also bringing
attention to the uprise of violence toward women and girls. It was a free event open to
all in the community but I knew that there were several expenses that I didn’t have a
budget for. Dawn raised funds to help support my mission without me even having to
ask. She is just like that. If you have a cause that represents positive change in Little
Rock, she is 100% behind you. Many people will stand behind a purpose when it’s
flourishing but Dawn is the type to help it materialize simply because it is a positive
mission that will make Arkansas better. The event turned out lovely.
I’ve watched her do vigils and balloon releases for female victims of homocide with only
a handful of people there to commemorate. I’ve watched her comfort victims families.
I’ve watched her teach.
Dawn has always represented love and community. I’ve never seen a person give so
much of herself. I felt compelled to write this letter and let you know the Dawn I know.
The Dawn that loves her community, works hard to better the community, and peacefully
demonstrates that by way of educating and providing resources.
She is a beautiful soul that is needed.
Sincerely,

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 20 of 77
Coffy Davis

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 21 of 77
Candace D. McKeever
June 30, 2021
RE: Character Reference for Brittany Dawn Jeffrey – Bond Revocation
Dear Judge Marshall,
I am writing on behalf of my niece, Brittany Jeffrey. I am her paternal aunt and have known her since
her birth.
I love Brittany dearly. She was a bright and intelligent child who has grown into an adult with strong
convictions. I admire her passion to work towards a world in which everyone is treated fairly and with
dignity and respect.
Having been diagnosed with PTSD, it is my understanding that Brittany began treatment sessions with a
therapist she could trust prior to her bond being revoked. This speaks not only to her understanding
that it’s important to seek help when recognizing there is an issue, but also to her maturity and
willingness to address the issue head on.
Additionally, Brittany is the mother of my ten-year-old great niece, . Because I serve as a court
appointed state advocate (CASA) for children in foster care, I know children can experience high levels of
stress when separated from their parents. Fortunately, is surrounded by many loving family
members while her mom is away, but no one can truly replace your mother.
Your Honor, it is my hope that you will take these things into consideration when reviewing Brittany’s
appeal. Thank you for taking the time to read my letter.
Sincerely,
Candace D. McKeever

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 22 of 77
Shayla Hooks-Woods
September 9, 2021
To whom it may concern:
I am writing this letter to show my support of Dawn Jeffrey. I met Dawn Jeffrey about 3
years ago. In that 3 years, I have seen nothing but great strides in her walk. She is a
young women of strength and power. Dawn has organized countless neighborhood
cleanups. She has helped bring awareness of how people can help people and bring
and bring about change. She leads by example. I have never been in her presence and
not experienced Dawn acting as a leader and pillar of the community of John Barrow.
These things Dawn are accused of are downright wrong. Dawn would never do anything
of such ignorance. This young lady is someone anyone can look up to and take
leadership from. I am often amazed by her great ability to speak up for what’s right and
fight for rights for our community. She is a brave heart, but she is definitely no criminal.
It’s a shame that in this society you cannot fight for what is right without a fight. I am
asking that you release Dawn and return her to her family, friends, and community. We
need her.
Sincerely,
Shayla Woods

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 23 of 77
Zachary Crow
Judge Price Marshall,
I have known Dawn Jeffrey as a compassionate and loyal friend for nearly five
years. During that time, I have had the opportunity to work with Dawn through
DecARcerate, an Arkansas based nonprofit working to affirm human dignity
by confronting unjust systems.
I know Dawn to be a tireless advocate for the betterment of her community.
She is truly one of the most selfless individuals I know. During the last several
years, I have watched Dawn organize community cleanups, promote civic
engagement, organize Know Your Rights trainings, and offer resources and
other forms of mutual aid to those most in need.
Dawn has proven to be incredibly resilient, having suffered and survived
countless forms trauma leading up to the incident at hand. Dawn is beloved
by a vast community of individuals who have pledged their support in
whatever ways she needs upon her release.
I hope that the court will take my letter into account and attach it to the case.
Please know that in spite of this offense, Dawn continues to be a personal hero
to myself and others and a valuable member of the local community.
Sincerely,
Zachary Crow

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 24 of 77
June 27, 2021
To the most Honorable Judge Marshall,
I, Lee A. Jeffrey, Sr. Brittany Dawn Jeffrey, Papa ,I am writing this letter
to let you know Dawn is a very good young lady, she just got caught up
in some of my traits, you see, in my young days, I was a Community
Activist, matter of fact I still am at 86 years old. I walked the streets in
nonviolence, peaceful, protests during the Martin Luther King era.
I saw from my back porch, Chicago West Side burn to the ground ,so
you see that why I say Dawn got some of my traits, but as I say she is a
Community Activist, nonviolence peaceful protester during the George
Floyd, BLM era. Dawn would never destroy or damage Government,
City, or State Property.
Your Honor my granddaughter is ill, she is suffering and is in
counseling trying get healed. She need your Help, Support please.
Again I say Dawn is a good young lady, a great mother to a beautiful
smart girl, so please have Mercy, show Compassion and send her
home so she can take care of my great grand daughter.
She has great family support, I, & her grandmother retired from the
Federal Government 40 years of service. Her father, & mother are
government employees, her Uncle is in State government. Her loving
sister Ashley is in the medical field helping to heal others while her
sister is suffering [RN]
2nd John 1:3 Grace, Mercy, & Peace shall be with you from God the
Father, and from Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the Father.
Lee A. Jeffrey, Sr. June 27,2021 6:46pm

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 25 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 26 of 77
July, 29, 2021
To whom it may concern,
I am writing as a character witness for Brittany Dawn Jeffrey who is being detained at your holding
facility. I wanted to first start by saying that for the past three or more years that I’ve known Dawn, she
has been the most caring, compassionate, and giving person that I’ve had the pleasure of meeting.
Dawn is always putting the needs of other people (in mostly under resourced communities) before her
own. I am a certified Mental Health First Aider and am reminded of a conversation Dawn and I had a
month ago about a local therapist who specializes in Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). Dawn asked
if I knew anyone and I provider her with resources. I only assist in facilitating a person if they are having
mental and emotional crisis. One thing we know about PTSD is that it progressively gets worse if
triggered by the trauma that caused it in the first place and if ignored by people who do not believe
marginalized folks when they express issues with trauma and PTSD.
I humbly ask that this court please take into consideration her mental and emotional well-being and that
she also has a daughter who deserves to have her mother healthy and whole. And, allowed to continue
her therapy sessions outside of your holding facility so that she can be with her daughter and family who
can provide the love and emotional support that she needs right now. Thank you for your time and
attention to this most important matter.
Respectfully,
/s/ Clarice Abdul-Bey
Certified Mental Health First Aider

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 27 of 77
Honorable Judge Marshall,
I have known Dawn for a couple of years now. I met her when I was first getting into the
local activism scene. I was working on a video for a Mother’s Day bailout she was part
of. That day, she helped to bail out over half a dozen mothers who had been stuck in jail
with no charges, waiting on bonds as low as a hundred or two hundred dollars. They
couldn’t afford their freedom, so Dawn was part of buying it for them.
Ever since that day, I knew Dawn was somebody who had an incredible sense of love
and respect for her community. She wants to help people get out of the terrible
situations they’ve been put in. Dawn is an incredible leader, speaker, and motivator. She
has been essential in building towards a better Little Rock, and a better Arkansas. And
she has gotten nothing but flack for trying. She’s received this flack in many forms, not
the least of which include being targeted, stalked, and harassed by the LRPD, after
calling them out for protecting officers that intentionally harm (and sometimes kill) black
and brown citizens.
At the time this letter was written, Dawn has been held in jail without bail or conviction
for over 70 days. Even with this, she has been organizing. She has talked to women in
the jail, and found people with low bonds that she could help free through the Little Rock
Freedom Fund. Even at her lowest, she finds ways to help others.
Daniel Nansel

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 28 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 29 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 30 of 77
LaKeisha Pickens
July 1, 2021
Honorable Judge Marshall:
The aim of this letter is to present the good character of Brittany D. Jeffrey.
I’ve know Brittany her entire life. I can confirm that she serves as a pivotal advocate to
her community. From hosting drives that provide supplies to children for back to school,
neighborhood clean ups and park restoration to name a few things on her resume.
She is well regarded among the community of Little Rock as a person of high integrity
and honesty. I have witnessed her compassion and ability to lead positive movements
for the betterment of her community.
I hope this letter will give you an idea of her good character.
Thank You for taking the time to read this letter.
Sincerely,
LaKeisha A. Pickens

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 31 of 77
Celebrating Trans Resilience
10420 Helm Dr., Mabelvale, Arkansas 72103 | (501) 400-8060
Intransitive
10420 Helm Dr,
Mabelvale, AR 72103
August 8, 2022
Re: Brittany Dawn Jeffrey
To: The Honorable Judge Marshall
Intransitive is a non-profit organization in Central Arkansas. We focus on providing advocacy,
education and financial support to people experiencing violence. We have had the pleasure of
doing community work with Brittany Dawn Jeffrey for over 2 years. It’s amazing to see Dawn
among the community she loves and serves and to see the profound impact she has on the
people of Central Arkansas. Dawn has done so much for Little Rock, from ensuring people are
fed to doing community clean ups and much more. Dawn continues to work with us even from
jail, which further proves just how much love and care she has for people in Arkansas.
Since the pandemic hit, several organizations closed their doors and/or left the state, which left
a lot of people in need with nowhere to turn for help. Very few community leaders stayed to
ensure people had their basic needs met, and at the forefront of those leaders was Dawn
Jeffrey. As an organization committed to ensuring our community can thrive, we are asking you
to please release Brittany Dawn Jeffrey.Our community needs her.
We appreciate your time and consideration.
Sincerely,
Rumba
Executive Director & Intransitive team

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 32 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 33 of 77
COURT REFERENCE LETTER
Jenea Jordan
Date: June 30 2021
To Whom This May Concern,
My name is Jenea Jordan and I am proud to attest on behalf of Brittany Dawn Jeffrey to whom I
have personally known for 15 years as my close family friend.
During my time knowing Brittany I have witnessed and experienced an individual who shows up
earlier than asked, works harder than most, and carries themselves in a polite, respectable manner.
Her heart for people far surpasses her inner circle as relentlessly fights for the disenfranchised in the
community. She is honest and fair and holds herself and peers to the same level of accountability
and transparency she asks from our justice system.
In addition, Brittany Dawn Jeffrey is a family-woman who has always presented themselves with
level headedness and grace. It's with great confidence that I recommend Brittany Dawn Jeffrey as
someone who, I truly believe, possesses the character and judgment for the betterment of our
community. She is far more than a community asset, she is a necessary beacon of hope, trusted
community leader, and her presence is sorely missed by the many lives she has touched and helped.
From writing letters and linking families to their incarcerated loved ones, protesting the unfair
treatment of our students in the school system, to facilitating Freedom projects to community
members who have paid their debts to society but lack the financial resources to exit the system.
She is undoubtedly a community champion and angel on earth. Please accept this letter on her
behalf.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you should require any further information.
Sincerely,
Signature___________________ Date: 6/30/2021______________
Page1

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 34 of 77
Jenea Jordan
Page2

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 35 of 77
Rumba Yambu
August 8, 2022
Re: Brittany Dawn Jeffrey
To: The Honorable Judge Marshall
I have known Dawn Jeffrey for over 2 years and have personally witnessed the tremendous
amount of love and care she has for the community in Little Rock. Not a day has gone by that
Dawn hasn’t helped someone, even from inside jail. She is always willing to help people without
asking for anything in return. Any amount of time Dawn is being kept in jail is harming our
community, because this is time she would be out providing education, ensuring people have
food and their basic needs met. She’s made Arkansas a better place for all of us and for the
next generation.
I am asking you today to please release Dawn Jeffrey’s bond.For the sake of her family
and for the entire Little Rock community we need Dawn to be released.
I appreciate your time and consideration.
Sincerely,
Rumba Yambu

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 36 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 37 of 77
Osyrus Bolly
8/7/2022
To the Honorable Judge Marshall
Hello my name is Osyrus Bolly and I'm writing to tell you about my friend Brittany Dawn
Jeffrey but I've always called her Dawn. I met Dawn about 5 years ago volunteering on
a community project, from there we formed a strong bond, friendship and working
relationship. Dawn has had an active hand in helping developing leaders in our
community by challenging them to be active citizens in our communities and to remain
civically engaged. Over the years we've worked together on numerous efforts to
encourage grassroots involvement from people throughout Arkansas and to advocate
for a collectivist model of leadership. Dawn believes that people can be strong leaders
with the proper knowledge, empathy and resources. Dawn has led voter registration
drives in 2018 and 2019 with a coalition of groups that include Citizens First Congress,
Vote Forward and Arkansas Poor People's Campaign. She believes in being an
active participant in the political process and being present on the local
government level attending city hall meetings and community forums while encouraging
others to do the same. In 2019 and 2020 Dawn organized Know Your Rights workshops
in Little Rock, North Little Rock and Monticello to help people have a healthy
understanding of their rights and freedom while collaborating with ACLU of Arkansas,
CFC, Seeds of Liberation and numerous lawyers/attorneys to offer free legal advice.
Every year I've witnessed Dawn as she has taken the initiative to do a weekend
community cleanup in her neighborhood, feed the less fortunate, organize or support a
back to school drive and encourage the youth to lead by example through her events.
Dawn is an asset to our city, state and country because she has the heart to help others
and strategize with people so that we all are more solution based thinkers. Dawn is also
a great mother and very family oriented, mothers are the glue that holds our families
together. I could talk for hours about how Dawn has been a blessing to so many, it's
immeasurable through words to know the amount of love she has shown our community
and that's why it's an honor to show a token of my gratitude by writing this letter for her.
Sincerely,
Osyrus Bolly

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 38 of 77
Tien Estell
8-5-2022
To the Honorable Judge Marshall,
My name is Tien Estell and I am writing to you on behalf of Brittany Dawn Jeffrey, who has been
detained for over a year awaiting sentencing. I’ve known Dawn for several years, during which I
have witnessed Dawn tirelessly empowering her community through neighborhood clean-ups,
voter registration, school supply drives, educational sessions, and so, so much more. Dawn
believes in the power of people to create and sustain change, and is a community leader who is
greatly appreciated and greatly missed by her family, friends, and community members.
Before her incarceration, Dawn helped with community gardening. One of my favorite days
spent with her was at the Woodruff Community Garden where we spent hours preparing the
land for planting. This is what Dawn does- this is who she is- a person who gives of herself in
the pursuit of betterment. Another favorite memory is spending the day with her at John Barrow
Day, where we registered people to vote and talked to folks about the importance of
representation and the electoral process. Dawn is an educator, an advocate, a proponent of
social justice and civil rights. I miss her every day, and am greatly looking forward to her
release.
I am asking you to please allow Dawn to return to her community where she is greatly missed
and needed. Please allow Dawn to return to her family- her daughter, her sister, her mother and
all of us who she has chosen to call family are greatly impacted by her detainment. Dawn is a
person who inspires love, embodies change, and encourages educational empowerment.
Thank you for your time and consideration,
Tien Estell

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 39 of 77
Ever Villalobos
08/05/2022
To the honorable Judge Marshall,
Please consider the release of Brittany Dawn Jeffrey. My name is Ever
Villalobos and I am a citizen of Arkansas who has felt a direct positive
impact from my interactions and relationship with Brittany Dawn Jeffrey.
I work for the City of Rogers as a Project Engineer, so I hope it goes
without saying that I greatly and deeply care for my community and my
fellow Arkansans. I know Brittany Dawn from collaborating and
participating in various social events aimed towards relieving the
burdens our communities face on a regular basis. From our first
interaction, I could instantly tell that Brittany Dawn has a deep love and
connection to the people they serve through their activism and their
contributions to their community. Brittany Dawn has always shown to be
a compassionate individual and a person who has so much to offer in
terms of their intelligence and social leadership. Their efforts and
intentions are always with the community they serve. I deeply hope that
Brittany Dawn Jeffrey’s release is considered for all the good that
they’ve done and the continuous efforts for public good that would result
from their freedom.
Thank you,
Ever Villalobos, EI

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 40 of 77
Georgetta Williams
August 8, 2022
To Honorable Judge Marshall
Hello I am sending this letter in concerning of my good friend Brittany Jeffrey. I have known
Ms. Jeffrey for almost 18 years now. We met back at Parkview Magnet High School, and she has
been a positive influence in my life ever since. Before I actually met her I would hear her speak
and carry a very positive energy amongst ALL students, and when I say ALL I mean students of
all nationalities. I can’t quite recall the day we actually met, but since that time I’ve always
considered her one of my sisters. Ms. Jeffrey has been a positive influence since before I met her,
and I am absolutely sure she will continue to be. For this reason, I believe she should be released
to the community. She is a strong pillar, who’s put in hard work and dedication to seek real
change in our communities. Her voice and leadership is needed to bring the people back together
for a greater cause that will bring peace and harmony. I also have faith that Ms. Jeffrey will be
the backbone of community organizations that will flourish throughout Little Rock, bringing our
people together once and for all. Please reconsider your decisions, and allow her time
incarcerated to be over.
Sincerely
Georgetta Williams

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 41 of 77
Aracely Mondragon
August 07, 2022
To the Honorable Judge Marshall,
I am writing in support of Brittany Dawn Jeffrey. I am a college counselor based in Northwest
Arkansas. I first met Dawn at a community organizing training over two years ago, after that I
saw her at a number of community events. Dawn is a community leader who is caring and
generous. Whenever I saw her at events, she was always making sure other people were taken
care of, from making sure they were fed to checking in on how people were feeling. I know that
Dawn helps with a number of community initiatives from education events, community cleanups,
to know your rights and advocacy work. She is someone who shows up for her community in
countless ways, and I strongly believe that where she belongs is with her community.
Dawn is an exceptional member of our Arkansas community who makes our community better
through her advocacy and leadership. I sincerely hope that Dawn will be released and reunited
with her loved ones.
Sincerely,
Aracely

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 42 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 43 of 77
Travis Short
8-4-2022
To the Honorable Judge Marshall
I am a friend of Dawn Jeffreys. I met her in Little Rock and she has been to my farm on
several occasions. I hope and pray that Dawn is released soon. She is a great asset to
her family, her community, her city, her state and her country. She works tirelessly to
make life better for people through all her community work. From cleaning up deserted
lots in her community to feeding and helping anyone in need she is an amazing, kind
individual. I have a guest house on my farm in western rural Perry. I would be honored
if Dawn stayed there as she transitions back into life outside of incarceration. She is a
welcome guest on my farm anytime she would to visit for as long as she would like to
stay.
Respectfully,
Travis Lee Short

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 44 of 77
Karen Bolden
August 7, 2022
RE: Character Reference for BriBany Dawn Jeffrey
To the Honorable Judge Marshall:
My name is Karen Bolden. I am a friend of the Jeffrey family and I have known BriBany Dawn
Jeffrey over 25 years. She is respecPul and supported in assisQng others.
I first noQced that BriBany had a desire to make different in the community of LiBle Rock when she
started the backpack drive when she just had graduated from High School and later the Freedom Fund.
BriBany exemplifies leadership skills where she leads with confidence, belief in the mission of
making a difference for community beBerment, strong, impacPul, and a visionary (progress
focused). She does not mind speaking up to support the community.
I, Karen Bolden, recommend BriBany Dawn to be release back to the community.
RespecPully,
Karen Bolden
Karen Bolden

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 45 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 46 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 47 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 48 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 49 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 50 of 77
Monica E. Freeman April 11, 2022
Hello Everyone,
My name is Monica E. Freeman.
I have
known Brittany Dawn Jeffrey for over 15 years. Brittany is a very kind and loving
person, who cares deeply for her family and her community.
Brittany is a mother, daughter, sister, aunt. She is a wonderful mother to her
daughter Brione whom she loves so very much. She has always made sure her
daughter has everything she needs. Brittany is an amazing daughter to Christine
Jeffrey; a wonderful big sister to her sister Ashley Jeffrey; a beautiful aunt to her
precious nephew and a friend to the homeless. Brittany loves her
community and has been a part of educational events, cleanups and backpack
drives, to name a few. Her life will be better served raising her daughter, helping
her family and helping her community.’
Jeremiah 29:11 says: “For I know the plans I have for you,” declares the
Lord, “plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a
future.” God has amazing plans in store for Brittany and a beautiful future. Let’s
give her the opportunity to experience this for herself.
Thank you for your time. God bless you.
Sincerely,
Monica E. Freeman

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 51 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 52 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 53 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 54 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 55 of 77
Dawn has always seemed to be serendipitously there for her community at their darkest moments.
One such moment was during Arkansas State Police’s violent arrest of on the night
of July 8th, 2020. At that time, Dawn was working as a frontline healthcare worker at St. Vincent’s.
She was raising her young daughter, usually working nights, and caring for her daughter during
the day. As she was exiting work that night, Dawn became aware of ASP’s stop of and
livestreamed the event. When I spoke with in the weeks after his arrest, he expressed
gratitude to Dawn for bearing witness that night.
After years of community service, Dawn emerged publicly as a leader through her work in the
campaign for justice for
the events that
followed, fanned the embers of Little Rock's modern movement. Over the next years, protestors
advocated in many forums for to be held accountable for his actions.
In May 2020, Little Rock residents filled the streets in response to the murder of George Floyd.
Dawn drew on her previous activism and training to organize and support the non-violent protest
movement that was developing. That summer, Dawn founded Little Rock Freedom Fund, which
works to support activists, organizers, and protesters. Dawn worked with me to create a pro bono
attorney network for LRFF. She raised funds for and provided labor to mutual aid efforts.
In Little Rock, the peaceful movement for Black lives has met violent opposition. Officials
responded to non-violent protests, rallies, and direct actions with tear gas, riot cops, snipers, and
violent arrests. On June 2, 2020, LRPD arrested dozens of protestors at a direction action led by
Dawn. Despite the pandemic, the protestors were held in county jail for hours. While they were
incarcerated, Gov. Hutchinson declared a state of emergency, martialing a broad range of law
enforcement resources to respond to a non-violent social change movement.
As the movement leader, Dawn was targeted by both militiamen and law enforcement. She has
been subject to violent arrests and extensive intimidation by law enforcement.1 She was also
targeted by an organized online white supremacist movement. Anytime Dawn would appear at a
public event, dozens of armed militiamen would appear to “support the police.”2
1
2 Again, just a few representative examples: On June 2, 2020, armed militiamen circled a direct action organized by
Dawn. On July 18, 2020, violent "Back the Blue" protesters attacked Dawn with a flagpole as she protested at the

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 56 of 77
As Dawn testified in 2021, she experienced extensive trauma because of this violence. The primary
and secondary trauma of the movement took an unmeasurable toll on Dawn. As a young, under
resourced, Black woman, Dawn lacked the privilege to distance herself the non-stop trauma. Over
the summer of 2020, I had several conversations with folks about the mental health toll the
movement was taking on us all in general, and Dawn in particular.
The traumatic events of over eighteen months continued the night of August 26, 2020. That night,
the Conway city board refused to allow police-reform related public comment. Community
activists took to the streets in peaceful protest. Again, armed militiamen came out in
counterprotest. After the activists left Conway, hours of protest occurred in Little Rock.
I also experience post-traumatic stress disorder (from related and unrelated events). One aspect
of my PTSD is flashbacks that cause me to dissociate in response to new traumatic events. I was
in a state of fight or flight for days after I spoke out against white supremacy to a crowd comprised
of both local community leaders and armed white supremacists. Even remembering and writing
about the events of the past years takes an indescribable toll on my nervous system. While I was
not with Dawn on the evening of August 26, 2020, several people who know Dawn and saw her that
night indicated she was not acting like herself and seemed severely traumatized.
I have read Dawn’s plea and have had general conversations with her about the events that
summer. As the Court discussed at her plea, defendants often take pleas for reasons other than
actual guilt. No human being is perfect, and no human nervous system is designed to withstand
the amount of trauma that Dawn has over experienced these past few years. Dawn’s experiences
and the trauma they inflicted upon are important parts of understanding her and her actions.
Regardless of their context, Dawn accepts full responsibility for her choices and actions that lead
to her arrest. For years, she has worked to heal the trauma inside herself, her community, and our
society. Throughout her incarceration, Dawn has worked to develop personally and spiritually
while continuing to serve her community.
For these reasons, I respectfully ask that the Court free Dawn as soon as the law allows. Her family
and community fully support her and her healing and will continue to do so upon her release.
Very Respectfully,
Amy Marie Pritchard
Attorney at Law
State Capitol. In April 2021, Dawn led a permitted rally at City Hall. Again, dozens of armed militiamen showed up to
counterprotest the “Rally to Stop Killing Black People.”

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 57 of 77
To the Honorable Judge Marshall,
Peace be unto you. My name is Crystal X, a fellow member of the community, member
of the Nation of Islam and friend. I am writing this letter on behalf of Dawn Jeffrey, whom
I met in 2017 at one of her community Backpack Drive Giveaways. She graciously gave
me the opportunity to share with the people something very near and dear to my heart-
my bartering organization. An organization that was set to help the people in the way
that Dawn wants to help the people- by helping to meet their needs. That’s what Dawn
does. Backpack Drives- alleviated stress and financial pressures from parents that just
didn’t have it. Non violent protest- for blatant injustices brought on people of color. Who
themselves had families, mouths to feed or people that depended on them. Just like she
does. Is it wrong to help a people whom you see yourself in? Is it wrong to care? To
have a heart full of love that one will put their name and life on the line for?
No one walks the line at 100% efficiency, but in the case of Dawn Jeffrey, the
community needs her because to us, her good out weighs whatever bad she has been
accused of. Not only in the site of the community but that’s what matters with God.
Dear, Honorable Judge, I’m not sure what your religious affiliations are but I do know
that to be a judge, there are some principals of freedom justice and equality that you
stand by and stand on when deciding the matters on each case. Especially one who is
held in great esteem.
Dawn has a daughter, family, friends and a community who loves and need her home. I
pray that justice is on her side.
Peace be unto you,
Crystal X
--
Blessings,
Crystal X

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 58 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 59 of 77
Raven Collins
June 27, 2021
RE: Character Reference for Brittany “Dawn” Jeffrey
Greetings to whom it may concern,
My name is Raven Collins and I have known Brittany for 6 years now. We met during a
very trying time in my life. I was working and going to school full time,
. We became close friends quickly as she saw that I needed
help and support in ways I was too prideful to admit.
She saw that, and offered guidance, support and opportunities
I never knew what organizing work for the community looked like until I met her. I grew
up in a single parent household with my younger brother. There was rarely a time where my
brother and I lived without other children in the house, as my mother would often times take in
children who’s parents were struggling to take care of on their own. At one time there were 7
kids to one bedroom, where we would sleep head to toe. We never had much but we always
had enough. Often times my mother would search for events held by churches and community
centers where they would have backpack drives and hand out school supplies. I remember
how important these events were to me. A young girl, who’s mom couldn’t afford everything on
the school supply list our teacher would hand out on the first day of school. I knew then that
when I grew up, I wanted to be the person that my younger me needed.
Brittany is that person. She taught me that I could be too. I watched her first hand
organize community clean ups, back pack drives, park clean ups, educational seminars, and
much more with no outside support, recognition, finances or praise. When she first started
doing these events, I had no idea how much energy, love, and satisfaction I would gain by
giving little boys and girls like me, a backpack full of supplies, feeding them their first meal of
the day, or giving them the chance to experience giving back to their own community. Brittany
is a teacher, as she taught me how to give from the kindness of your heart. She is one of the
most dedicated and genuine activists I know.
Being close to someone who gives their all to their community in the way that Brittany
does, has definitely exposed me to things that I wasn’t always aware of. I have always heard of
how there were people in this world and in this state, that had certain beliefs that they were
superior, and would harass you just for the color of your skin. However, I have never
experienced the threats, backlash, and constant harassment first hand. I have watched people
threaten her with violence in public spaces while she is with her family. I have witnessed hate
groups harass and threaten her, her family and friends on the internet, including posting their

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 60 of 77
addresses imposing constant fear and stress. Including government agencies that have, on
several occasions, wrongfully arrested her for crimes in which she was proven innocent.

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 61 of 77
COURT REFERENCE LETTER
ReAsia McKissick
ck, Arkansas, 72206
Date: August 3 2022
Dear Honorable Judge Marshall,
My name is ReAsia McKissick and proud to offer my recommendation of Dawn Jeffrey to be released
to the community. I have personally known Dawn for 3 years not only just as passionate organizer but
someone I can call a true friend.
During my friendship with Dawn Jeffrey, I have experienced an individual who shows up earlier than
asked, works hard, and carries themselves in a respectable manner. Someone who is always ready to
serve her community. In addition, Dawn Jeffrey is a family-person who has always presented
themselves with levelheadedness and grace.
It's with great confidence that I recommend Dawn Jeffrey as someone who, I truly believe, possesses
the character and judgment for the betterment of our community.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you should require any further information.
Page1

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 62 of 77
Sincerely,
Signature
By ReAsia McKissick Date: August 3 2022
Page2

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 63 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 64 of 77
Maya Ellington
August 8, 2022
To the Honorable Judge Marshall
Good evening, my name is Maya. I am a supporter and concerned peer of Brittany
Dawn Jeffrey, who I've known since the 9th grade- year 2004.
The city of Little Rock and central AR is made better with Dawn in the community. She
has spearheaded and created countless community outreach events that helps all races
who participate:
Community/Neighborhood Clean ups
Back to School Events
•Backpack/school supply drives
•Haircuts for young boys
Food Drives/Handouts for the Poor
Created a fund to help people out of jail, who couldn't afford bail payments
She has protested countless times for citizen equality
She's held a citywide tour educating people on how to correctly and safely deal with
encounters with police officers and Arkansas laws.
On a personal note, just like me, she loves her Class of 2008 Parkview Patriots. We are
a close- knit group of individuals; unfortunately, over the past 14 years, we've had
several classmates pass away. Classmates who've left behind spouses, parents, and
children. It was Dawn who would set up gofundme accounts for our fallen classmates to
give to their loved ones. Because of her initiative, thousands of dollars have been raised
in honor of our classmates. Out of her own pocket, she would purchase supplies for us
to meet at Parkview for a balloon release- giving us a chance to, one more time, hug
each other and say our "love yous".
Out of everything I've mentioned, these things come 2nd to her being a devoted mother
to her teenage girl.
This community loves Dawn but most importantly, we need her released back to our
community.

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 65 of 77
It is my prayer that you do the right thing and allow this citizen the continuation of
flourishing in society. Doing this would make our environment a better one- yes, even
for you.
God bless,
Maya

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 66 of 77
Obafemi Kinsiedilele,
August 8, 2022
I am Obafemi Kinsiedilele of Pine Bluff, Arkansas. I met Dawn at a Back To School
event where she was giving away uniform clothing for children. I’ve had a chance to talk
and work with her on several occasions in the community.
Dawn is a person who is passionate and committed to serving her community and
making a difference to improve the lives of those who are often marginalized in our
community. She has demonstrated leadership and tenacity in her efforts to support
grassroots efforts in minority issues most important to her and the community at large.
Her release should be immediate. She does not pose a threat to herself, family,
community or the state. Rather she is an asset to the community in which she serves
daily!
With high regard,
Obafemi Kinsiedilele

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 67 of 77
COURT REFERENCE LETTER
Blaire Scoggins
Date: August 3 2022
Dear Honorable Judge Marshall,
My name is Blaire Scoggins and proud to offer my recommendation of Dawn Jeffrey to whom I have
personally known for 3 years as my friend.
During my relationship with Dawn Jeffrey I have experienced an individual who shows up earlier than
asked, works hard, and carries themselves in a polite, respectable manner. In addition, Dawn Jeffrey is
a family-person who has always presented themselves with levelheadedness and grace.
It's with great confidence that I recommend Dawn Jeffrey as someone who, I truly believe, possesses
the character and judgment for the betterment of our community.
Please do not hesitate to contact me if you should require any further information.
Sincerely,
Page1

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 68 of 77
Signature
By Blaire Scoggins Date: August 3 2022
Page2

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 69 of 77

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 70 of 77
thereof in exacerbating the mental health issues that have already been documented in
relationship to the justice system.
Thank you for your time and consideration in this matter.
In the Spirit of Grace,
Carissa Rodgers

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 71 of 77
Subject: Statement
Date: April 4, 2022 at 8:24:12 PM CDT
4.4.22
To All Concerned:
I would respectfully like to speak to the character, person and depth on behalf of
Brittany Dawn Jeffrey. Brittany is my cousin, but more like a niece to me. I have
known Brittany all of her life. As a child Brittany was always respectful, smart,
energetic and funny! And most of all passionate. A complete joy to be with and
care for. I had the pleasure of being the fun cousin/auntie to Brittany and her
sister. However, they were the MOST fun for me. It was a win-win for us all!
As Brittany got older and matured, she became for my children, what I was for
her. The fun cousin! Brittany was always and continues to be so very passionate
about people. I first saw and recognized this while witnessing Brittany pour into
my children, love from her heart. Passion from her soul and knowledge that
empowered my children and still empowers them to this day. I think, that makes
Brittany a cultivator of people and esteem. I am grateful for the impact Brittany
has made and the knowledge imparted to my now, young adults.
My wish, my hope, my prayer is for Brittany to receive an opportunity to continue
to love, educate and empower.
Respectfully Submitted,
Angela R West
Sent from my iPhone

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 72 of 77
Subject: Character Letter
Date: April 1, 2022 at 4:17:32 PM CDT
Honorable Judge Marshall,
I’m writing this on behalf of Brittany Jeffery.
My name is Ozella Higgins. I have known Christian Jeffery and her two girls
Brittany and Ashley since they-were in elementary school. My daughter and
Brittany attended both elementary and middle school together. Although their
lives carried them in different directions, they still remained friends. Brittany has
always been a people person - even as a child she wanted the best for her
friends, and that love for others carried over into her path as becoming an adult.
Our journey through life carries us in many different directions; some good and
some not so good, but it’s how we embrace it and learn from our journey is what
really matters. Brittany has a good heart and loves her family, but her greatest
accomplishment is her daughter Brione. Being away from a child at such a young
age has caused unnecessary suffering for both, Brittany and Brione. Brittany has
always been there for her daughter regardless of the activities, from school
fundraisers to Brione’s swimming lessons. But due to the unfortunate situation,
she’s having to experience a very important part of her life without her mom. I
hope and pray that Brittany and her family will be celebrating her homecoming
soon.
Taking a quote from The Late Nelson Mandela “It Always Seems Impossible Until
It’s Done”.
Your time and consideration is greatly appreciated.
Ozella A. Higgins
Sent from my iPhone

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 73 of 77
LaTrisha Bass
1300 Childrens Way #303
Little Rock, AR 72202
August 8, 2022
To the Honorable Judge Marshall,
I am long time community organizer here in Little Rock as well as one of the
current directors at Lucie’s Place , which is a nonprofit organization where we provide
resources and assistance to unhoused LGBTQ individuals. I have been good friends
with Dawn and her partner Miranda for several years. We started out as social friends
but soon grew closer as a result of our passions to help our communities. I would
absolutely recommend that Dawn be released from prison as well as that all of her
charges be dropped.
Dawn is an integral part of our community because she inspires people to do
good. I’ve seen her inspire people to care, to educate themselves, and most importantly
grow. She relates to people, meets them where they are, and challenges them to be
more than what society has told them they can be. She also holds people accountable
for their behaviors or lack thereof. She challenges people to have integrity and follow up
their words with actions. It is my belief that upon release she would continue to build,
uplift, and pour into the community that she loves and values so dearly.
Thank you for reading.
L. Bass

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 74 of 77
Carol Pickens
Character Letter on behalf of Dawn Jeffrey
June 27, 2021
Honorable Judge Marshall,
Dawn Jeffrey is a person, a mother, sister, niece and aunt who is loved by all. I am her biological
aunt, who helped to raise her along with her mother.
She is a person that will give you the truth whether you want to hear it or not. Dawn will stand
for what's right. She is dependable and ready to do what she can to help. We can't do nothing but
love her for what she stands for. Dawn stands for making sure we all have a fair chance at being
human.
If you have any further questions on behalf of Dawn Jeffrey, please feel free to contact me.
Carol Pickens

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 75 of 77
Tanya James
Character Letter on behalf of Dawn Jeffrey
July 1, 2021
Honorable Judge Marshall,
This letter is in regards to Dawn Jeffrey and how I know her and the woman she is. I met Dawn
in May 2020 peacefully protesting in Little Rock, Arkansas. I stood with her and for her on at
least 100 occasions or more. She has always been about peace. I saw and know this. She even
had allies come to me and ask me to calm down more than once. I will testify to that and do have
witnesses. She is a huge asset to our community, but she is a Mother before anything. I ask that
you set her free because this is wrong. She has not been convicted of anything and deserves to be
free while she waits for her trial.
Tanya James

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 76 of 77
September 7, 2021
To Whom it May Concern,
My name is Camille Richoux. I am a doctoral student and public health professional residing in
Little Rock, AR. I am writing this letter on behalf of Dawn Jeffrey, a friend and colleague. I want
to offer my enthusiastic support of her character as an individual and member of our community.
I first met Ms. Jeffrey more than three years ago while volunteering at a Mother’s Day event
providing resources and support to mothers re-entering society after incarceration. I found her to
be a kind and selfless person, quick to help others in need. My initial opinion of her has
remained consistent since (and only strengthened). Ms. Jeffrey spends an enormous amount of
her time helping others with no expectations of compensation or return on her energy. She is an
advocate with an unparalleled belief in justice being “what love looks like in public” as defined by
Dr. Cornel West.
I have witnessed Ms. Jeffrey assist her community for years in myriad ways. She has organized
multiple clean-ups in Little Rock parks and streets, uniform drives for low-income students, and
block parties to increase neighborhood relationships and connect families to various resources.
There are plenty of good people who volunteer at events to help others in need. There are much
fewer people who consistently labor in often-thankless work for the long-term benefit of people
who may not ever know your name. Ms. Jeffrey is the latter.
Ms. Jeffrey is not only an advocacy colleague I encounter in our shared work. I’ve also grown to
know her over the past several years as a dear friend. We have spent time together socially.
She has had dinners in my home. She is a wonderful parent--a parent who is trying to build a
better and more just world for her child. Her drive has not been without cost to her well-being
and safety. She has been threatened with violence and harassed for her advocacy. And yet she
continues to toil in the service of others.
I hope this letter provides insight to the type of person Dawn Jeffrey is: a person who cares
deeply about others and an immense asset to her community. I am glad to call her a friend and
endorse her character without reservation. Thank you for your time.
Sincerely,
Camille M. Richoux, MPH

Case 4:20-cr-00288-DPM Document 264-1 Filed 11/14/22 Page 77 of 77
LaKeisha Pickens
July 1, 2021
Honorable Judge Marshall:
The aim of this letter is to present the good character of Brittany D. Jeffrey.
I’ve know Brittany her entire life. I can confirm that she serves as a pivotal advocate to
her community. From hosting drives that provide supplies to children for back to school,
neighborhood clean ups and park restoration to name a few things on her resume.
She is well regarded among the community of Little Rock as a person of high integrity
and honesty. I have witnessed her compassion and ability to lead positive movements
for the betterment of her community.
I hope this letter will give you an idea of her good character.
Thank You for taking the time to read this letter.
Sincerely,
LaKeisha A. Pickens