JUSTICE ACCUSED

ANTISLAVERY AND THE JUDICIAL PROCESS

Robert M. Cover

New Haven and London
Yale University Press


xi Acknowledgments

I have had the good fortune to work with a helpful and most per-
ceptive editor; my thanks also to Jane Isay of the Yale University
Press.

Works are but vanities without a life into which they fit. I owe
more than gratitude to Diane, and more recently to Avi, who share
and create that life with me.

All citation to legal materials except for books and treatises is in
accord with the forms suggested or required in the Harvard Law
Review et al., A Uniform System of Citation (11th ed., 1967, pub-
lished by the Harvard Law Review Association).

PRELUDE: Of Creon and Captain Vere

Antigone’s star has shown brightly through the millennia. The arche-
type for civil disobedience has claimed a constellation of first-magni-
tude emulators. The disobedient—whether Antigone, Luther,
Gandhi, King, or Bonhoeffer—exerts a powerful force upon us. The
singular act, the risk, the dramatic appeal to a juster justice, all con-
tribute to the high drama of the moment and the power of the actor’s
role. No wonder, then, that such men and women are celebrated in
literature and history. No wonder that a great psychiatrist like Erik-
son, upon embarking on a venture in history and biography, chose
Luther and Gandhi as his first subjects.!

Yet, in a curious way, to focus upon the disobedient and the pro-
cess of disobedience is to accept the perspective of the established
order. It is a concession that it is the man who appeals beyond law
that is in need of explanation. With the sole exception of Nazi atroci-
ties, the phenomenon of complicity in oppressive legal systems (op-
pressive from the actor’s own perspective) has seldom been studied.*
Thus, Creon is present only as a foil for Antigone, not himself the
object of the artist’s study of human character. In Antigone note the
curious one-dimensional character of the King. How he comes to

* Complicity with the Nazi regime has been the object of much study. But at least the trans-
atlantic emphasis has been an analysis of responsibility on the command and policy initiative
level in a genocidal situation. Some attempts have been made to associate legal positivism—
especially in its Kelsenian form—with the atrocities. H. L. A. Hart has vigorously and convinc-
ingly argued that positivism has no necessary relationship to such amoral and immoral judicial
conduct. Indeed, he has demonstrated how the English positivists, and most especially
Bentham, urged the analytical distinction between law as it is and law as it ought to be and
stressed the human origins of law in order to be able to effectively measure the law against an
external standard for reform purposes. (In Bentham’s case the external standard was, of course,
utility. But one need not accept the utilitarian basis of morality to accept the necessity of the an-
alytical distinction.) See, e.g., H. L. A. Hart, ‘‘Positivism and the Separation of Law and
Morals,”’ 71 Harvard Law Review 593 (1958). While I argue within that a thoroughgoing legal
positivism was one of the many factors that determined the complicity of the antislavery judge
in the system of law that he himself considered immoral, it is but one such factor. Moreover, I
shail also argue that the same jurisprudential perspective contributed to the most radical of the
opposition viewpoints with regard to slave law. See, Chapter 9, infra.

1


2 Prelude

make his law and at what cost in psychic terms is not treated at all.
Indeed, Creon’s first conflict is not between right and law, but be-
tween his son and his pride. And even in the midst of that conflict he
betrays his singular obtuseness to the complexity of the situation he
created by crying filial impiety and anarchy in one breath. He is as-
tounded by the possibility of Haemon’s sympathy to an affront to au-
thority. Much of the simplicity of Creon lies in the choice of a tyrant
as model for legal system. The making of law and its applications are
wholly confined to a single will unconstrained by any but the most
personal of considerations such as the feelings and actions of a son.

Melville’s Captain Vere in Billy Budd is one of the few examples
of an attempt to portray the conflict patterns of Creon or Creon’s
minions in a context more nearly resembling the choice situations of
judges in modern legal systems. Billy Budd, radical innocence per-
sonified, is overwhelmed by a charge of fomenting mutiny, falsely
levied against him by the first mate Claggart. Claggart seems to per-
sonify dark and evil forces. Struck dumb by the slanderous charges,
Billy strikes out and kills the mate with a single blow. Captain Vere
must instruct a drumhead court on the law of the Mutiny Act as it is
to be applied to Billy Budd—in some most fundamental sense ‘‘in-
nocent,’’ though perpetrator of the act of killing the first mate.? In
what must be, for the legal scholar, the high point of the novella,
Vere articulates the ‘‘scruples’’ of the three officers (and his own)
and rejects them.

How can we adjudge to summary and shameful death a fellow
creature innocent before God, and whom we feel to be
so?—Does that state it aright? You sign sad assent. Well, I too
feel that, the full force of that. It is Nature. But do these buttons
that we wear attest that our allegiance is to Nature? No, to the
King.

And, but a few paragraphs farther on, Vere asks the three whether
“occupying the position we do, private conscience should not yield
to that imperial one formulated in the code under which alone we of-
ficially proceed.’’ 3

In Vere’s words we have a positivist’s condensation of a legal sys-
tem’s formal character. Five aspects of that formalism may be dis-
cerned and specified: First, there is explicit recognition of the role

Of Creon and Captain Vere 3

character of the judges—a consciousness of the formal element. It is
a uniform, not nature, that defines obligation. Second, law is distin-
guished from both the transcendent and the personal sources of ob-
ligation. The law is neither nature nor conscience. Third, the law is
embodied in a readily identifiable source which governs transactions
and occurrences of the sort under consideration: here an imperial
code of which the Mutiny Act is a part. Fourth, the will behind the
law is vague, uncertain, but clearly not that of the judges. It is here
“imperial will’? which, in (either eighteenth- or) nineteenth-century
terms as applied to England, is not very easy to describe except
through a constitutional law treatise. But, in any event, it is not the
will of Vere and his three officers. Fifth, a corollary of the fourth
point, the judge is not responsible for the content of the law but for
its straightforward application.

For that law and the rigor of it, we are not responsible. Our
vowed responsibility is in this: That however pitilessly that law
may operate in any instances, we nevertheless adhere to it and
administer it.*

These five elements are part of Vere’s arguments. But Billy Budd
is a literary work and much that is most interesting about Vere is not
in what he says but in what he is, in overtones of character. For ex-
ample, we have intimations from the outset of a personality commit-
ted to fearful symmetries. His nickname, derived from Marvell’s
lines

Under the discipline severe
Of Fairfax and the starry Vere

suggests an impersonal and unrelaxed severity. And his intellectual
bent, too, reinforces this suggestion of rigidity. He eschewed innova-
tions ‘‘disinterestedly’’ and because they seemed ‘‘insusceptible of
embodiment in lasting institutions.’’ And he lacked ‘‘companionable
quality.’’ A man emerges who is disposed to approach life institu-
tionally, to avoid the personal realm even where it perhaps ought to
hold sway, to be inflexibly honest, righteous, and duty bound.®

It is this man who, seeing and appreciating Budd’s violent act,
exclaimed, ‘‘Struck dead by an angel of God! Yet the angel must
hang.”’ And, characteristically, it is Vere who assumes the responsi-


4 Prelude

bility of conveying the dread verdict to the accused. Melville’s specu-
lations on that ‘‘interview’’ are revealing. He stresses the likelihood
that Vere revealed his own full part in the ‘‘trial.”” He goes on to
speculate that Vere might well have assumed a paternal stance in the
manner of Abraham embracing Isaac ‘‘on the brink of resolutely of-
fering him up in obedience to the exacting behest.’’ ® Such a re-
ligious conviction of duty characterizes our man. Neither conven-
tional morality, pity, nor personal agony could bend him from a stern
duty. But in Vere’s case the master is not God but the King. And the
King is but a symbol for a social order.

Righteous men, indeed, suffer the agonies of their righteousness.
Captain Vere betrayed just such agony in leaving his meeting with
Billy Budd. But there is no indication that Vere suffered the agony of

doubt about his course. When Billy died uttering ‘‘God Bless Captain.

Vere,’’ there is no intimation that the Captain sensed any irony
(whether intended or not) in the parting benediction. If Captain Vere
is Abraham, he is the biblical version, not Kierkegaard’s shadow
poised achingly at the chasm.

Melville has been astonishingly successful in making his readers
ask dreadful questions of Vere and his behavior. What deep urge
leads a man to condemn unworldly beauty and innocence? To em-
brace, personally, the opportunity to do an impersonal, distasteful
task? How reconcile the flash of recognition of ‘‘the angel must die’
and the seizing of the opportunity to act Abraham, with declared pro-
testations, unquestionably sincere, that only plain and clear duty
overcomes his sense of the victim’s cosmic innocence? We have so
many doubts about a man who hears and obeys the voice of the Mas-
ter so quickly, and our doubts are compounded when it is a harsh
social system that becomes the Lord.

I venture to suggest that Melville had a model for Captain Vere
that may bring us very close to our main story. Melville’s father-in-
law was Chief Justice Lemuel Shaw of the Massachusetts Supreme
Judicial Court. A firm, unbending man of stern integrity, Shaw domi-
nated the Massachusetts judicial system very much as Captain Vere
ran his ship. The Chief Justice was a noted, strong opponent to slav-
ery and expressed his opposition privately, in print, and in appropri-
ate judicial opinions.” Yet, in the great causes célébres involving
fugitive slaves, Shaw came down hard for an unflinching application

Of Creon and Captain Vere 5

of the harsh and summary law. The effort cost Shaw untold personal
agony. He was villified by abolitionists. I cannot claim that Vere is
Lemuel Shaw (though he might be), for there is no direct evidence. I
can only say that it would be remarkable that in portraying a man
caught in the horrible conflict between duty and conscience, between
role and morality, between nature and positive law, Melville would
be untouched by the figure of his father-in-law in the Sims Case, the
Latimer affair, or the Burns controversy. We know Melville’s predi-
lection to the ship as microcosm for the social order. He used the
device quite plainly with respect to slavery in Benito Cereno. :
The fugitive slave was very Budd-like, though he was as black as

Billy was blonde. The Mutiny Act admitted of none of the usual |
defenses, extenuations, or mitigations. If the physical act was that of |
the defendant, he was guilty. The Fugitive Slave Act similarly ex-
cluded most customary sorts of defenses. The alleged fugitive could
not even plead that he was not legally a slave so long as he was the
person alleged to be a fugitive. The drumhead court was a special
and summary proceeding; so was the fugitive rendition process. In
both proceedings the fatal judgment was carried out immediately.
There was no appeal.® ~

More important, Billy’s fatal flaw was his innocent dumbness. He
struck because he could not speak. So, under the Fugitive Slave Acts,
the alleged fugitive had no right to speak. And, as a rule, slaves had
no capacity to testify against their masters or whites, generally. Billy
Budd partakes of the slave, generalized. He was seized, impressed,
from the ship Rights of Man and taken abroad the Bellipotent.'°
Aboard the Bellipotent the Mutiny Act and Captain Vere held sway.
The Mutiny Act was justified because of its necessity for the order
demanded on a ship in time of war. So the laws of slavery, often
equally harsh and unbending, were justified as necessary for the
social order in antebellum America. Moreover, the institution itself
was said to have its origin in war.

But most persuasive is Vere and his dilemma—the subject matter
of this book. For, if there was a single sort of case in which judges
during Meiville’s lifetime struggled with the moral-formal dilemma,
it was slave cases. In these cases, time and again, the judiciary
paraded its helplessness before the law; lamented harsh results; in-
timated that in a more perfect world, or at the end of days, a better


6 Prelude

law would emerge, but almost uniformly, marched to the music,
steeled themselves, and hung Billy Budd.

Of course, Billy Budd, like any great work of literature, exists on
many levels. I would not deny the theology in the work, nor the clash
of elemental good and elemental evil in Budd and Claggart. But the
novella is also about a judgment, within a social system, and about
the man who, dimly perceiving the great and abstract forces at work,
bears responsibility for that judgment. It is about starry-eyed Vere
and Lemuel Shaw.

2

The rest of this book is not about literature, but about Lemuel Shaw
“and many judges like him. It is the story of earnest, well-meaning
pillars of legal respectability and of their collaboration in a system of
oppression—Negro slavery. I have chosen to analyze at length only the
dilemma of the antislavery judge—the man who would, in some
sense, have agreed with my characterization of slavery as oppression.
It was he who confronted Vere’s dilemma, the choice between the
demands of role and the voice of conscience. And it was he who con-
tributed so much to the force of legitimacy that law may provide, for
he plainly acted out of impersonal duty.
~~ In a static and simplistic model of law, the judge caught between
law and morality has only four choices. He may apply the law against
his conscience. He may apply conscience and be faithless to the law.
He may resign. Or he may cheat: He may state that the law is not
what he believes it to be and, thus preserve an appearance (to others)
of conformity of law and morality. Once we assume a more realistic
model of law and of the judicial process, these four positions become
only poles setting limits to a complex field of action and motive. For
in a dynamic model, law is always becoming. And the judge has a le-
gitimate role in determining what it is that the law will become. The
flux in law means also that the law’s content is frequently unclear.
We must speak of direction and of weight as well as of position.
Moreover, this frequent lack of clarity makes possible ‘‘ameliorist’’
solutions: The judge may introduce his own sense of what ‘‘ought to
be’’ interstitially, where no ‘‘hard’’ law yet exists. And, he may do
so without committing the law to broad doctrinal advances (or re-
treats).

Of Creon and Captain Vere 7

In a given historical context the way in which judges are likely to
respond to the moral-formal dilemma is going to be determined by a
wide variety of intellectual and institutional variables. Judges, more
than most men, are conscious of the baggage of the past. Thus, the
traditions that they inherit will be important. For both slavery and the
judicial role in antebellum America the judge had a library of works
that influenced the idiom in which he thought. The nature of that in-
tellectual tradition is my first inquiry. I shall examine the natural law
tradition on slavery as it stood in the late eighteenth century. I shall
then explore the actual uses of principled preferences for liberty in
the first thirty or forty years of the nineteenth century. This explora-
tion will delineate the areas of accepted usage of preference for lib-
erty in judicial opinion and the areas where the judge could move the
law in the direction of freedom. I shall then explore the sorts of
demands that were made upon the judiciary to go beyond those ac-
cepted areas and the judicial refusal to do so. That refusal will be
traced on the cognitive level to carefully formulated ideas about the
judicial function that are themselves the products of a heritage of
conflict over the values that ought to govern judging. The dialectical
context for the judge’s response was not constant, and it is necessary
to examine responses to many demands varying, in part, with the
ideology of the lawyers and the movements they represented.

Finally, I shall confront directly the question of personality. With
Captain Vere we have the sense that it is not logic alone that leads
him to his response. So, with Lemuel Shaw, John McLean, Joseph
Story, and others, we must inquire into the internal forces that pro-
duced an almost uniform response of role fidelity. The theory of cog-
nitive dissonance provides a suggestive framework for integrating the
uniform response, the personalities of these men, and the professional
and intellectual milieu in which they worked.

Make no mistake. The judges we shall examine really squirmed;
were intensely uncomfortable in hanging Billy Budd. But they did the
job. Like Vere, they were Creon’s faithful minions. We must under-
stand them—as much as Antigone—if we are to understand the pro- .
cesses of injustice. ~
