JANUARY TERM, 1847. 57
The State v. Clarissa.
may possibly depend on the circumstance of his being a cred-
itor of the estate.
6. In relation to the small charge.for which a constable's
receipt was produced, it seems to fall within the category of
other clamis attempted to be established by evidence which
might be fabricated at pleasure. Doubtless the recovery by
any one of a sum of money against the estate by action,
would warrant the executor or administrator in paying it,
but on contestation of the fact of payment, that as well as
the existence of the debt shotild be proved by competent
testimony.
This consideration of the cause enables us to decide the
several questions presented. The several items of charge by
the administrator for moneys paid or debts contracted by
himself should have been sustained by evidence showing
'those debts were contracted for articles or services which
came to or were rendered for the benefit of the estate. - The
items on account of debts created by the executor, Savage,
could only be sustained by showing a state of facts which in
equity would subject the assets of the estate to the several
creditors; and the charge for the sum paid to the constable
should have been suppqrted by proof of the existence of a
judgment binding the estate as well as its payment. On all
these points the proof in the court below seems to be defec-
tive. Judgments reversed, and the causes remanded.
THE STATE v. CLARISSA, A SLAVE.
1. To constitute the crime of an " attempt to poison" a white person, by a
sfave, there must be an actual attempt to poison, by the administration of
some poisonous drug, or substance, calculated to destroy human life.
2. An indictment under this statute, must alledge, that the substance admin-
8

58 ALABAMA..
The State v. Clarissa.
istered was a deadly poison, or calculated to destrdy human life. An in-
dictment which alledges the administration of the seed of the Jamestown
weed, but does not contain an allegation that it is a poisonous substance,
calculated in its effects to destroy human life, is insufficient to sustain a
judgment.
3. .The grand jury cannot be called, and required to expurgate themselves of
any supposed interest, or bias, at the instance of one in jail, and expect-
ing an indictment to be preferred against him. Objections to the grand
jury must be taken by plea in abatement, at the term at which the indict-
ment is found.
4. Where a slave after a whipping had confessed her guilt, and subsequently
whenthe overseer inquired.why she had committed the act, confessed the
crime: held, that the answer to this question was not admissible evidence,
as the question assumed the fact of her guilt as previously admitted by
her. Quere-Would the subsequent confession of a slave, after a confes-
sion had been extorted, be evidence in any case ?
Errqr to the Circuit Court of Dallas.
THE prisoner was indicted for an attenipt to poison, by ar,
indictment as follows: The grand jurors for the State of
Alabama, empanneled, sworn and charged, &c., upon their
oaths -present, that Clarissa, the property of, &c., on, &c.,
feloniously and wilfully did administer to, and cause to be
administered to, and taken, by one Nelson Parsons, and one-
Hezekiah Bussey,'then and there, being free white persons,
a laig quantity of a 'certain noxious, and destructive thing,
called the deed of Jimson weed, or Jamestown weed, to wit,
two ounces thereof, with intent then and there, and thereby
feloniously, wilfully, and of her malice aforethought, the said
Nelson Parsons, and the said Hezekiah Bussey, to poison,
kill, and murder, against the peace and dignity of the State,
&c. &c.
Previous to the finding of the bill of indictment by the
grand jury, on the third day of the term, the defendant by
her counsel, stated that she was confined in the jail of Dallas-
county, charged with having attempted 'to poison certain
persons, and that her case would probably come before the
grand jury theri sitting, and moved the court for leave t6
have.the grand jury brought into court, and purged, in refer-
ence to defendant's -guilt ot innocence; and, that each of
them might be asked, if before they were summoned and or-

JANUARY TERM, 1847. 59
The State v. Clarissa.
ganized, and at the time, they had any fixed opinion, as to
the guilt or innocence of the accused, which would bias his
finding; which motion the court refused, and the defendant
excepted. I
A true bill being found, upon the trial of the prisoner, it
was proved that she was the cook of Parsons, who lived on
the plantation as her overseer, and that he and Bussey having
partaken of coffee at breakfast, prepared and administered by
the prisoner, were affected in the same manner as if they' had
taken narcotic poison. The State also offered'to prove,'that
for a succession of days previous, she had prepared and ad-
ministered coffee similarly charged with poison, and produ-
cing violent effects. The prisoner's counsel objected, unless
it was proved, the coffee was administered both to Bussey
and-Parsons, which objection was overruled.
The State introduced Chloe, the mother of the prisoner,
'who stated, that she cooked for the negroes on the planta-
tion,,and-was often in the kitchen, where the prisoner pre-
pared the overseer's meals. That on two occasions, she had
seen the prisoner put a small bag of the seed of Jamestown
weed, in the coffee-pot-that one of these occasions, was on
the morning when Bussey breakfasted with Parsons. -That
not wishing to see Bussey her master poisoned, during the
absence of the prisoner, and whilst the coffee was-boiling,
she took the bag of seed from the coffee-pot, and threvi it
away. 'The witness stated, that at first she had derfied all
knowledge of the poisoning, but on being whipped by'Bus-
sey, had disclosed the above facts, which she insisted were
true. That the prisoner was also whipped with great se-
verity, but 'refused to make any confession; but on being
informed by Bussey her master, that Chloe had confessed
'what she knew; made a confession, that she had 'prepared
and administeied the poison in the coffee. -
This.confession' was on motion of the prisoner, excluded.
It was -also'proved, .that after this confession, which was
o1 Thursday, the prisoner was removed from the house' to
the field, -and-on the next Saiurday was sent for by the over-
seer, to look up some of his clothes. 'The overseer asked
her 'which she liked the best, 'cooking; or working in 'the
field, and oniher answering that she preferred the former, he

60 ALABAMA,
The State v. Clarissa.
then asked him why she had continued to give him poison,
when she saw him so near dying from the effect of it. She
replied that she did not khow, unless it was the devil that put
it into her head. Parsons then told her, that her return to
the kitchen depended on her future good conduct, but was
uncertain whether this was told before or after this confps-
sion.
The prisoner's counsel moved toexclude this confession,
which the court refused to do, btut instructed the jury, that
it was .difficult in the case of a slave to apply the rules of law
in regard to confessions. That slaves might be considered
as in almost a state of -duress, and under all circumstances,
confessions made by them, ought to be received with a great
deal of caution. That the last confession could not be ex-
cluded from the jury, and yet upon that alone, it would be
unsafe to convict the prisoner. If, however, they were sat-
isfied beyond a reasonable doubt, that it was fully sustained
and corroborated, by other independent testimony, they could
not but find the prisoner guilty under the indictment.
The prisoner's counsel then moved the court to charge
the jury, that if they believed the said Bussey and Parsons
had been poisoned-by the prisoner, she could not be convic-
ted on the indictment of an attempt to poison them, which
charge the court refused.
. To all these matters the prisoner excepted,.and now as-
signs as. error, as also that the indictment is insufficient.
The prisoner was found guilty, and condemned to be hung.
PECK, for the plaintiff in error.
ATTORNEY GENERAL, for the State.
ORMOND, J.-The offence for which the prisoner was
indicted, is in the language of the- act, an "attempt to poi-
son" a white person, which in the case of a slave is a capital
offence. The offerfne consists in the attempt to do an act,
which if consummated, would have caused death, and cannot
be committed but by the actual attempt to administer a poi-
sonous drug, or substance, calculated to produce death. An
unexecuted determination to poison, though preparation was
made for-that purpose, or the actual administration of a sub-

JANUARY TERM, 1847. 61
The State v. Clarisa.
stance not poisonous, or calculated to-cause.death, though
believed to be so by the person administering it, will not be
an attempt to poison, within the rdeaning of the statute.
From this analysis of the statute, it follows, that the indict-
ment should alledge, that the substance administered was a
deadly poison, or calculated to destroy human life, as it is
iiecessary that every indictment should warrant the judgment
rendered ripon it. Yet every allegation in this indictment
may have-been proved, and tlie life of the, persons against
whom the supposed attempt to poison was made, never have
been in jeopardy; as it cannot be known as matter of law,
that the seed of the Jamestowh weed is a deadly poison.
The moral guilt,-it is true, is as great in the one case as in
the other; but that is not the offence which the law intend-
ed to punish; but the actual attempt to poison, by means
calculated to accomplish it.,
The attempt-to purge the grand jury, as it is cialled, wqs
wholly unauthorized. In the State v. Hughes, 1 Ala. 658,
it was held, that the grand jury could not be asked, before
they were tworn, whether they had not formed and express-
ed an opinion, as to the guilt or innocence of one whose case
they would probably have to pass upon. Such was also the
opinion of the court in Tucker's case, 8 Mass. 28,6. In
Hughes' case, supra, this court intimated, that challenges
for causes, not operating a universal disqualification, might
be made after the jury was elected and sworn. -It was not
intended by this suggestion,- that the grand jury should be
called at the pleasure of any one, expecting to have a charge.
preferred against him, and compelled to expurgate them-
selves of any supposed bias, but that after indictment found,
the objection might be made. This was afterwards provided
for, in the penal code, by restricting a plea in abatement to
the array of the grand jury, or to the disqualification of any
of its members, to the term at which the indictment is found.
[Clay's Dig. 458, ยง 51.] We are clear in the opinion,, that
no such right exists as that claimed in this case.
Although the confessions of slaves, freely and voluntarily
made, nninfluenced by threats or promises, must, as in the
case of white persons, be received in evidence, it mtust be
admitted, their condition in the scale' of society, throws a

6 ALABAMA.
The State v. Clarissa.
certain degree of discredit over any confession of guilt they
may make, and renders it unsafe if not improper, to act'upon
such evidence alone, Without other corroborating proof. But
when a confession has been extorted by threats or punish-
meni, or obtained by promises of favor, it would seem that
no subsequent confession of the same facts, ought in the case
of slaves, under any circumstances to be admitted, as even a
recantation of what-was once admitted, would be to expose
the accused again to punishment. We need not, however,
decide the general question, whether such subsequent inde-
pendent admissions of the same facts, could in any case be
competent, as it is clear those made in this case, should not
have been received.
The overseer, as it appears, some two or three days after
the confession of the prisoner, made after having received a
severe whipping, inquired of her why she continued to give
him poison, when she had seen him so near dying from the
effect of it. This.inquiry assumed the fact of her guilt, from
her previous confession, and did not even in form,' propose
the question of her guilt or innocence, but merely demanded
a reason for her conauct. To hold that the reply of a slave
to her overseer, under such circumstances, was testimony of
the fact, thus impliedly asserted, because it could not be de-
nied, vould be exceedingly improper. The humane policy
of our law, would exclude such evidence coming from a
white person, and the reason is much stronger for excluding
it in the' case of a slave.
The judgment of the court below must be reversed, but
the prisoner will remain in custody for another indictment,
or until discharged by due courie of law.