REPORTS
OF
CASES ARGUED AND DETERMINED
AT JUNE TERM, 1854.
WYATT, A SLAVE, vs. THE STATE.
*
1. A slave's confessions of guilt to his master, when elicited or influenced by
the fear of punishment or the hope of some benefit to be gained by making
them, is not admissible evidence against him; and his subsequent repetition
of them before the examining magistrate, if made in the presence of his
master. is equally inadmissible, unless it is clearly shown that he was
free from the least apprehension of punishment from his master as a con-
sequence of his recantation.
2. Therefore, in this case, the slave's confessions to his master were excluded,
because the latter had said to him, " Boy, these denials only make the matter
worse"; and the repetition of them before the examining magistrate, in
the presence of the master, was also ruled inadmissible, the justice having
failed to caution him as to their effect.
ERROR to the Circuit Court of Dallas.
Tried before the Hon. NAT. COOK.
THE plaintiff in error was indicted for burning'his'master's
gin-house, was convicted, and sentenced to death. His con-
fessions of guilt to his master,'and afterwards to the examining
magistrate, were admitted in evidence on the trial below,
against the prisoner's objections ; and he excepted to this
ruling of the court. Other errors were assigned and insisted
on in the argument; but it is deemed unnecessary to notice
them, as the judgment was reversed solely on account of the
2

10 ALABAMA.
Wyatt, a slave, v. The State.
error in receiving the prisoner's confessions in evidence against
him.
S. D. HAYs and WILLIAM M. MuRPHY, for plaintiff in error:
1. The court below erred, in admitting as evidence the
confessions of the prisoner, as testified to by the prosecutor,
his master, made while he was confined by his master. In
order to entitle a confession to any weight, or to render it
admissible in evidence, it must be shown to have been perfectly
free and voluntary, " without the hope of reward or fear of
punishment" ; any hope or fear, however trivial, is sufficient
to exclude them, for the law cannot determine the amount of
influence which they might have had on the prisoner's mind.-
1 Phil. Ev. 111, and notes 205, 212 ; 1 Green. Ev. §§ 214,
219; 2 Stark. Ev. 36 (48) ; Roscoe's Cr. Ev. 36, 37; Whar.
Am. Cr. Law, 252 (185); State v. Fields, Peck's (Tenn.) R.
140 ; 1 Wheeler's Criminal Cases, pp. 68, 69. These
authorities show, that this confession cannot be presumed to
have been voluntary, but was prompted by the fear of punish-
ment if he denied, and the hope of being released if he
confessed.
2. The court erred, also, in admitting in evidence the pris-
oner's confession to the justice, as detailed by his master ;
because, having once confessed, under the circumstances, to
his master, he is presumed to have been actuated by the same
motives, hopes, or fears, when subsequently confessing in the
presence of one (his master) whom he feared, and to whom he
had made the previous confessions : and this influence shall be
presumed to have continued until palpably done away with.-
Roscoe on Evidence, pp. 41, 42 1 Phil. Ev. 111 ; 2 ib. 207;
2 Stark. Ev. 36; 1 Green. Ev. §§ 225, 226; Serpentine v. The
State, 1 How. (Miss.) R. 256 State v. Clarissa, 11 Ala. 57;
Van Buren v. The State, 24 Miss. 516 ; Whar. Am. Cr. Law,
257 ; Peter v. The State, 4 Sin. & Marsh. 31.
3. The court erred, in admitting as evidence the slave's
confessions to his master : for a slave's confession to his
master, or to any one who has authority over him, cannot he
presumed to be of that free and voluntary character which
alone entitles it to be received :4 evidence. If the confessions
of a hireling to his master or employer, and the confessions

JUNE TERM, 1854. 11
Wyatt, a slave, v. The State.
of a wife to her husband, are inadmissible, upon the ground of
fear, or hope, or duress, certainly, for much stronger reasons,
should the slave's confesssions to his master be excluded.-
1 Green. Ev. § 222.
P. T. SAYRE, for the Attorney General, contra:
The expressions, " Well boy, you have done it," cannot be
connected with the confessions which were subsequently made
by the prisoner. No force was given to them, and no inference
was deduced from them, unfavorable to the prisoner. The
common inference of guilt from silence does not appear to
have been made. No punishment had been inflicted, nor was
threatened. Even, therefore, under the circumstances presented
in this bill of exceptions, if the question assumed the guilt of
the prisoner, his confessions in answer to it would have been
evidence.-Carroll v. The State, 23 Ala. 38.
The prisoner, after this, volunteered to confess, but his
owner absolutely declined to hear him. Says he, " Master, I
want to talk with you"; to which the reply was, " I don't
want to hear a word from you." This shows that no effort,
up to that time, had been made to extort any confession from
him. Up to this period, no promises, or threats, and nothing
approximating to either, had been used; this is clear from the
bill of exceptions. It purports to set out all the conversations
that had occurred between the master and the prisoner; and
we find nothing, in the slightest degree tending to show, that
an undue influence had been resorted to to get a confes-
sion.
The master, so far as the bill of exceptions shows, had not,
up to this time, said anything which could be tortured into
harshness; he had only used means proper for the safe-keeping
of the prisoner. At the third interview we find him using
the words, " these denials only make the matter worse." The
condition of the prisoner was changed; he had been using
violence on himself. We cannot tell in reference to what this
expression was used. The bill of exceptions purports to set
out all the testimony on this point, and it fails to show that
any denials had been made in reference to burning the gin-house.
The rule is, that a bill of exceptions must be construed most
strongly against the party excepting. We must, therefore,

12 ALABAMA.
Wyatt, a slave, v. The State.
conclude that it was as to something else that the denials
were made.-State v. Goodrich, 19 Ver. 121.
The tr ue rule is, to ascertain whether the confession was
made under circumstances calculated to render it untrue.-
Carroll v. The State, 23 Ala. 38; State v. Grant, 22 Maine
173 ; Peter v. The State, 4 S. & M. 37. The bill of excep-
tions, in this case, shows, that the prisoner manifested great
anxiety to say something about it when first arrested, and did
tell all about it the first time his master would permit him
to speak.-18 Conn. 180.
The confession made to the magistrate was admissible; it
was unlike the confessions in the case of Clarissa, 11 Ala.
60, and of Spence v. The State, 17 Ala. 197.
CHILTON, C. J.-In considering cases of the kind before
us, where the master or owner of the slave is introduced to
prove his confessions, we must bear in mind the relation
existing between them, of ownership and dominion on the
part of the master, and subjection and dependence on the
part of the slave. This relation, in many cases, may be
supposed to exert an influence over the mind of the slave,
with respect to such admissions, when considered in connec-
tion with declarations made by the master, which might not
attach to declarations made by strangers or persons having no
connection with the slave in any way.-1 Green. Ev. § 222.
The slave naturally looks to his master for protection: he is
accustomed to throw himself upon his leniency and mercy,
and, it may be, by honest confessions of his guilt, to mitigate
the chastisement which may await him as the punishment for
his misconduct.
Keeping in view this relation, it is proper that we should
examine with caution, whether the confessions of guilt made
by a slave in interviews had with his master, or one having
dominion over him, were not elicited or controlled by the
relation, and predicated upon the fear of punishment or
injury, or upon the hope of some benefit to be gained by
making them. Before confessions can be received in evi-
dence, it is necessary for the State to show that they were
voluntary. The course of practice, says Professor Greenleaf,
" is, to inquire of the witness, whether the prisoner had been

JUNE TERM, 1854. 13
Wyatt. a slave, v. The State.
told that it would be better for him to confess, or worse for
him if lie did not confess, or whetlr language to that effect had
been addressed to him."-1 Green. Ev. § 219.
The examples given in illustration of the rule, will serve to
show that the confessions in this case fall directly within the
principle of exclusion. Thus, where the prosecutor said to
the prisoner, "If you will tell me where my goods are, I will
be favorable to you" ; so, also, " It is no use for you to deny
it, for there are the man and boy who will swear they saw
you do it" ; again, the prosecutor said to the prisoner, " He
only wanted his money, and if the prisoner gave him that, he
might go to the devil if he pleased"; in another case, where
he said, he would be obliged to the prisoner if he would tell
all he knew about it, adding, "if you will not, of course we
can do nothing," meaning nothing for the prisoner; so, too,
where the officer of the police said to the prisoner, "Now be
cautious in the answers you give me to the questions I am
going to put to you about this watch": in all these cases the
confessions were excluded.-1 Green. Ev. § 220 and notes.
The defendat, in this case, must have known for what he
was arrested. His master's gin-house had been burned the
night of the day on which the prisoner had run away from
his master. Suspicion had settled down upon him as the
guilty agent, and the foreman, with other slaves, had been
directed to watch and capture and take him, dead or alive.
Shortly thereafter, viz., on the second or third night, the
prisoner was taken, and brought to his owner, who said,
"Well, boy, you have done it now" ; thus, evidently assuming
his guilt. Having confined the prisoner, the master went off;
but as lie was leaving, the prisoner said, " Master, I want to
talk with you;" the answer was, " I don't want to hear a word
from you." The naster, returning next morning to where he
had left the prisoner bound, found him tied as he had left
him, but discovered that he had cut his hands with a razor in
an attempt to sever the rope with which he was bound, and
was bleeding from the wound. The master then said to him,
" Boy, these denials only make the matter worse" ; to which
the prisoner replied, " Master, I have done wrong." The
witness then asked him, " What have you done"? to which
he answered, " I burnt your gin-house." On the same day,

14 ALABAMA.
Wyatt, a slave, v. The State.
the witness (the master) carried the slave before a justice of
the peace for examination and commitment. Upon inquiry
of the justice made of the master as to what the slave had
done, he replied, " He has burnt my gin-house; examine him
for yourself." The justice then examined the prisoner in the
presence of the master, and the same confessions were made
that had been made in the morning to the master.
It is said, in the affidavit made to support the substituted
bill of exceptions, that the master, after detailing the conver-
sation had with the slave, and his confessions, stated, that
when he said " these denials only make the matter worse," he
alluded to the fact, that the slave had previously denied
having a knife ; but it is not shown that he thus explained
it to the prisoner, who might fairly have construed the remark
as general, and have very naturally concluded that confes-
sions of his guilt would make the matter better. We do
not think the proof shows any intention on the part of the
master to extort from the prisoner confessions, or to entrap
him by assuming his guilt; on the contrary, his conduct
appears to have been dispassionate and ingenuous; but he was
doubtless unapprised of the caution and guards which the law
throws around persons thus situated, or he would have
advised the slave of the effect of his proposed confessions,
especially since what be said to him as to the effect of his
denials was calculated to excite in him the hope that a con-
fession would make the matter better.
The confessions to the master, we think, were clearly
improperly received; and under the rule as declared in
Clarissa v. The State, 11 Ala. 57, the same inducement to
confess continued, and must be regarded as vitiating those
made before the justice of the peace. In such case, before
the subsequent repetition of the confession before the justice
can be received, especially when made in the presence of the
master, the influence of the former inducement, aid all fear
of punishment from a recantation of his confessions, must be
" totally done away with." If it be competent, under such
circumstances, to render the repetition of the confessions
legitimate proof, the greatest precaution should be used, so as
to disabuse the mind of the prisoner, and he should be fully
charged as to the effect of such confessions. Ordinarily, we

JUNE TERM, 1854. 15
Dill v. The State.
would not exclude confessions which are clcarly shown to be
voluntarily made before a mag strate, for the sole reason that
the justice failed to caution the prisoner (20 Ala. 15) ; but
where confessions have once been made by a slave to his
master, under circumstances which will render them improler
as evidence, the utmost precaution should be taken to advise
him of their nature and effect, by the examining officer, and
it must be cleariy shown that he was free from the least
apprehension of punishment from his master as a consequence
of his recantation. Even then we should regard it unsafe to
convict the prisoner upon such subsequent confessions, if
wholly uucorroborated by other proof.-Clarissa v. The
It folows from what we have said, that the sentence of
conviction must be reversed, and the cause remanded, that the
prisoler may again be tried; and it is ordered that he be
retained in custody to await such further trial.
DILL vs THE STATE.
1. When there is the least conflict, in a material point, between the evidence
adduced by the State and that offered by the defendant, a charge, based upon
the State's evidence, and indicating that the jury may look to it alone in
passing on the guilt or innocence of the defeudant, is improper; but if
there is no conflict in the testimony, and the conclusion drawn by the court
is the only one warranted by the facts and the law arising upon them, such a
charge may be given.
2. If one see another about to perpetrate a felony, he may use such force to
prevent it as may be necessary; and if, while so engaged, he is intentionally
killed, it will be murder in the slayer.
3. As to reasonable apprehension of imminent danger to life or limb, when
relied on as a defence.
APPEAL from the Circuit Court of Walker.
Tried before the Hon. ALEX. B. CLITHERALL.
THE facts are set out at length in the opinion of the court.