(cid:43)(cid:40)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:50)(cid:49)(cid:47)(cid:44)(cid:49)(cid:40)
Citation: 109 Harv. L. Rev. 1995-1996
Content downloaded/printed from
HeinOnline (http://heinonline.org)
Sat Mar 28 13:48:19 2009
-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance
of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license
agreement available at http://heinonline.org/HOL/License
-- The search text of this PDF is generated from
uncorrected OCR text.
-- To obtain permission to use this article beyond the scope
of your HeinOnline license, please use:
https://www.copyright.com/ccc/basicSearch.do?
&operation=go&searchType=0
&lastSearch=simple&all=on&titleOrStdNo=0017-811X

VOLUME 109 DECEMBER 1995 NUMBER 2
HARVARD LAW REVIEW
ARTICLE
SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS: REFLECTIONS ON TWO
DECADES OF CONSTITUTIONAL REGULATION OF
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
Carol S. Steiker and Jordan M. Steiker
"Those whom we would banish from society or from the human com-
munity itself often speak in too faint a voice to be heard above society's
demand for punishment. It is the particular role of courts to hear these
voices, for the Constitution declares that the majoritarian chorus may not
alone dictate the conditions of social life. The Court thus fulfills, rather
than disrupts, the scheme of separation of powers by closely scrutinizing
the imposition of the death penalty, for no decision of a society is more
deserving of 'sober second thought."' McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279,
343 (x987) (Brennan, J., dissenting) (quoting Harlan F. Stone, The Com-
mon Law in the United States, 5o HARV. L. REv. 4, 25 (1936)).
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
I. INTRODUCTION ......................................................... 357
IlI. BEGINNING AT THE BEGINNING: THE CONCERNS OF FURMAN AND GREGG ... 361
A. D esert ............................................................. 364
B. Fairness. ........................................................... 366
C. Individualization .................................................... 369
D. Heightened ProceduralR eliability ..................................... 370
M. ENDING BACK AT THE BEGINNING: THE RETURN TO PRE-FURM'N CAPITAL
SENTENCING ........................................................... 371
A. Narrowing .......................................................... 372
I. Aggravating Circumstances ........................................ 373
2. Proportionality Review ............................................ 375
B. Channeling ......................................................... 378
C. M itigation .......................................................... 389
I. What Evidence Counts as Mitigating? .............................. 390
2. Channeling Consideration of Mitigating Evidence .................... 393
D. Death is Different ................................................... 397
IV. FATED FAILURE? ....................................................... 403
A. The Limits of the Court .............................................. 404
x. Furman as Brown ................................................ 404
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 355 1995-1996

5 HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
2. Furman as Roe .................................................. 408
B. The Limits of Legal Process: Death is Different (Reprise) ................ 412
V. ROADS NOT TAKEN ..................................................... 414
A. Regulation of Outcomes .............................................. 415
x. "Real" Narrowing by State Legislatures ............................. 415
2. "Real" Narrowing by the Court: Proportionality ..................... 417
3. Challenging Disparities ........................................... 4 8
B. "Super Due Process". ....... ........................................ 421
i. Representational Equality ......................................... 421
2. Expanding Postconviction Opportunities ............................ 423
VI. FINAL REFLECTIONS .................................................... 426
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 356 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS: REFLECTIONS ON TWO
DECADES OF CONSTITUTIONAL REGULATION OF
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
Carol S. Steiker* and Jordan M. Steiker**
I. INTRODUCTION
W
e stand poised between two important anniversaries. Slightly
more than twenty years ago, in 1972, the Supreme Court in
Furman v. Georgia' abolished the death penalty as it was then admin-
istered in the United States. Slightly less than twenty years ago, in
,976, the Court in Gregg v. Georgia2 and its quartet of accompanying
cases3 sustained some new death penalty statutes that appeared to ad-
dress many of the concerns voiced in Furman. In doing so, the Court
embarked on a course of continuing constitutional regulation of capital
punishment in America.
Virtually no one thinks that the constitutional regulation of capital
punishment has been a success.4 But oddly, and we think signifi-
cantly, critics of the Court's death penalty jurisprudence fall into two
* Assistant Professor, Harvard Law School. B.A. 1982, Harvard-Radcliffe Colleges; J.D.
x986, Harvard Law School.
** Professor of Law, University of Texas School of Law. B.A. 1984, Wesleyan University; J.D.
1988, Harvard Law School. We thank Scott Brewer, Scott Howe, Duncan Kennedy, Sandy Lev-
inson, and participants in faculty workshops at Boston University School of Law, Harvard Law
School, and the University of Texas School of Law for helpful comments, and Mae Quinn and
Richard Kilbride for research assistance.
1 408 U.S. 238 (1972).
2 428 U.S. 153 (1976).
3 See Roberts v. Louisiana, 428 U.S. 325 (1976); Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280
(976); Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S. 262 (1976); Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 242 (976).
4 See, e.g., SAMUEL R. GROSS & ROBERT MAURO, DEATH AND DISCRIMINATION: RACIAL
DISPARITIES IN CAPITAL SENTENCING 9-In (1989) (claiming that the federal courts are devoted to
a "fiction of their own invention" that procedural capital sentencing reforms have been effective);
Michael Millemann, Capital Post-Conviction Petitioners'R ight to Counsel: IntegratingA ccess to
Court Doctrine and Due Process Principles, 48 MD.L . REv. 455, 487 (1989) (contending that
capital punishment doctrine includes "some of the most complicated, dynamic, and at times incon-
sistent bodies of law that exist"); Shelley Clarke, Note, A Reasoned Moral Response: Rethinking
Texas' Capital Sentencing Statute After Penry v. Lynaugh, 69 TEX. L. REV. 407, 416-18 (i990)
(describing capital punishment doctrine as a "confusing array of ill-defined concepts, conflicting
pronouncements, ipse dixits and short-lived precedents" (footnotes omitted)). But see Louis D.
Bilionis, Legitimating Death, 91 MICH. L. Rv. x643, 1649 (993) (arguing, in opposition to the
above-described consensus, that "a meaningful Eighth Amendment death penalty jurisprudence
lives on, that it is a quite intelligible jurisprudence, and that it is driven by a coherent
methodology").
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 357 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW IVol. 109:355
diametrically opposed camps. On the one hand, some critics claim
that the Court's work has burdened the administration of capital pun-
ishment with an overly complex, absurdly arcane, and minutely de-
tailed body of constitutional law that, in the words of Learned Hand
in a slightly different context, "obstructs, delays, and defeats"S the ad-
ministration of capital punishment.6 This set of critics notes the sheer
volume of death penalty litigation, the labyrinthine nature of the doc-
trines that such litigation has spawned, the frequency with which fed-
eral courts overturn state-imposed death sentences, and the lengthy
delays that occur between the imposition of death sentences and their
execution.7 On the other hand, a different set of critics claims that the
Supreme Court has in fact turned its back on regulating the death
penalty and no longer even attempts to meet the concerns about the
arbitrary and discriminatory imposition of death that animated its
"constitutionalization" of capital punishment in Furman." These critics
note that the Court's intervention has done little or nothing to remedy
the vast overrepresentation on death row of the young, poor, and men-
tally retarded9 or the continuing influence of race on the capital sen-
5 United States v. Garsson, 291 F. 646, 649 (S.D.N.Y. 1923) (criticizing constitutional crimi-
nal procedure generally).
6 See, e.g., 141 CONG. REC. S459 3 (daily ed. Mar. 24, 1995) (statement of Sen. Specter) ("Fed-
eral habeas corpus is a complex and arcane subject. Its difficult and restrictive rules simply delay
imposition of the death penalty and render it useless as a deterrent."); Alex Kozinski & Sean
Gallagher, For an Honest Death Penalty, N.Y. TIMES, Mar. 8, 1995, at A21 ("[The jurisprudence
of death is so complex, so esoteric, so harrowing, this is the one area where there aren't nearly
enough lawyers willing and able to handle all the current cases.").
7 See, e.g., H.R. REP. No. 23, Io4th Cong., 1st Sess. io (i99S) ("The result of this system [of
federal review of capital punishment] has been the virtual nullification of state death penalty laws
through a nearly endless review process."); William F. Buckley, Jr., The War Against Capital Pun-
ishment, NAT'L REV., June 25, 199o, at 62, 62 (opining that America's enthusiasm for execution
"has generated the longest juridical foreplay in history").
8 See, e.g., DAVID C. BALDUS, GEORGE WOODWORTH & CHARLES A. PULASKI, JR., EQUAL
JUSTICE AND THE DEATH PENALTY: A LEGAL AND EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS 419 (iggo) (noting the
"Supreme Court's significant withdrawal from the field"); RAYMOND PATERNOSTER, CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT IN AMERICA at xv (ggx) C'[A] substantial number of death sentences continue to be
imposed in a fashion that can only be described as 'freakish.'"); WELSH S. WHITE, THE DEATH
PENALTY IN THE NINETIES: AN EXAMINATION OF THE MODERN SYSTEM OF CAPITAL PUNISH-
MENT 207 (iggi) (concluding that "the present Court holds that maintaining the smooth function-
ing of our system of capital punishment is a higher priority than protecting the rights of capital
defendants").
9 See, e.g., PATERNOSTER, supra note 8, at 95 (reporting that at the end of September, 1990,
32 of 2393 persons on death row were under the age of i8 at the time of their offenses); EMILY F.
REED, THE PENRY PENALTY: CAPITAL PUNISHMENT AND OFFENDERS WITH MENTAL RETARDA.
TION 39 (1993) (reporting that while persons with mental retardation make up roughly 2 to 3% of
the population and do not commit crimes or murders at higher rates than others, they constitute
an estimated 12 to 20% of those under death sentences); Stephen B. Bright, Counsel for the Poor:
The Death Sentence Not for the Worst Crime butf or the Worst Lawyer, 103 YALE L.J. 1835, 1840
(I994) ("[A] large part of the death row population is made up of people who are distinguished by
neither their records nor the circumstances of their crimes, but by their abject poverty, debilitat-
ing mental impairments, minimal intelligence, and the poor legal representation they received.").
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 358 1995-1996

1995] ' SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
tencing decision.10 Under this view, in the anguished words of Justice
Blackmun, who twenty years after his dissent in Furman radically
changed course and argued for the abolition of the death penalty alto-
gether under the Eighth Amendment, the Court has done no more
than "tinker with the machinery of death.""
The volume and, more significantly' the cacophony of the criti-
cisms directed at the Court's work has prompted us to take a sus-
tained and systematic look at the constitutional regulation of capital
punishment over the past two decades. Somewhat to our surprise, we
conclude that both sets of criticisms of the Court's work are substan-
tially correct: the death penalty is, perversely, both over- and under-
regulated. The body of doctrine produced by the Court is enormously
complex and its applicability to specific cases difficult to discern; yet,
it remains unresponsive to the central animating concerns that inspired
the Court to embark on its regulatory regime in the first place. In-
deed, most surprisingly, the overall effect of twenty-odd years of doc-
trinal head-banging has been to substantially reproduce the pre-
Furman world of capital sentencing.
How and why did the Court create a body of law at once so messy
and so meaningless? We attempt to answer the "how" question in Part
II by systematically canvassing the development of capital punishment
law over the past two decades in light of the concerns of Furman and
Gregg (which we develop in Part I). We demonstrate that almost all of
the complexity that the Court has injected into death penalty law con-
cerns relatively few aspects of state death penalty practices; important
aspects of those practices remain essentially unregulated. We address
the "why" question in Part I by exploring two plausible theories that
might account for the colossal failure of current death penalty law.
One account is the now-familiar story of the Court's institutional in-
competence, told more often in the contexts of Brown and Roe. The
other account focuses not on the limits of the Court, but on the special
nature of the capital sentencing decision as one that defies "doctrinal-
ization." We conclude that although both accounts have considerable
power, neither is ultimately fully convincing, in large part because
each account suggests that the Court's failure was in some important
sense predetermined.
We resist that conclusion in Part IV by suggesting avenues for con-
stitutional regulation of the death penalty left unexplored by the
10 See, e.g., H.R. REP. No. 458, Io3d Cong., 2d Sess. 3 ('994) ("There is compelling evidence
from certain jurisdictions that the race of the defendant may be a factor governing the imposition
of the death sentence."); BALDUS, WOODWORTH & PULASKI, supra note 8, at 40o-oi (noting the
persistence of race-of-victim discrimination in Georgia, even while race-of-defendant discrimina-
tion has been reduced); GROSS & MAURO, supra note 4, at 212 (concluding that "de facto racial
discrimination in capital sentencing is legal in the United States").
11 Callins v. Collins, 114 S. Ct. X127, 1130 (1994) (Blackmun, J., dissenting from denial of
certiorari).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 359 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
Court. We identify two general types of "roads not taken." First, de-
spite the concern voiced in Furman about the patterns of death pen-
alty imposition discernible at the time, the Court has always focused
on refining the legal process that leads to the sentencing decision and
has steadfastly resisted regulation that would look to actual outcomes
or patterns of outcomes. We explore the possible contours of such
"outcome-based" regulation. Second, despite its putative commitment
to special procedures that address the need for heightened reliability in
capital sentencing, the Court has never truly insisted on what Mar-
garet Radin has aptly termed "super due process for death."12 We ex-
plore what real "super due process" might look like.
We do not proffer these possibilities as fully realized proposals for
doctrinal change, not least because we remain profoundly agnostic
about the likelihood that these (or any other) strategies could rational-
ize to an acceptable degree the administration of capital punishment in
America. Rather, our purpose is to debunk systematically the notion
that the Supreme Court's chosen doctrinal path was in any strong
sense predetermined or that the Court's regulation of the death pen-
alty could not have been radically different.
By emphasizing the notion of choice and alternatives, we hope to
call attention to a substantial hidden cost of the Court's chosen path
of death penalty regulation, which creates an impression of enormous
regulatory effort but achieves negligible regulatory effects. Although
perhaps not intended by any member of the Court or by any advocate
before it, the Court's current approach to regulating the death penalty
has the effect of legitimating the use of capital punishment as a penal
sanction in the eyes of actors within the criminal justice system and
the public at large. The aura of science and shared responsibility cre-
ated by the- Court's doctrine comforts actors within the system who
have the discretion to bring capital charges, impose the death penalty,
or commute a capital sentence. The public at large likewise presumes
that the highly visible continuing involvement of the Supreme Court
in regulating capital punishment insures - perhaps over-insures -
against arbitrary or unjust executions. We conclude, with gloomy
irony, that the Supreme Court's Eighth Amendment jurisprudence,
originally promoted by self-consciously abolitionist litigators and ad-
vanced by reformist members of the Court, not only has failed to meet
its purported goal of rationalizing the imposition of the death penalty,
but also may have helped to stabilize and entrench the practice of cap-
ital punishment in the United States.
12 See Margaret J. Radin, Cruel Punishment and Respect for Persons: Super Due Process for
Death, 53 S. CAL. L. REv. 1143 (i98o).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 360 1995-1996

19951 SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
II. BEGINNING AT THE BEGINNING: THE CONCERNS OF FuRmAN
AND GREGG
Ascribing beginnings is always artificial, in the sense of requiring
human agency and artifice. Beginnings are never "out there" waiting
patiently to be discovered; they are always imposed upon the continu-
ous flow of time as a framing and ordering device. Thus, where to
begin a story is one of the most important narrative decisions to be
made.
In asking whether the Supreme Court has succeeded or failed on
its own terms in regulating capital punishment in America, it is only
fair to ask why the Court began its regulatory regime in the first
place. But when was "the first place"? One could argue that the first
truly important decisions regulating the administration of the death
penalty came in 1968 with United States v. Jackson13 and Wither-
spoon v. Illinois,14 both of which affected the conduct of capital trials
throughout the country.'5 Or one could start in I97I with McGautha
v. California,16 the Court's rejection - never to this day overruled -
of systematic challenges to capital punishment mounted under the Due
Process Clause; or in 1972 with Furman v. Georgia,17 when the Court
accepted systematic challenges to capital punishment framed in terms
of the Eighth Amendment; or in 1976 with Gregg v. Georgiai and its
quartet of accompanying cases,19 when the Court upheld three and
struck down two state statutory schemes passed in response to
Furman; or in 1978 with Lockett v. Ohio,20 when the Court strongly
sounded the theme of individualized sentencing as opposed to, and in
some significant tension with, its Furman theme of limiting sentencer
discretion; or as late as 1983 when the Court revisited the three state
13 390 U.S. 570, 572 (1968) (striking down the capital punishment provisions of the Federal
Kidnaping Act on the ground that they burdened the right to trial by making the death penalty
available only after a trial by jury). Later cases limited the scope of Jackson. See Parker v.
North Carolina, 397 U.S. 790, 794-95 (1970); Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742, 746-47 (1970).
14 391 U.S. 510, 522 (1968) (reversing a death sentence when the state was permitted to strike
for cause all jurors having conscientious scruples against the infliction of the death penalty). The
Court later limited the scope of Witherspoon in Wainwright v. Witt, 469 U.S. 412, 424 (1985).
15 See ICHAEL MELTSNER, CRUEL AND UNUSUAL: THE SUPREME COURT AND CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT II-25 (1973) (describing Jackson and Witherspoon); id. at 124 (documenting the
fact that "[a]lmost everyone questioned [about Witherspoon] believed the decision meant the end
of capital punishment in the United States").
16 402 U.S. 183 (197i).
17 408 U.S. 238 (1972).
18 428 U.S. 153 (1976).
19 See Roberts v. Louisiana, 428 U.S. 325, 336 (1976) (striking down a statute that provided
for a mandatory death penalty in certain circumstances); Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S.
280, 305 (1976) (same); Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S. 262, 276-77 (1976) (upholding a statute that
guided sentencer discretion through the use of "special issues"); Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 242,
259-6o (1976) (upholding a statute that guided sentencer discretion through the use of aggravating
and mitigating factors).
20 438 U.S. 586 (1978).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 361 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
statutes which it had upheld in i976 and again validated them,21 re-
casting its aspirations in the process.
Our decision to begin with Furman is fairly conventional. Furman
dominates the legal landscape in both its unexpectedness (it was de-
cided only one year after McGautha) and its scope: Furman had the
effect of invalidating capital statutes passed by thirty-nine states, the
District of Columbia, and the federal government.22 Whatever crude
gauge one employs - be it the size and placement of the headlines in
the New York Times23 or the number of citations by other courts and
commentators24 - Furman easily wins as the landmark Supreme
Court decision regarding capital punishment. But identifying the "con-
cerns" of Furman is a daunting task. The longest decision ever to ap-
pear in the U.S. Reports, the majority "opinion" in the case is a one-
paragraph per curiam invalidating under the Eighth Amendment the
death sentences imposed on the three petitioners in the case. Each of
the five Justices in the majority then appended his own opinion, none
of which was joined by any other Justice. Each of the four dissenters
wrote his own opinion as well, although some of them joined in each
other's dissents. The opinions presented a staggering array of argu-
ments for and against the constitutionality of the death penalty and
offered little means, aside from shrewd political prediction, of deter-
mining which arguments would dominate in the decision of any future
cases.
Indeed, the main question left in the wake of Furman was whether
there would be any future cases. Only Justices Brennan and Marshall
argued in Furman that the death penalty was per se cruel and unusual
punishment;25 Justices Douglas, Stewart, and White expressly left open
the question whether a more structured capital sentencing regime
might someday pass constitutional muster.26 Some participants in the
21 See Barclay v. Florida, 463 U.S. 939, 956-58 (1983) (revisiting Florida's post-Furman stat-
ute and upholding a death sentence even though the trial judge considered an aggravating factor
not authorized by state law in overriding a jury recommendation for life imprisonment); Barefoot
v. Estelle, 463 U.S. 88o, 889, 9o6 (1983) (revisiting Texas's post-Furman statute and upholding the
use of summary procedures for appellate review of denials of federal habeas corpus relief); Zant v,
Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 890-91 (1983) (revisiting Georgia's post-Furman statute and upholding a
death sentence even though one of the aggravating circumstances found by the sentencing jury
was invalid).
22 See Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 411 (1972) (Blackmun, J.,d issenting). Only Rhode
Island's capital punishment law was left untouched by Furman in 1972, because it was wholly
nondiscretionary and thus not invalidated until the Court later rejected mandatory sentencing in
1976.
23 See Fred P. Graham, Supreme Court, 5-4, Bars Death Penalty as It Is Imposed Under
Present Statutes, N.Y. TIMES, June 3o, 1972, at Ax (two-line banner headline).
24 There are approximately 25oo citations to Furman in Shepard's (through June x995).
25 See Furman, 408 U.S. at 305 (Brennan, J., concurring); id. at 358-59 (Marshall, J.,
concurring).
26 See id. at 257 (Douglas, J., concurring); id. at 306 (Stewart, J., concurring); id. at 31o-Il
(White, J., concurring).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 362 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
debate, both on and off the Court, no doubt believed that Furman was
the end, not the beginning, of the Supreme Court's involvement in the
issue of capital punishment. For example, Justice White noted that the
infrequent imposition of the death penalty by capital juries in the pe-
riod leading up to Furman indicated that "capital punishment... has
for all practical purposes run its course."z7 And Michael Meltsner, one
of the Legal Defense Fund (LDF)28 lawyers involved in the Furman
litigation, introduced his 1973 book chronicling the Furman case -
either naively or strategically - as a celebration of the Fund lawyers
who led the Court to "abolish" the death penalty and thus "right a
deeply felt, historic wrong."29 Yet, in the weeks and months immedi-
ately following the Furman decision, state and federal lawmakers
across the country geared up to revamp and revitalize the death
30
penalty.
It is important to add Gregg v. Georgia and its accompanying cases
to the picture in order to gain some perspective on the "concerns" of
Furman. The extent to which Furman was a beginning and not an
end to constitutional regulation of the death penalty became clear only
in 1976, when the Gregg Court considered five new state statutory
schemes in light of its decision in Furman. Gregg and its accompany-
ing quartet clarified that the death penalty was not per se invalid
under the Eighth Amendment and that the Court would now be in-
volved in the ongoing business of determining which state schemes
could pass constitutional muster. Indeed, the very nature of its 1976
opinions made clear that the Court was assuming a stance of continu-
ing supervision. The Gregg, Proffitt, and Jurek opinions did not at-
tempt to list in any definitive fashion the prerequisites for a valid
capital punishment regime; rather, they simply upheld each particular
scheme presented on the basis of its own peculiar mix of procedural
protections.3' Hence, the 1976 opinions established the essentially
"provisional"32 nature of the Supreme Court's capital punishment ju-
risprudence and thus marked the clear commencement of the Court's
ongoing regulatory role. The 1976 opinions also help us "read"
Furman by speaking in a more coherent and consistent voice about
27 Id. at 313 (White, J., concurring).
28 The full name of the Legal Defense Fund is the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational
Fund, Inc.
29 MELTSNER, supra note i5, at xi.
30 See id. at 306-09.
31 See, e.g., Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 195 (1976) (opinion of Stewart, Powell & Stevens,
JJ.) ("We do not intend to suggest that only the above-described procedures would be permissible
under Furman or that any sentencing system constructed along these general lines would inevita-
bly satisfy the concerns of Furman, for each distinct system must be examined on an individual
basis." (footnote omitted)).
32 See Jordan Steiker, The Long Road Up from Barbarism:T hurgood Marshall and the Death
Penalty, 71 TEX. L. REv. 1131, 1145 (1993).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 363 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
Furman's objectives than the badly splintered Furman Court was it-
self able to do. The five 1976 opinions from Gregg to Roberts were all
dominated by the same three-Justice plurality, which selected certain
themes of the vast Furman morass to represent the Court's central
concerns.
We thus have chosen to read Furman and Gregg et al. together as
a way of identifying the Supreme Court's concerns and goals regard-
ing its constitutional regulation of capital punishment. We stop with
Gregg and its companion cases, however, because the seeds of all of
the rest of the Court's capital jurisprudence can be traced to the
themes that it sounded in 1972 and 1976. Since 1976, the Supreme
Court's pronouncements on capital punishment have been essentially
backward-looking; majority and dissenting Justices alike have cast
their positions in terms of what Furman and Gregg command and per-
mit.33 This is not to deny that the morass of Furman and the tenta-
tive, provisional tone of the 1976 decisions left future Justices a wide
margin of deniability; nonetheless, it seems likely that the Court itself
would think it fair to measure the success of its capital punishment
jurisprudence against the concerns articulated in Furman and Gregg et
al. Given that our critique of the Court is an internal one, identifying
these concerns becomes a crucial part of our project. We think that
these concerns can fairly be grouped around four ideas: desert (the
problem of overinclusion), fairness (the problem of underinclusion), in-
dividualization, and heightened procedural reliability.
A. Desert
At the time of the Court's decision in Furman, virtually every
death penalty jurisdiction in the United States afforded sentencers ab-
solute discretion to impose either death or life imprisonment (or some-
times merely a term of years) for certain crimes. For instance, the
Georgia statute reviewed in Furman afforded the jury full discretion to
sentence a defendant convicted of forcible rape to death, life imprison-
ment, or "imprisonment and labor in the penitentiary for not less than
one year nor more than 20 years."34 Similarly, the Texas rape law,
33 For example, Justice Scalia's concurrence and Justice Stevens's dissent in Walton v. Ari-
zona, 497 U.S. 639 (iggo), each argue directly about the meaning of Furman and Gregg. Compare
id. at 656 (Scalia, J., concurring) (arguing that the Furman requirement that sentencer discretion
be constrained is inconsistent with doctrine forbidding constraint of sentencer discretion not to
impose the death penalty) with id. at 708 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (arguing that under Furman, the
sentencer may be given unlimited discretion once the size of the death-eligible class has been
sufficiently narrowed). Even more striking is the way in which the majority and dissenting opin-
ions in McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279 (1987), frame themselves around the "[t]wo principal
decisions" of Furman and Gregg. Id. at 3o.
34 Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 308 n.8 (,972) (Stewart, J., concurring) (quoting GA.
CODE ANN. ยง 26-1302 (Supp. 197i) (effective prior to July i, x969)) (internal quotation marks
omitted).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 364 1995-1996

I9951 SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
also reviewed in Furman, allowed the jury to impose punishment "by
death or by confinement in the penitentiary for life, or for any term of
years not less than five."35 The language of a 1962 Florida decision
holding that the decision to impose death or a lesser punishment for
murder was to be "determined purely by the dictates of the con-
sciences of the individual jurors"36 exemplifies the kind of discretion
given to pre-Furman juries.
One problem with such broad discretionary schemes identified by
the Furman and Gregg Courts was that the state and federal legisla-
tures that drafted such statutes were never required to articulate a the-
ory about the most death-worthy crimes or defendants. The Justices
in Furman repeatedly noted that the number of those actually sen-
tenced to death represented only a tiny fraction of those eligible to be
executed by the broad net cast by the state statutes at issue in the
case.37 Such sentencing systems provide no guarantee that each impo-
sition of the death penalty reflected the larger community's considered
judgment - as articulated through its elected representatives - about
who deserved to die. This failure can be thought of as a problem of
"overinclusion": without narrower statutory mandates, individual
sentencers might return sentences of death in otherwise "ordinary"
cases and thus perhaps run afoul of the larger community's moral
standards. This fear was clearly a subtext in Furman itself: of the
three petitioners, two had been sentenced to death for rape, which
raised the possibility that the penalty was being applied when a com-
munity consensus was lacking.38 Indeed, four years later in Gregg, one
reason given by all of the Justices in the majority for upholding the
revised Georgia statute was the fact that the Georgia Supreme Court
had used its new power of broad appellate review to strike down the
imposition of the death penalty for armed robbery as "disproportion-
ate" to the crime.39 Hence, the brief flirtation by the three crucial con-
curring Justices in Furman (Douglas, Stewart, and White, who joined
abolitionists Brennan and Marshall to make up the Furman majority)
with mandatory sentencing schemes:40 if state or federal legislatures
35 Id. (quoting TEX. PENAL CODE art. ix89 (i96I)).
36 Baugus v. State, 141 So. 2d 264, 266 (Fla.), cert. denied, 371 U.S. 879 (1962).
37 See, e.g., Furman, 408 U.S. at 291 (Brennan, J., concurring) ("The outstanding characteris-
tic of our present practice of punishing criminals by death is the infrequency with which we
resort to it."); id. at 309 (Stewart, J., concurring); id. at 311 (White, J., concurring).
38 See Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584, 592-97 (1977) (plurality opinion) (emphasizing the
widespread consensus that the death penalty is excessive for rape in support of a holding that the
death sentence is unconstitutional in such cases).
39 See Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. I53, 205-06 (1976) (opinion of Stewart, Powell & Stevens,
JJ.); id. at 224 (White, J., joined by Burger, CJ., and Rehnquist, J., concurring in the judgment).
40 See Furman, 408 U.S. at 257 (Douglas, J., concurring) (leaving open the possible constitu-
tionality of a mandatory death penalty); id. at 308 (Stewart, J., concurring) ("[Tihe Georgia and
Texas Legislatures have not provided that the death penalty shall be imposed upon all those who
are found guilty of forcible rape."); id. at 311 (White, J., concurring) ("The narrower question to
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 365 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW IVol. 109:355
could agree on circumstances that would require, not merely permit,
the imposition of the death penalty in certain cases, such schemes
would manifest the crucial missing ingredient of "legislative will"41
and, by implication, community approval.
B. Fairness
Related to, but conceptually distinct from, the concern about desert
in capital sentencing is the concern about fairness. Even if every de-
fendant sentenced to death under a capital sentencing scheme "de-
served" to die according to the larger community's considered
judgment, the scheme could still be subject to challenge on the basis
that it treated others, just as "deserving" as the condemned defendant,
more leniently for no reason, or for invidious reasons. Thus, a sen-
tencing scheme could avoid the problem of "overinclusion" (the failure
to distinguish the deserving from the undeserving), but still present the
problem of "underinclusion" (the failure to treat equally deserving
cases alike).
The problems of overinclusion and underinclusion are related at a
general conceptual level in that both are concerned with treating like
cases alike. Overinclusion (the execution of a defendant in the absence
of expressed legislative will) treats the defendant more harshly than he
deserves, whereas underinclusion (the failure to execute some other de-
fendants in the presence of expressed legislative will) treats other de-
fendants more leniently than they deserve. The problems are related
at a practical level as well: both overinclusion and underinclusion are
necessarily aggravated by the kind of wholly discretionary, completely
standardless decisionmaking that prevailed in the capital sentencing
context prior to Furman. Moreover, the most obvious remedies for
overinclusion will also help ameliorate the problem of underinclusion
(and vice
versa).42
Despite these connections, desert and fairness concerns remain con-
ceptually and practically distinct, as the Furman and Gregg Courts
recognized. The problem of ascribing desert, and thus avoiding over-
which I address myself concerns the constitutionality of capital punishment statutes under which
...the legislature does not itself mandate the penalty in any particular class or kind of case.").
41 Id. at 311 (White, J., concurring) (noting that under discretionary capital punishment
schemes, "legislative will is not frustrated if the penalty is never imposed"). But see Roberts v.
Louisiana, 428 U.S. 325, 336 (1976) (striking down mandatory capital sentencing schemes under
the Eighth Amendment as violative of an overwhelming national consensus in favor of individual-
ized capital sentencing); Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280, 301 (1976) (same).
42 For example, when legislatures set careful standards for determining who "deserves" to die,
they obviously reduce overinclusion by establishing a theory of who the worst murderers are, but
they also reduce underinclusion by inhibiting opportunities for arbitrary or invidious action by the
sentencers who must implement those standards. Similarly, if states carefully circumscribe sen-
tencer discretion in order to ameliorate the problem of arbitrary or discriminatory underinclusion,
the ways in which they curb that discretion must necessarily reflect some theory of who deserves
to die and thus tend to reduce overinclusion as well.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 366 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
inclusion, is largely the realm of the legislature, which speaks as the
voice of the larger community. The Furman Court fueled its concerns
about desert by observing the sheer infrequency with which sentencers
imposed the death penalty: such rarity of imposition, the Court ob-
served, suggested that the death penalty was not serving any useful
function in society and that it no longer reflected any considered com-
munity judgment or "legislative will."43 But even if death penalty stat-
utes on the books could be said to reflect community judgment and
legislative will, the problem of translating that will into practice would
still remain. In this process of translation arises the inevitable possibil-
ity of arbitrary or even discriminatory enforcement of community
norms by the sentencer (usually a jury), in whom resides the ultimate
power to pronounce life or death. Unlike its concerns about desert,
the Furman Court's concerns about fairness were fueled not by the
sheer infrequency of the imposition of the death penalty, but rather by
the patterns of its imposition.
Justice Douglas's concurring opinion in Furman presents the clear-
est expression of the fairness concern - what he himself called the
"equal protection" theme "implicit" in the Eighth Amendment pro-
scription of cruel and unusual punishments.44 In sounding this theme,
Douglas used anecdotal and statistical evidence45 to demonstrate that
the death penalty in the United States was visited disproportionately
upon the "poor, young, and ignorant"46 and upon "the Negro, and the
members of unpopular groups."47 He noted explicitly what was
largely a subtext for the other concurring Justices - in each of the
three cases before the Court in Furman the defendant was black, and
in the two rape cases the victims were,white.48 Douglas decried what
he evocatively termed the "caste" aspect49 of the imposition of the
death penalty and argued that the discretionary capital sentencing
schemes at issue were "pregnant with discrimination."S At no point
did Douglas attempt to argue that the defendants before the Court (or
the largely poor, young, ignorant, black, or unpopular defendants who
had previously been executed) did not "deserve" the death penalty, by
43 Furman, 408 U.S. at 311 (White, J., concurring).
44 Id. at 249 (Douglas, J., concurring).
45 See id. at 249-53.
46 Id. at 250 (quoting Rupert C. Koeninger, Capital Punishment in Texas, z924-1968, 15
CRIME & DELINQ. 132, I4 (1969)).
47 Id. (quoting THE PRESIDENT'S COMM'N ON LAW ENFORCEMENT AND ADMIN. OF JUSTICE,
THE CHALLENGE OF CRIME IN A FREE SOCIETY 143 (1967)).
48 See id. at 252-53. The race of Furman's murder victim is not apparent from the published
opinions in the case.
49 See id. at 255 (quoting Guy B. Johnson, The Negro and Crime, 217 ANNALS AM. AcAD.
POL. & SOC. SCI. 93 passim (1941)).
S0 Id. at 257. Justices Marshall and Stewart also sounded the "equal protection" theme, see
id. at 320 (Stewart, J., concurring); id. at 366 & n.I55 (Marshall, J., concurring), but Justice Doug-
las is the only Justice to have built his entire opinion around this idea.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 367 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
reference either to internal community norms or to some external,
Court-imposed notion of proportionality. Rather, Douglas's concern
was quite clearly with those who got away: "A law that stated that
anyone making more than $50,000 would be exempt from the death
penalty would plainly fall .. . . A law which in the overall view
reaches that result in practice has no more sanctity than a law which
in terms provides the same."5'
This focus on fairness, as distinct from desert, was apparent again
four years later in Gregg: the plurality upheld Georgia's new capital
sentencing scheme partly on the basis that the new statute provided
"clear and objective standards" that would "control[ ]" sentencer discre-
tion "so as to produce non-discriminatory application."52 The Gregg
plurality went on to praise the "important additional safeguard against
arbitrariness and caprice"53 afforded by Georgia's automatic appellate
review and comparative proportionality determination, which required
the Georgia Supreme Court to compare each sentence of death with
sentences imposed in "similar" cases and permitted it to reference those
cases in which the death penalty had not been imposed.54 Indeed, the
new Georgia statute most explicitly addressed the Furman Court's
concerns about discrimination by calling upon the state's highest court
to determine in each capital case "[w]hether the sentence of death was
imposed under the influence of passion, prejudice, or any other arbi-
trary factor," based partly on a questionnaire filled out by the trial
judge that disclosed whether race played a role in the case.5
Although the Furman and Gregg Courts did distinguish "equal pro-
tection" (underinclusion) problems from "legislative will" (overinclu-
sion) problems in assessing the shortcomings of the pre-Furman capital
sentencing regime, the Supreme Court failed to recognize one crucial
point. Although many types of sentencing reforms would ameliorate
both shortcomings at once,56 some reforms would ameliorate one type
of problem only at the expense of exacerbating the other. For in-
stance, we have argued elsewhere that providing for discretionary
grants of mercy based on individualized consideration of defendants
ameliorates overinclusion while exacerbating underinclusion.57 The
Supreme Court appeared to reject this argument in 1976,58 but that
S1 Id. at 256 (Douglas, J.,c oncurring) (footnote omitted).
52 Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, I98 (1976) (plurality opinion) (quoting Coley v. State, 204
S.E.2d 612, 615 (Ga. 1974)).
53 Id.
54 See id. at 204-05 & n.56.
55 Id. at 211-12 (White, J., concurring) (quoting GA. CODE ANN. ยง 27-2537(a) (Supp. 1975)).
56 See supra note 42 and accompanying text.
57 See Carol S.S teiker & Jordan M. Steiker, Let God Sort Them Out?: Refining the Individu-
alization Requirement in Capital Sentencing, 102 YALE L.J. 835, 862-66 (1992) (reviewing BEV.
ERLY LOWRY, CROSSED OVER: A MURDER, A MEMOIR (1992)).
58 See Gregg, 428 U.S. at x99 (plurality opinion).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 368 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
rejection came long before the Court had fully fleshed out its theory of
individualized sentencing, to which we now turn.
C. Individualization
Ironically, the Furman and Gregg Courts' commitment to individu-
alized sentencing began not in contrast to, but rather as an outgrowth
of, their concerns about desert and fairness. Each of the three con-
cerns or commitments (desert, fairness, and individualization) reflects
different facets of the basic norm of equal treatment, the idea that like
cases should be treated alike. As the pluralities explained in Woodson
v. North Carolina59 and Roberts v. Louisiana,60 the third and fourth
companion cases to Gregg, mandatory (that is, non-individualized)
death penalty statutes run afoul of the basic norm of equal treatment
because they erroneously rely on the flawed belief that "every offense
in a like legal category calls for an identical punishment without re-
gard to the past life and habits of a particular offender."61 In other
words, in order to treat like cases alike, sentencers must have access to
information about relevant likenesses and differences.
Obscured by the prominence of the argument about equal treat-
ment is another important idea - that the Constitution defines what
is "relevant" to the imposition of a sentence of death, and that this
definition includes more than merely the nature of the underlying of-
fense. This second idea obviously cannot be derived from the norm of
equal treatment; the idea of equality does not contain within it a
method for determining which cases are "like" enough such that they
must be treated "equally." Thus, the Woodson and Roberts pluralities
located the source of the constitutional standard for relevant capital
sentencing information in the "evolving standards of decency that
mark the progress of a maturing society."62 In applying such "evolving
standards of decency" to the context of capital punishment, the Jus-
tices explained both that they detected an overwhelming societal con-
sensus against the imposition of mandatory death sentences63 and that
the "fundamental respect for humanity underlying the Eighth Amend-
ment" required consideration of "the character and record of the indi-
vidual offender and the circumstances of the particular offense as a
constitutionally indispensable part of the process of inflicting the pen-
alty of
death."64
59 428 U.S. 280 (1976) (plurality opinion).
60 428 U.S. 325 (1976) (plurality opinion).
61 Id. at 333 (quoting Williams v. New York, 337 U.S. 241, 247 (i949)) (internal quotation
marks omitted).
62 Trop v. Dulles, 356 U.S. 86, ioi (i958) (plurality opinion).
63 See Woodson, 428 U.S. at 289-3oi (plurality opinion).
64 Id. at 304.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 369 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
This latter "respect for humanity" argument built on Justice Bren-
nan's opinion in Furman, in which he tried to construct an argument
against the death penalty based on the idea that "[t]he State, even as it
punishes, must treat its members with respect for their intrinsic worth
as human beings."65 Ultimately, Justice Brennan failed to convince his
brethren that respect for humanity required the abolition of capital
punishment altogether. However, his lengthy Furman concurrence did
begin to develop a notion of human dignity that formed the basis of
the Court's requirement of individualized sentencing - a requirement
that later became a pillar of Eighth Amendment law separate and dis-
tinct from, and in some tension with, the Furman Court's predomi-
nant concerns about desert and fairness.
D. Heightened Procedural Reliability
Like its commitment to individualized capital sentencing, the
Court's concern for heightened procedural reliability in capital cases
built on Justice Brennan's solo concurrence in Furman. Just as Justice
Brennan elaborated the notion of "human dignity" implicit in the
Court's "evolving standards of decency" formulation of the Eighth
Amendment, he also singlehandedly constructed the now-familiar
"death is different" argument. Arguing that death as a punishment
differs in kind, and not merely degree, from all other punishments,
Justice Brennan attempted to demonstrate that its "uniqueness" as a
punishment, both in severity and finality, rendered it cruel and unu-
sual in all circumstances.66 No other Justices in Furman joined in that
conclusion (although, arguably, Justice Marshall agreed with
it67).
Four years later, however, a plurality of the Court echoed Bren-
nan's Furman concurrence in Woodson when it noted, in language
that would be repeated many times in future cases:
Death, in its finality, differs more from life imprisonment than a ioo-year
prison term differs from one of only a year or two. Because of that qual-
itative difference, there is a corresponding difference in the need for relia-
bility in the determination that death is the appropriate punishment in a
specific
case.68
The Court thus concluded that although the practice of individualized
sentencing "generally reflects simply enlightened policy rather than a
constitutional imperative,"69 the Eighth Amendment requires individu-
alized sentencing in capital cases.
65 Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 270 (1972) (Brennan, J., concurring).
66 See id. at 286-91.
67 See id. at 345-46, 369 (Marshall, J., concurring) (arguing that if members of the public
were fully informed, the death penalty would be shocking to their consciences, and that it is
therefore unconstitutional in all circumstances).
68 Woodson, 428 U.S. at 305 (plurality opinion).
69 Id. at 304.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 370 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
The Woodson plurality's willingness to require a special decision-
making process in capital cases that is clearly not necessary in non-
capital proceedings70 was generated by its concern about the "reliabil-
ity" of death verdicts. What did the Woodson plurality mean by "reli-
ability"? Accuracy, perhaps? But what does accuracy mean in the
context of capital sentencing? By referencing "the fundamental respect
for humanity underlying the Eighth Amendment,"7' the Woodson plu-
rality seemed to suggest that reliability in capital sentencing has some-
thing to do with respecting and confronting the humanity of the
individual defendant. And by speaking of the "appropriate[ness]" of
death as punishment, the plurality implied that reliability is tied to
strong notions of desert and fairness among defendants. Hence, one
can view the Court's commitment to heightened procedural reliability
as its manner of making good on its three substantive commitments -
to desert, fairness, and individualization in capital sentencing.
III. ENDING BACK AT THE BEGINNING: THE RETURN TO
PRE-FIURMAN CAPITAL SENTENCING
We now turn to the current regulatory approach that has emerged
from Furman and the 1976 decisions. It is undeniably true, as many
critics have claimed, that the Court's death penalty doctrine is com-
plex, arcane, and minutely detailed. But this complexity does not
translate, as the critics seem to assume, into significant impediments to
states' efforts to impose the death penalty. Instead, much of the recent
capital litigation in the federal courts concerns statutory provisions
that state legislatures could readily remedy or that in fact have already
been repealed. Indeed, if a state sought to design a capital statute
from scratch today, it could easily avoid federal constitutional difficul-
ties and, perhaps more tellingly, could do so without departing signifi-
cantly from the statutory schemes struck down in Furman.
To illustrate the complexity of current doctrine as well as its rela-
tively minimal demands on states seeking to administer the death pen-
alty, we organize the Court's jurisprudence around four doctrinal
areas that correspond to the concerns of Furman and the 1976 cases
that we described above. The Court's efforts to ensure that the death
penalty is reserved for the most deserving defendants - its concerns
about "desert" from a retributive perspective - are reflected in its
proportionality decisions as well as in the requirement that states nar-
row death-eligibility through the use of "aggravating" circumstances or
their functional equivalent. The equality and fairness concerns of
Furman are addressed by doctrines focusing on the related effort to
70 The mandatory Federal Sentencing Guidelines (and other state mandatory sentencing
schemes) abundantly demonstrate this point.
71 Woodson, 428 U.S. at 304 (plurality opinion).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 371 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
channel sentencer discretion at all stages of the decisionmaking pro-
cess. The Court's insistence on "individualized" sentencing is matched
by a series of doctrines concerning a defendant's right to present and
have considered mitigating evidence that may call for a sentence less
than death. The remainder of the Court's death penalty decisions col-
lectively define the requirement of "heightened reliability" in capital
proceedings (including, among other things, the selection of the capital
jury, the cognizability of "innocence" claims, and the permissibility of
certain kinds of prosecutorial argument).
This organization enables us to perform three important tasks.
First, it allows us to rise above the morass of extraordinarily compli-
cated doctrine and get a "bird's-eye view" of the entire landscape of
constitutional death penalty regulation. Only by doing so can we see
clearly the entirety of what states must do to impose the death penalty
within the bounds of current constitutional constraints. Second, exam-
ining doctrine within our framework helps explain why so much capi-
tal litigation persists despite the limited nature of the Court's actual
demands. Within each of our categories, we trace the distinctive mis-
understandings and evasions that account for ongoing, yet avoidable
constitutional litigation. Third, and finally, by examining the Court's
present doctrines in light of the concerns reflected in the early death
penalty decisions, we are able to perform an internal critique of the
Court's capital jurisprudence - to evaluate its success in light of its
own purported goals.
A. Narrowing
One body of doctrine is designed to ensure that only those who are
most deserving of the death penalty are eligible to receive it. Given
the observed rarity of death sentences in relation to serious violent
crimes, including murder, this doctrine - which we call "narrowing"
- seeks to force communities, speaking through state legislatures, to
designate in advance those offenders most deserving of death. By
forcing states to articulate their theories of the "worst" offenders, the
narrowing doctrine purportedly guards against "overinclusion" - that
is, the application of the death penalty in circumstances in which,
notwithstanding the sentencer's decision, the sentence is not deserved
according to wider community standards.
As the Court has elaborated this idea, state legislatures can narrow
the class of the death-eligible in one of two ways. First, statutes can
fulfill this narrowing requirement at the penalty phase of a capital
trial by requiring the prosecution to prove the existence of some "ag-
gravating factor" beyond what is required for conviction of capital
murder. Second, statutes can narrow at the guilt phase of the capital
trial by confining their definitions of capital murder to a certain subset
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 372 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
of offenses more serious than the class of all murders.72 Finally, as an
additional fail-safe beyond these forms of legislative narrowing, courts
can further narrow the class of the death-eligible through some sort of
post-sentencing proportionality review.73 Courts can either perform
this review "wholesale" by excluding entire groups of offenders or of-
fenses from the ambit of the death penalty based on insufficient culpa-
bility or harm74 or they can undertake case-by-case examinations of
facts to ensure that each sentence imposed is actually deserved in light
of a particular jurisdiction's general sentencing practices.75
Despite the promise that the narrowing doctrine would signifi-
cantly reduce the problem of overinclusion, the doctrine as elaborated
by the Court has done no such thing. As the following section will
illustrate, death-eligibility remains remarkably broad - indeed, nearly
as broad as under the expansive statutes characteristic of the pre-
Furman era.
i. Aggravating Circumstances. - In evaluating the states' ap-
proaches, the Court has insisted that a state scheme "must 'genuinely
narrow the class of persons eligible for the death penalty and must
reasonably justify the imposition of a more severe sentence on the de-
fendant compared to others found guilty of murder.' 76 This language,
however, has been more bark than bite. First, the Court has approved
aggravating circumstances that arguably encompass every murder,
such as Arizona's circumstance that asks whether the defendant com-
mitted the offense in an "especially heinous, cruel or depraved man-
ner" 77 and Idaho's circumstance that asks whether "[b]y the murder,
or circumstances surrounding its commission, the defendant exhibited
utter disregard for human life."78 In approving both of these circum-
stances, the Court relied on the state courts' adoption of limiting con-
structions that purportedly offered further, more definitive content
than the concededly broad language of the statutes.79 The states' lim-
iting constructions, however, appear no less encompassing than the
facially vague statutory circumstances. Arizona's supreme court, for
72 See Lowenfield v. Phelps, 484 U.S. 231, 246 (1988).
73 See, e.g., Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 2o4-o6 (1976) (opinion of Stewart, Powell &
Stevens, JJ.) (describing Georgia's proportionality review as a means of assuring that the death
penalty is reserved for the most deserving defendants).
74 See, e.g., Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584, 592 (1977) (holding that the death penalty is
grossly disproportionate for the crime of rape).
75 See, e.g., Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 88o n.I9 (1983) (describing Georgia's mechanism
for proportionality review).
76 Lowenfield, 484 U.S. at 244 (quoting Stephens, 462 U.S. at 877).
77 ARiz. REv. STAT. ANN. ยง 13-73(F)(6) (1989).
78 IDAHO CODE ยง 19-25i5(g)(6) (1987).
79 See Arave v. Creech, 113 S. Ct. 1534, 1541 (I993) (sustaining a limiting construction
adopted by the Idaho Supreme Court); Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S. 639, 655 (iggo) (concluding
"that the challenged factor has been construed by the Arizona courts in a manner that furnishes
sufficient guidance to the sentencer").
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 373 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
example, initially concluded that a crime could fairly be regarded as
"especially heinous, cruel or depraved" if the perpetrator relished the
killing or inflicted gratuitous violence on the victim, if the victim was
helpless or needlessly mutilated, or if the crime was senseless.80 More-
over, the Arizona Supreme Court did not regard these possibilities as
exclusive, and subsequently ruled that prosecutors could establish hei-
nousness or depravity by a whole new range of factors, including the
age of the victim, the type of weapon used by the defendant, and the
purpose of the killing.8' The Idaho Supreme Court, meanwhile, de-
fined the "utter disregard" circumstance as applying to "cold-blooded,
pitiless slayer[s]."82 Far from ensuring that the class of the death-eligi-
ble is meaningfully narrowed, factors that focus on whether an inten-
tional murder was committed "senselessly" or "pitilessly" invite an
affirmative answer in every case.
A second, and more significant, failing of the Court's approach is
that the Court has placed no outer limit on the number of aggravating
factors that a state may adopt. Thus, even if a state adopts aggravat-
ing factors that, taken individually, meaningfully narrow the class of
the death-eligible, the factors collectively might render virtually all
murderers death-eligible. This concern is not merely an idle possibil-
ity. Several states have enumerated ten or more aggravating circum-
stances, each individually sufficient to support a capital sentence.83
Indeed, most states adopting capital statutes after Furman have looked
for guidance to the Model Penal Code, which lists eight aggravating
circumstances, including the notoriously vague "especially heinous,
atrocious or cruel" factor84 that has generated litigation in numerous
jurisdictions8. 5 At the same time, few states have sought to narrow the
class of the death-eligible at the guilt phase, as definitions of capital
murder remain extraordinarily broad.86
The experience in Georgia (whose statutes were the focus of
Furman and Gregg) reflects the general failure of states to achieve any
80 See State v. Gretzler, 659 P.2d i, il- 12 (Ariz. 1983), discussed in Walton, 497 U.S. at 694
(Blackmun, J., dissenting).
81 See Walton, 497 U.S, at 695-96 (Blackmun, J., dissenting) (collecting Arizona Supreme
Court cases that expanded the circumstances in which a finding of heinousness or depravity could
be sustained).
82 State v. Osborn, 631 P.2d 187, 201 (Idaho ig8i), discussed in Creech, 113 S. Ct. at 1541.
83 See, e.g., ARiz. REv. STAT. ANN. ยง 13-703(F) (1989) (listing io aggravating circumstances);
COLO. REv. STAT. ยง 16-ii-io3(5) (Supp. 1994) (listing 13 aggravating circumstances); FLA. STAT.
ANN. ยง 921.141(5) (West Supp. 1995) (listing ii aggravating circumstances).
84 MODEL PENAL CODE ยง 21o.6(3)(h) (198o).
8S See, e.g., Stringer v. Black, 5o3 U.S. 222 (1992) (addressing the factor in the Mississippi
scheme); Maynard v. Cartwright, 486 U.S. 356 (1988) (addressing the factor in the Oklahoma
scheme); Henderson v. Dugger, 925 F.2d 1309 (iith Cir. iggi) (addressing the factor in the Flor-
ida scheme), cert. denied, 113 S. CL 621 (1992).
86 See, e.g., ALA. CODE ยง 13A-S-4o(a) (Supp. 1994) (enumerating 18 kinds of capital murder);
UTAH CODE ANN. ยง 76-5-202(I) (Supp. 1995) (enumerating 17 kinds of capital murder).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 374 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
meaningful narrowing through the enumeration of aggravating circum-
stances. The most detailed study of death-eligibility within a state -
conducted by the famous Baldus group - found that approximately
eighty-six percent of all persons convicted of murder in Georgia over a
five year period after the adoption of Georgia's new statute were
death-eligible under that scheme. 7 Perhaps more revealing is the
Baldus study's conclusion that over ninety percent of persons sen-
tenced to death before Furman would also be deemed death-eligible
under the post-Furman Georgia statute.8 The Baldus group's work
strongly suggests that Georgia has not articulated a carefully circum-
scribed theory of what the state might regard as the "worst" murders.
Quite the contrary, Georgia has simply described the various factors
that collectively account for the circumstances surrounding most
murders. Instead of achieving the narrowing function suggested in the
Furman and Gregg decisions, these aggravating factors merely give the
sentencer the illusion that the offense at issue truly falls within the
select set of crimes that justifies imposition of the death penalty. The
Baldus study itself suggests that higher death-sentencing rates after
Furman may be the result of precisely this dynamic, with jurors giving
special weight in sentencing decisions to Georgia's adoption and en-
dorsement of statutory aggravating circumstances.89
Accordingly, as in the pre-Furman regime, thousands of murderers
are death-eligible, yet few receive death sentences and fewer still are
executed. If, as some of the Justices in Furman maintained, the rela-
tive rarity of death sentences confirms that our society does not regard
the death penalty as appropriate for all murders,90 the continuing fail-
ure of states to narrow the class of the death-eligible invites the possi-
bility that some defendants will receive the death penalty in
circumstances in which it is not deserved according to wider commu-
nity standards (overinclusion).
2. Proportionality Review. - One important qualification
should be made to the general observation that meaningful narrowing
is neither required by Court decisions nor secured by state statutory
schemes. The most significant source of narrowing in current doctrine
stems not from the enumeration of aggravating circumstances (or from
more limited definitions of capital offenses) but rather from the
Court's proportionality decisions, which preclude the imposition of the
death penalty when the Court has discerned an overwhelming societal
consensus against that punishment for particular crimes. Most nota-
87 See BALDUS, WOODWORTH & PULASKI, suprn note 8, at 268 n.31. The Baldus study is
discussed in Daniel Givelber, The New Law of Murder, 69 IND. LJ. 375, 413-16 (1994).
88 See BALDUS, WOODWORTH & PULASKI, supra note 8, at 102.
89 See id. at 102-03.
90 See, e.g., Furman v. Georgia, 4o8 U.S. 238, 291 (1972) (Brennan, 3., concurring); id. at 309
(Stewart, J.,c oncurring); id. at 311 (White, .., concurring).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 375 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW Vol. 109:355
bly, in Coker v. Georgia,91 the Court ruled only one year after the
976 decisions that the Eighth Amendment barred states from impos-
ing the death penalty for the crime of rape.92 This decision remains
the most significant source of protection against overinclusion in the
administration of the death penalty.
Prior to Furman, experience had demonstrated that the availability
of the death penalty for rape. was inextricably linked to race - prose-
cutors rarely asked for and juries seldom returned a capital verdict
without the combination of an African-American defendant and a
white victim.93 Indeed, the precursor to the Court's contemporary ef-
forts to regulate the death penalty can be found in Justice Goldberg's
dissent from a denial of certiorari in a 1963 capital case involving an
interracial rape.94 Although Justice Goldberg did not mention race in
the dissent,95 he would have granted certiorari to decide whether the
death penalty was an excessive or disproportionate punishment for the
crime of rape.96 Furman, too, seemed to raise the possibility that the
death penalty was not truly being reserved for the "worst" defendants,
given that two of the petitioners before the Court in Furman were
African-Americans convicted of rape.97 By placing an absolute bound-
ary on states' efforts to impose the death penalty, proportionality re-
view, as envisioned in Coker, contributes in a concrete and meaningful
way to the goal of reserving the death penalty for the most deserving
defendants.
Coker, though, stands as an exception to the Court's general reluc-
tance to narrow the class of death-eligible defendants through constitu-
tionally imposed proportionality limitations. Although the Court held
in 1982 that the death penalty was disproportionate as applied to a
perpetrator who had not killed, attempted to kill, or intended to kill,98
the Court subsequently retracted that standard and sustained the pro-
portionality of the death penalty for major participants in dangerous
91 433 U.S. 584 (1977).
92 See id. at 597.
93 See MELTSNER, supra note 15, at 74-78 (discussing statistical data regarding the dispropor-
tionate charging and sentencing of African-American men who had allegedly raped white women).
94 See Rudolph v. Alabama, 375 U.S. 889, 889-91 (1963) (Goldberg, J., dissenting from denial
of certiorari).
95 See id. Somewhat surprisingly, the Court did not mention race in its decision in Coker
either.
96 See id.
97 The two companion cases to Furman - Jackson v. Georgia, No. 69-503o, and Branch v.
Texas, No. 69-5031 - involved interracial rapes. See Jackson v. State, M71S .E.2d 501, 504 (Ga.
1969) (rejecting defendant's claim that "there exists a discriminatory pattern whereby the death
penalty is consistently imposed upon Negro defendants convicted of raping white women" (inter-
nal quotation marks omitted)); Branch v. State, 447 S.W.2d 932, 934 (Tex. Crim. App. 1969) (iden-
tifying "Negro defendant" and "Caucasian complaining witness').
98 See Enmund v. Florida, 458 U.S. 782, 797 (1982).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 376 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
felonies who exhibit reckless indifference to human life.99 Thus, the
death penalty remains available for persons convicted of felony-murder
regardless whether the defendant intended to commit, attempted to
commit, or actually committed murder. Indeed, states have executed
several "non-triggermen" since Furman,00ยฐ and a substantial number of
states presently make the death penalty available for participants in
dangerous felonies in which an accomplice intentionally or even acci-
dentally kills.1ยฐ1
In addition to its reluctance to narrow the availability of the death
penalty based on mitigating aspects of the offense, the Court has de-
clined to exempt certain classes of offenders from death-eligibility
based on personal characteristics - such as youth and retardation -
that tend to lessen culpability. In Stanford v. Kentucky,102 the Court
rejected the claim that an emerging national consensus precluded the
imposition of the death penalty for offenders who were sixteen or sev-
enteen years old at the time of the offense.103 Conceding that few ju-
venile offenders had been sentenced to death over the past several
decades, the Court maintained that such evidence could not support
the proposition that society overwhelmingly disapproved of the death
penalty's application to juveniles.104 Rather, contemporary practices
reflected a more limited consensus that the death penalty should rarely
be imposed against juveniles, and the requirement of individualized
sentencing afforded a constitutionally satisfactory vehicle for identify-
ing those cases in which the death penalty was truly deserved. 05
On the same day that it refused to exempt juveniles from the death
penalty, the Court also found insufficient evidence of a consensus
against executing mentally retarded offenders.'06 Although the Court
acknowledged that society has long believed that mental retardation
(like youth) lessens an offender's culpability for criminal conduct,107
the Court found no consensus in state legislative acts, jury decisions,
or expert opinion that mentally retarded persons as a class "inevitably
lack the cognitive, volitional, and moral capacity to act with the de-
gree of culpability associated with the death penalty."'08
99 See ison v. Arizona, 481 U.S. 137, x58 (1987).
100 See 1994 DEATH Row U.S.A. REPORTER CURRENT SERVICE (NAACP Legal Defense and
Educ. Fund, Inc.), Summer 1994, at 648-52 (indicating that states have executed io non-trig-
germen since 1977).
101 See Enmund, 458 U.S. at 789-92 (discussing state statutes, most of which remain in force).
102 492 U.S. 361 (1989).
103 See id. at 380.
104 See id. at 373-74.
1os See id. at 374-75 (plurality opinion).
106 See Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302, 335 (1989).
107 See id. at 322-23.
108I d. at 338 (opinion of O'Connor, J.).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 377 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
Apart from Coker, then, the Court's proportionality decisions sug-
gest strongly that the "narrowing" of the class of offenders and offenses
subject to the death penalty should be accomplished primarily, as in
the pre-Furman regime, by sentencer discretion guided by statutory
criteria rather than court mandate. Given that the statutory criteria
(in the form of aggravating and mitigating circumstances) do not
themselves accomplish any significant narrowing, this approach is es-
sentially indistinguishable from the standardless discretion embodied
in the pre-1972 statutes. Minor participants in crime, severely retarded
or youthful offenders, and other defendants who may appear less de-
serving of the death penalty must rely on the discretionary decision-
making of prosecutors and sentencers to protect them from a
punishment that the broader community might deem excessive as ap-
plied to them. In this respect, the fear of overinclusive application of
the death penalty that accounted in part for the Court's decision to
enter the constitutional thicket remains quite justified.
B. Channeling
As discussed above, Furman and the 1976 decisions sought not
merely to ensure that the death penalty was imposed only on deserv-
ing offenders, but also to ensure that similarly situated offenders
would be treated equally. Overinclusion, of course, constitutes one
kind of inequality (because it subjects some offenders to the death pen-
alty who are by definition not as deserving as others), but it is not the
only kind. Inequality also results if some - but not all - deserving
offenders receive the death penalty, especially if there is no principled
basis for distinguishing between those who receive the penalty and
those who do not.
The 1976 decisions appeared to suggest that the most promising
means of avoiding this sort of inequality was to focus, or "channel,"
the sentencer's discretion on the relevant decisionmaking criteria. In
this respect, the 1976 decisions seemed to reject Justice Harlan's insis-
tence in McGautha v. California0'9 that efforts to channel discretion
are doomed to fail because of both the difficulty of cataloging the ap-
propriate considerations and the uselessness, in terms of channeling,
that a truly exhaustive list would represent." 0 Notwithstanding the
1976 decisions' seeming endorsement of channeling as a separate con-
stitutional requirement,"' subsequent doctrine has veered sharply in
109 402 U.S. 183 (1971).
110 See id. at 204-08.
1I See, e.g., Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 189 (1976) (opinion of Stewart, Powell & Stevens,
JJ.) ("Furman mandates that where discretion is afforded a sentencing body on a matter so grave
as the determination of whether a human life should be taken or spared, that discretion must be
suitably directed and limited so as to minimize the risk of wholly arbitrary and capricious
action.').
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 378 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
the direction of Justice Harlan. The Supreme Court has emphatically
disclaimed any separate requirement to channel discretion apart from
the requirement that states narrow the class of death-eligible offenders.
Accordingly, under current doctrine, once a state has limited the death
penalty to some sub-class or sub-classes of murderers, the state can
give the sentencer absolute and unguided discretion to decide between
death and some lesser punishment. Indeed, a state could constitution-
ally achieve the "narrowing" function at the guilt phase of a capital
trial and ask one simple question at the punishment phase: life or
death?
The rejection of channeling as an independent constitutional re-
quirement was not inevitable. Four years after the 1976 decisions, in
Godfrey v. Georgia,"2 the Court reversed the death sentence of a
Georgia inmate whose sentence rested solely on the aggravating cir-
cumstance that the offense "was outrageously or wantonly vile, horri-
ble or inhuman in that it involved torture, depravity of mind, or an
aggravated battery to the victim.""3 The vague language of this cir-
cumstance, coupled with the state courts' failure to adopt and apply a
limiting construction in the defendant's case, led the Court to conclude
that the aggravating circumstance failed to "provide a 'meaningful ba-
sis for distinguishing the few cases in which [the penalty] is imposed
from the many cases in which it is not.""14
In discussing the inadequacy of the aggravating circumstance, the
Court'1 5 appeared to criticize both the circumstance's failure to nar-
row the class of the death-eligible (by limiting in absolute terms the
number of murderers eligible for the death penalty) and its failure to
channel jury discretion (by focusing the jury on the relevant sentenc-
ing considerations). As to the narrowing function, the Court concluded
that "[a] person of ordinary sensibility could fairly characterize almost
every murder as [falling within the circumstance]."" 6 Hence, applica-
tion of the circumstance in this case gave no assurance that the de-
fendant was within a class of defendants particularly deserving of the
death penalty.
The Court's opinion, though, focused more significantly on the cir-
cumstance's inability to channel or guide sentencer discretion. Quot-
ing the 1976 cases, the Court insisted that "if a State wishes to
authorize capital punishment ... [i]t must channel the sentencer's dis-
cretion by 'clear and objective standards' that provide 'specific and
112 446 U.S. 420 (ig8o) (plurality opinion).
113 Id. at 422 (citing GA. CODE ยง 27-2534.i(b)(7) (1978)).
114 Id. at 427 (quoting Gregg, 428 U.S. at x88 (quoting Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 313
(1972) (White, J., concurring)) (internal quotation marks omitted)).
US The lead opinion in Godfrey is technically a plurality opinion (joined by four Justices), as
Justices Marshall and Brennan concurred only in the judgment. See id. at 433 (Marshall, J.,
concurring in the judgment).
116 Godfrey, 446 U.S. at 428-29.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 379 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
detailed guidance,' and that 'make rationally reviewable the process
for imposing a sentence of death."11 7 Accordingly, the Court strongly
suggested that one role of aggravating circumstances, apart from their
narrowing function, is to ensure some equality in sentencing decisions
by keeping the sentencer focused on clearly defined criteria: "As was
made clear in Gregg, a death penalty 'system could have standards so
vague that they would fail adequately to channel the sentencing deci-
sion patterns of juries with the result that a pattern of arbitrary and
capricious sentencing like that found unconstitutional in Furman could
occur.'11s
Three years after Godfrey, though, the Court revisited the Georgia
scheme in Zant v. Stephens,119 a case involving a death sentence sup-
ported by two permissible aggravating circumstances and one uncon-
stitutionally vague aggravator.120 The defendant argued that the
inclusion of the impermissible factor in the jury's deliberations under-
mined the "channeling" function of aggravating circumstances.' 2' Re-
lying on Furman, Gregg, and Godfrey, the defendant insisted that
states must do more than simply limit death-eligibility; they must pro-
vide a clear and workable set of criteria to channel the sentencer's
discretion at all points in its decisionmaking process. The state, on the
other hand, argued that the finding of one valid aggravating circum-
stance was constitutionally sufficient to support the sentence. In an
unusual procedural twist, the Supreme Court certified a question to
the Georgia Supreme Court seeking a more detailed explanation of its
practice of affirming death sentences when one of the statutory aggra-
vating circumstances that the jury found was later deemed invalid.1 22
The Court's subsequent decision was surprising in its stark repudi-
ation of channeling as a separate constitutional requirement. The
Georgia Supreme Court had stated that its statute required the class of
the death-eligible to be limited by the finding of at least one aggravat-
ing circumstance.123 Once such narrowing was accomplished, the
Georgia scheme afforded the jury "absolute discretion" to determine
whether the death penalty should be imposed. Such discretion would
involve consideration of not only statutory aggravating circumstances,
but also non-statutory evidence that had either aggravating or mitigat-
117 Id. at 428 (quoting, respectively, Gregg, 428 U.S. at 198 (quoting Coley v. State, 204 S.E.2d
612, 615 (Ga. 1974)); Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 242, 253 (1976); and Woodson v. North Caro-
lina, 428 U.S. 280, 303 (1976) (opinion of Stewart, Powell & Stevens, JJ.)).
118 Id. (quoting Gregg, 428 U.S. at 195 n.46).
119 462 U.S. 862 (x983).
120 See id. at 864.
121 See id. at 885.
122 See id. at 87o n.ai (describing the certified question).
123 See Zant v. Stephens, 297 S.E.2d 1, 3 (Ga. 1982) (opinion answering the question certified
by the U.S. Supreme Court).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 380 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
ing import.124 Given this structure, the Georgia Supreme Court in-
formed the U.S. Supreme Court that the inclusion of an invalid
aggravating circumstance in the jury's deliberations after death-eligi-
bility had been established could have had only an "inconsequential
impact" on the jury's death penalty decision. 25
In sustaining the constitutionality of Georgia's approach, the Court
conceded that the Georgia scheme did not channel the jury's discretion
at the critical moment when it decided whether to impose a death sen-
tence. Indeed, the Court maintained that Gregg itself had recognized
that channeling was not a function of the new Georgia statute. 26 In
so doing, the Court redefined the channeling function that it had de-
veloped in Gregg and Godfrey as nothing more than a means of nar-
rowing the class of the death-eligible. According to the Court, the
difficulty with "standards so vague that they would fail adequately to
channel the sentencing decision patterns of juries" was that such stan-
dards would not "genuinely narrow the class of persons eligible for the
death penalty." 27 The goal of channeling discretion ceased to be an
independent constitutional requirement.
The collapsing of the channeling requirement into the narrowing
function fundamentally ignores a crucial concern of Furman. As ar-
gued above, it is undoubtedly true that narrowing the class of the
death-eligible was a central goal of Furman because it addressed the
problem of overinclusion - imposition of the death penalty in a par-
ticular case in which the defendant did not deserve death in light of
general community standards. But Furman was at least equally con-
cerned with underinclusion - the failure of juries to impose death in
cases in which it is truly deserved. Indeed, underinclusion, rather than
overinclusion, was the principal target of the NAACP's pre-Furman
efforts to subject state capital punishment statutes to constitutional
128
scrutiny.
Narrowing the class of the death-eligible in no way addresses the
problem of underinclusion, because open-ended discretion after death-
eligibility permits, even invites, the jury to act according to its own
124 See id.
125 Id. at 4.
126 See Stephens, 462 U.S. at 875 ("For the Court [in Gregg] approved Georgia's capital sen-
tencing statute even though it clearly did not channel the jury's discretion by enunciating specific
standards to guide the jury's consideration of aggravating and mitigating circumstances.").
127 Id. at 877.
128 See Steiker & Steiker, supra note 57, at 863 & n.14I (citing Brief Amici Curiae of the
NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc., and the National Office for the Rights of the
Indigent at 13-r4, McGautha v. California, 402 U.S. 183 (1971) (No. 71-203) (describing the prob-
lem of underinclusion)). Of course, there is an important connection between underinclusion and
overinclusion: underinclusive application of the death penalty may be strong evidence of overin-
clusiveness, because the fact that the state selects only a few out o] many eligible to bear a
burden often reveals that the state's purported interest in imposing the burden is illusory. See id.
at 863 n.r40.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 381 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
unaccountable whims. Without guiding the sentencer at all points of
its decisionmaking, there simply is no guarantee that the "equal pro-
tection" concerns highlighted in Furman will be meaningfully ad-
dressed. As we have argued elsewhere:
If we are worried that the failure to provide precise guidance to capital
sentencers may lead them to use irrelevant characteristics (like physical
attractiveness) or impermissible ones (like race or class) to determine who
should live and who should die from among the equally eligible, this
problem is not resolved merely by narrowing the range of persons among
whom the sentencer can discriminate.129
The abandonment of channeling as a distinct constitutional re-
quirement is unsurprising given that genuine channeling cannot be
achieved by focusing solely on aggravating factors. One of the funda-
mental conclusions of the 1976 decisions - particularly Woodson v.
North Carolina'30 - was that capital sentencing proceedings must be
"individualized" so as to permit a capital defendant to present mitigat-
ing evidence about his background, his character, or the circumstances
of the crime that might offer a basis for a sentence less than death.131
As a matter of doctrine, this individualization requirement ultimately
evolved into a capital defendant's virtually unconstrained right to
present any conceivably mitigating evidence that might influence the
sentencer's punishment decision.132 Thus, state efforts to channel con-
sideration of mitigating evidence, far from being constitutionally re-
quired, became constitutionally impermissible.
Once channeling the sentencer's consideration of mitigating evi-
dence becomes impermissible, it is difficult to see a basis to insist on
channeling the sentencer's consideration of aggravating evidence.. If
the sentencer may refuse to impose a death sentence for any reason or
no reason at all (and nothing guides the sentencer in that decision),
there is no effective means of preventing underinclusion. In such cir-
cumstances, guiding the sentencer in its consideration of aggravating
evidence will not meaningfully contribute to "equality" in sentencing,
because the absolute discretion afforded the sentencer at the critical
moment of decision will render insignificant whatever guidance has
been achieved on the aggravating side.
This tension between Gregg's seeming insistence on channeling and
Woodson's seeming insistence on uncircumscribed consideration of
mitigating evidence constitutes the central dilemma in post-Furman
capital punishment law. Although two Justices have sought to resolve
the dilemma by abandoning the individualization requirement,133 and
129 Id. at 863 (footnote omitted).
130 428 U.S. 280 (,976) (plurality opinion).
131 See id. at 304.
132 See infra pp. 390-91 (discussing the individualization requirement).
133 See Graham v. Collins, i13 S. Ct. 892, 912 (1993) (Thomas, J., concurring) (arguing that
courts have pushed the individualization requirement too far given that "the power to be lenient
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 382 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
at least one other has explicitly argued that the incommensurate pres-
sures of these two doctrines reveal the impossibility of administering
the death penalty in a constitutional fashion,34 the Court's basic ap-
proach is reflected in its decision to require narrowing but not chan-
neling. Hence, Georgia's failure to channel the jury's consideration of
aggravating evidence (because of the inclusion of an invalid ag-
gravator) could not, in the Court's view, be constitutional error given
that Georgia did not channel the jury's consideration of mitigating evi-
dence at all. The Georgia scheme that the Court approved in Gregg
did not enumerate mitigating factors, but instead simply instructed the
jury to determine its sentence in light of the aggravating evidence (in-
cluding enumerated statutory aggravating circumstances) and "any
mitigating circumstances."' 35
The Court's abandonment of channeling was qualified somewhat
by its emphasis on a separate mechanism in Georgia's scheme, apart
from sentencing instructions, that was directed toward ensuring non-
arbitrary results in the administration of the death penalty.136 In its
post-Furman statute, Georgia required its supreme court to engage in
mandatory comparative proportionality review of each sentence.137
Such review would presumably forestall applications of the death pen-
alty that were permissible under the statute (because of the finding of
at least one aggravating circumstance) but that were nonetheless
anomalous given sentencing practices within the state. In conducting
such comparative review, the Georgia Supreme Court considered "not
only similar cases in which death was imposed, but similar cases in
which death was not imposed."138 One could regard such review
either as an additional protection against overinclusion or as an addi-
tional means of promoting overall equality in the sentencing scheme.
Soon after Stephens, however, the Court rejected the view that
such proportionality review is constitutionally mandated. In Pulley v.
Harris,139 a California inmate argued that the California scheme insuf-
ficiently protected capital defendants against arbitrary sentencing and
[also] is the power to discriminate" (quoting McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 312 (1987) (quot-
ing KENNETH C. DAVIS, DISCRETIONARY JUSTICE 170 ('973))) (internal quotation marks omit-
ted)); Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S. 639, 670-73 (iggo) (Scalia, J.,c oncurring) (maintaining that
because the channeling concerns of Furman are "arguably supported" by the text of the Constitu-
tion, whereas the concern for individualized capital sentencing bears "no relation whatever" to the
Eighth Amendment, the individualization requirement should be abandoned).
134S ee Callins v. Collins, 114 S. CL 1127, 1136 (x994) (Blackmun, J., dissenting from denial of
certiorari) ("All efforts to strike an appropriate balance between these conflicting constitutional
commands are futile because there is a heightened need for both in the administration of death.").
13S Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 211 (1976) (White, J.,co ncurring) (quoting GA. CODE ANN.
ยง 27-2534.1(b) (Supp. 1975)) (internal quotation marks omitted).
136 See Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 890 (1983).
137 See id.
138 Stephens v. State, 227 S.E.2d 261, 263 (Ga. 1976).
139 465 U.S. 37 (1984).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 383 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
maintained that the 1976 decisions - as well as the Court's subse-
quent decision in Stephens - should be read to require appellate pro-
portionality review.140 In sustaining the California scheme against this
challenge, the Court relied primarily on its approval of the Texas stat-
ute in Jurek v. Texas,' 4' which likewise did not provide for any com-
parative proportionality review. 42 In its decision, the Court made
clear that once a state has limited the class of the death-eligible "to a
small sub-class" of defendants, the state has no further obligation to
ensure equality in sentencing. 43 Narrowing thus clearly emerged as
the sole and decisive constitutional obligation. Moreover, as in the
Georgia scheme, one could hardly describe the California statute's
purported narrowing of the class of the death-eligible as limiting the
availability of the death penalty to a "small sub-class": it rendered
seven separate classes of murderers death-eligible, including all those
who committed murder in the course of any of five felonies. 44 Under
California's current statute, the legislature has expanded the list of the
death-eligible to nineteen categories, encompassing murders as varied
as those occurring in the context of a train wrecking and those involv-
ing formerly appointed state officials.145
The Court's focus on narrowing as the sole constitutionally re-
quired means of addressing arbitrariness in capital sentencing - to
the exclusion of both channeling and proportionality review - has
yielded an additional significant consequence for death penalty doc-
trine. Because states need not channel sentencing discretion (and need
not require sentencers to explicitly weigh enumerated aggravating and
mitigating factors), the punishment decision need not have any struc-
ture at all. Under current doctrine, a state could choose to limit
death-eligibility through its definition of capital murder (as several
states have),146 and then simply ask the sentencer to decide punish-
ment in light of any aggravating or mitigating factors that the sen-
tencer deems significant. Although no state has yet chosen to leave the
punishment phase unstructured to this degree, such a scheme would
clearly withstand constitutional scrutiny given current doctrine. In-
deed, such a scheme would also avoid much of the complicated litiga-
tion that has arisen as a result of states' decisions to design more
elaborate sentencing proceedings.
140 See id. at 44-5o.
141 428 U.S. 262 (1976).
142 See Pulley, 465 U.S. at 48.
143 Id. at 53.
144 See id. at 51 n.13.
145 See CAL. PENAL CODE ยง 190.2(13) (West 1995) (concerning appointed officials); id.
ยง I9o.2(17Xix) (concerning murders in the course of a train wrecking).
146 The Court has indicated that both the Texas and Louisiana schemes adequately narrow the
class of the death-eligible in their definitions of capital murder. See Lowenfield v. Phelps, 484
U.S. 231, 245-46 (x988).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 384 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
The apparent constitutional permissibility of such a scheme seems
odd given the Court's strong emphasis in the 1976 decisions on the
creation of a separate structured punishment phase in the post-
Furman statutes it sustained. In those decisions, the Court did not
explicitly indicate that a bifurcated proceeding with a carefully
designed punishment phase was constitutionally indispensable. None-
theless, a casual (and even a careful) observer of the interaction be-
tween the Court's decisions and statutory developments following
Furman would likely have regarded such a proceeding as the new
hallmark of permissible death penalty schemes. That current doctrine
would permit a state to enact a statute defining nineteen or so catego-
ries of capital murder and to provide for a punishment phase struc-
tured around one general question - life or death - reveals the
extent to which the Court has retreated from the more ambitious regu-
latory efforts that its 1976 decisions seemed to embrace and indeed to
require.
If, as we have argued, the Court now demands so little of states in
terms of guiding sentencer discretion, what accounts for the extensive
and complex litigation surrounding states' use of aggravating circum-
stances? Over the past fifteen years, the Supreme Court has issued
opinions in more than a dozen cases involving constitutional chal-
lenges to states' efforts to guide sentencing discretion.147 Notwith-
standing our claim that compliance with current doctrine is relatively
simple, many inmates have prevailed in such challenges, and litigation
concerning states' efforts to guide sentencer discretion remains
substantial.
Some of this litigation is based on the very minimal requirement
that states narrow the class of the death-eligible through some non-
vague factor or aggravating circumstance. For example, in Godfrey v.
Georgia, the challenged aggravating circumstance provided the sole
basis for the sentencer's death-penalty decision.' 48 In such cases, if the
challenged circumstance is impermissibly vague, the sentence must be
reversed. Invalidation of the vague aggravating circumstance leaves
nothing to support the death sentence other than the defendant's con-
147 Cases in which the Court has addressed the constitutional adequacy of states' efforts to
guide sentencer discretion include: Arave v. Creech, 113 S. Ct. 1534, 1538 (1993); Espinosa v.
Florida, 112 S. Ct. 2926, 2929 (1992) (per curiam); Sochor v. Florida, 504 U.S. 527, 529-30 (1992);
Stringer v. Black, 5o3 U.S. 222, 228-29 (1992); Lewis v. Jeffers, 497 U.S. 764, 789 (iggo); Walton
v. Arizona, 497 U.S. 639, 652-53 (iggo); Clemons v. Mississippi, 494 U.S. 738, 741 (iggo); May-
nard v. Cartwright, 486 U.S. 356, 363-64 (1988); Lowenfield v. Phelps, 484 U.S. 231, 245-46
(1988); Barclay v. Florida, 463 U.S. 939, 956-58 (1983); Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 864
(1983); and Godfrey v. Georgia, 446 U.S. 420, 428 (I98O).
148 See Godfrey, 446 U.S. at 426 (reversing a sentencing decision that rested solely on the
aggravating circumstance "that the offense of murder was outrageously or wantonly vile, horrible
and inhuman").
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 385 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
viction for murder, and the requisite "narrowing" has not been
accomplished.
Many of the remaining cases, including Zant v. Stephens,149 in-
volve verdicts in which the sentencer relied on both permissible and
impermissible aggravating circumstances.150 As discussed above, the
sentencer's reliance on an impermissibly vague aggravating circum-
stance does not mandate reversal in a scheme such as Georgia's,
which affords the sentencer absolute discretion once the defendant has
become death-eligible (based on the sentencer's identification of at
least one satisfactory aggravating circumstance).51
The doctrine has become more intricate, though, in cases in which
the state has structured its punishment phase so that the sentencer is
required to weigh aggravating and mitigating factors against each
other to determine the appropriate sentence. Under such schemes, the
Court has held that the sentencer's reliance on an invalid aggravating
circumstance requires the state courts either to reweigh aggravating
and mitigating factors (excluding the improper aggravating factor) or
to determine whether the sentencer's consideration of the improper
factor was "harmless" beyond a reasonable doubt if the sentence is to
be sustained.'52 Thus, even though states can entirely forego "struc-
tured" sentencing phases that involve the explicit weighing of aggra-
vating and mitigating factors, the Court has insisted that once a state
has adopted such a scheme, it may not ignore the sentencer's reliance
on an improper factor in that structured decisionmaking process.
This departure from Stephens generates substantial, highly techni-
cal litigation, because it requires courts to assess whether a given
scheme is "weighing" or "non-weighing," and, if "weighing," whether
the state courts have appropriately reweighed the relevant factors or
adequately applied harmless error analysis. Moreover, the different
doctrinal approaches to "weighing" and "non-weighing" schemes are
difficult to justify given that the sentencer's decisionmaking process is
149 462 U.S. 862 (1983).
IS0 See, e.g., id. at 864; Clemons v. Mississippi, 494 U.S. 738, 742 (i99o) (reviewing a case in
which the sentencer considered one permissible aggravating circumstance - that the murder was
committed during the course of a robbery - and one impermissibly vague aggravating circum-
stance - that the killing was "especially heinous, atrocious or cruel"); Barclay v. Florida, 463
U.S. 939, 944-46 (1983) (involving sentencer consideration of valid aggravating circumstances, in-
cluding that the defendant had committed the murder while engaged in a kidnapping, as well as
a non-statutory aggravating circumstance that was improper under state law).
1 But cf. Tuggle v. Netherland, x6 S. Ct. 283 (1995) (per curiam) (holding that constitutional
error that prevented the defendant from responding to a non-vague aggravating circumstance ar-
gued by the prosecution required reversal of the defendant's death sentence despite the presence
of an additional aggravating factor found by the jury).
152 See, e.g., Clemons, 494 U.S. at 754 (holding that states with "weighing" schemes must "en-
gage in reweighing or harmless-error analysis when errors have occurred in a capital sentencing
proceeding" if the sentence is to be sustained).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 386 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
likely to be similar under either scheme.153 In any event, despite the
Court's closer supervision of "weighing" schemes, a majority of state
death penalty statutes require some sort of balancing or weighing of
factors at the punishment
phase.154
Two significant observations about these developments emerge.
First, the extensive litigation concerning the adequacy of particular ag-
gravating circumstances continues only because many states have
failed to purge dubious aggravating factors from their statutes.55 The
153 The difference appears to rest on the belief that sentencers in non-weighing states will place
no special emphasis on the aggravating circumstances that they have found in determining the
ultimate sentence; once a defendant has become death-eligible, the sentencer is "cut loose" from
those circumstances and has absolute discretion to decide between life and death. It seems likely,
though, that even in self-described "non-weighing" states, most sentencers will approach their de-
cision by considering the extent to which aggravating factors outweigh mitigating factors. Once
the sentencer has been instructed to think about the appropriate punishment in terms of aggravat-
ing and mitigating circumstances, the decisionmaking process seems inevitably driven to some sort
of balancing or weighing. Indeed, in fashioning its doctrinal approach, the Court has offered no
clear statement concerning its view of how decisionmaking could proceed in non-weighing states
apart from some sort of makeshift balancing or weighing. A critical examination of the Court's
doctrine in this area is offered in Stephen Hornbuckle, Note, Capital Sentencing Procedure: A
Lethal Oddity in the Supreme Court's Case Law, 73 TEX. L. REV. 441, 455-57 (1994).
154 Of the 36 death penalty jurisdictions, 21 are weighing states. See id. at 448 n.38 (listing
weighing states and their corresponding statutory provisions).
155 In some cases, the Court has upheld the use of a general factor for "heinous, atrocious, or
cruel" crimes when those terms have been narrowed by either state courts or legislatures. None-
theless, the retention of such language by many states invites litigation. State statutes that still
contain vague aggravating factors include: ALA. CODE ยง 13A-5-49(8) (1994) ("capital offense was
especially heinous, atrocious or cruel compared to other capital offenses"); ARiz. REV. STAT. ANN.
ยง 1 3 -70 3 (F)(6) (Supp. 1994) ("defendant committed the offense in an especially heinous, cruel or
depraved manner"); ARK. CODE ANN. ยง 5-4-604(8) (Michie 1993) ("capital murder was committed
in an especially cruel or depraved manner," which includes those offenses in which torture is
inflicted on the victim or in which the defendant "relishes" the murder); CAL. PENAL CODE
ยง I9o.2(aX4) (West Supp. I995) ("murder was especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel, manifesting
exceptional depravity," which is defined as a "conscienceless, or pitiless crime which is unnecessar-
ily torturous to the victim"); COLO. REv. STAT. ยง 16-iI-IO3(5)(j) (Supp. z994) ("defendant commit-
ted the offense in an especially heinous, cruel, or depraved manner"); CONN. GEN. STAT. ยง 53a-
46a(h)(4) (i9g9) ("defendant committed the offense in an especially heinous, cruel or depraved
manner"); DEL. CODE ANN. tit. II, ยง 42o9(eX)(iL) (Supp. 1994) ("murder was outrageously or wan-
tonly vile, horrible or inhuman in that it involved torture, depravity of mind, use of an explosive
device or poison or the defendant used such means on the victim prior to murdering him"); FLA.
STAT. ch. 921I4X(5)(h) (1993) ("capital felony was especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel"); GA.
CODE ANN. ยง 17-Io-3o(b)(7) (iggo) ("offense of murder, rape, armed robbery, or kidnapping was
outrageously or wantonly vile, horrible, or inhuman in that it involved torture, depravity of mind,
or an aggravated battery to the victim"); IDAHO CODE ยง I9-2SI5(g)(5) (Supp. I995) ("murder was
especially heinous, atrocious or cruel, manifesting exceptional depravity"); ILL. COMP. STAT. ANN.
ch. 720, para. 5/9-I(b)(7) (West 1994) ("murdered individual was under 12 years of age and the
death resulted from exceptionally brutal or heinous behavior indicative of wanton cruelty"); KAN.
STAT. ANN. ยง 21-4625(6) (Supp. 1994) ("defendant committed the crime in an especially heinous,
atrocious or cruel manner"); LA. CODE CRiM. PROC. ANN. art. 905.4(A)(7) (West Supp. 1995) ("of-
fense was committed in an especially heinous, atrocious or cruel manner"); Miss. CODE ANN.
ยง 99-ig-Iox(s)(h) (1994) ("capital offense was especially heinous, atrocious or cruel"); Mo. REv.
STAT. ยง 56s.032(2)(7) (1994) ("murder in the first degree was outrageously or wantonly vile, horri-
ble or inhuman in that it involved torture, or depravity of mind"); NEB. REV. STAT. ยง 29-
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 387 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
Court has made clear that aggravating factors that are evaluative as
opposed to objective are vulnerable to constitutional attack. Thus,
Georgia's factor asking whether the crime was "outrageously or wan-
tonly vile,'u56 Oklahoma's factor asking whether the murder was "es-
pecially heinous, atrocious, or cruel,"57 and Idaho's factor asking
whether the defendant exhibited an "utter disregard for human life"'58
raise reasonable concerns that even the minimal "narrowing" function
has not been achieved because such factors could fairly encompass all
murders.
The vast majority of aggravating circumstances have not and will
not encounter this sort of challenge. States can, for example, fully sat-
isfy the narrowing requirement by establishing aggravating circum-
stances that focus on the presence of a separate felony, the killing of
more than one person, the killing of a peace officer, or the commission
of the crime while in prison. The requirement that states limit their
aggravating circumstances (or definitions of capital murder) to objec-
tive factors does not significantly inhibit a state's ability to render vir-
2523(i)(d) (x989) ("murder was especially heinous, atrocious, cruel, or manifested exceptional de-
pravity by ordinary standards of morality and intelligence"); NEV. REV. STAT. ยง 200.033(8) (199x)
("murder involved torture, depravity of mind or the mutilation of the victim"); N.H. REv. STAT.
ANN. ยง 63o:5(VII)(h) (Supp. 1994) ('defendant committed the offense in an especially heinous,
cruel or depraved manner in that it involved torture or serious physical abuse to the victim"); NJ.
STAT. ANN. ยง 2C:II-3(c)(4)(C) (West x995) ("murder was outrageously or wantonly vile, horrible or
inhuman in that it involved torture, depravity of mind, or an aggravated assault to the victim");
N.C. GEm. STAT. ยง I;A-2ooo(e)(9) (Supp. 1994) ("capital felony was especially heinous, atrocious,
or cruel"); OKLA. STAT. tit. 21, ยง 70.12(4) (iggi) ("murder was especially heinous, atrocious, or
cruel"); S.D. CODIFIED LAWS ANN. ยง 23A-27A-I(6) (Supp. 1995) ('offense was outrageously or
wantonly vile, horrible, or inhuman in that it involved torture, depravity of mind, or an aggra-
vated battery to the victim"); TENN. CODE ANN. ยง 39-13-204(i)(5) (Supp. 1994) ("murder was espe-
cially heinous, atrocious, or cruel in that it involved torture or serious physical abuse beyond that
necessary to produce death"); UTAH CODE ANN. ยง 76-5-202(i)(q) (x995) ("homicide was committed
in an especially heinous, atrocious, cruel, or exceptionally depraved manner, any of which must be
demonstrated by physical torture, serious physical abuse, or serious bodily injury of the victim
before death"); VA. CODE ANN. ยง I9.2-264.2(I) (Michie 1995) ("[defendant's] conduct in commit-
ting the offense for which he stands charged was outrageously or wantonly vile, horrible or inhu-
man in that it involved torture, depravity of mind or an aggravated battery to the victim"); Wyo.
STAT. ANN. ยง 6-2-102(h)(vii) (Michie Supp. I995) ("murder was especially atrocious or cruel, being
unnecessarily torturous to the victim").
156 GA. CODE ANN. ยง 17-Io-3o(b)(7) (299o); see Godfrey v. Georgia, 446 U.S. 420, 431-33 (i98o)
(sustaining a challenge to this aggravating circumstance as applied by state courts).
157 OKLA. STAT. tit. 2I, ยง 701.12(4) (1991); see Maynard v. Cartwright, 486 U.S. 356, 363-65
(1988) (sustaining a challenge to this aggravating circumstance as applied by state courts).
is8 IDAHO CODE ยง I9-25I5(g)(6) (Supp. 1995); see Arave v. Creech, 113 S. Ct. IS34, 1541 (1993)
(upholding the statute against a vagueness challenge on the ground that the aggravating circum-
stance as interpreted by state courts focused on a factual determination of defendant's state of
mind rather than on a "subjective determination" (quoting Creech v. Arave, 947 F.2d 873, 884
( th Cir. ggi)) (internal quotation marks omitted)).
9
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 388 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
tually all murderers death-eligible; it simply obligates states to
establish the breadth of their statutes in unmistakably clear terms.'59
The second observation relates to the first. Even if a state chooses
to persist in its use of a vague aggravating circumstance, it could
avoid a substantial amount of litigation by restructuring its punish-
ment phase along the lines of Georgia's "non-weighing" approach. As
stated above, a sentencer's reliance on an impermissibly vague aggra-
vating circumstance in a non-weighing scheme will not require rever-
sal of the sentence if a separate, permissible aggravating factor
supports the verdict. States need resort to appellate reweighing and
harmless error analysis only if they have gratuitously conferred greater
procedural protections in the sentencing phase than current doctrine
presently requires. Accordingly, much of the intricate litigation con-
cerning whether a state's scheme is weighing or non-weighing,
whether a state court has appropriately reweighed aggravating and
mitigating factors, and whether a state court's limiting construction
"genuinely" narrows the class of the death-eligible is entirely avoidable.
C. Mitigation
In its rejection of mandatory sentencing in the 1976 decisions, the
Court made clear that a defendant was entitled to an "individualized"
proceeding that would facilitate the sentencer's consideration of miti-
gating evidence.' 60 Those opinions did not, however, answer two cru-
cial questions concerning the scope of that right. First, the opinions
did not specify what kinds of evidence could be regarded as "mitigat-
ing" so as to trigger the defendant's right to offer the evidence as a
basis for a sentence less than death. Thus, litigation was inevitable in
those states that through statute or practice limited the sentencer's
consideration to certain kinds of mitigating evidence. Second, the
opinions did not define the extent to which states are permitted to
structure the sentencer's consideration of mitigating evidence. Most
states, including Georgia, invited the sentencer to evaluate mitigating
evidence at the end of the decisionmaking process in answering the
159 Of course, much of the current litigation involves the review of sentences rendered before
some states ceased using patently invalid aggravating circumstances. To the extent that existing
litigation falls within this category, it does not reflect pervasive regulation of state capital schemes
as much as the enforcement of one easily met (though perhaps belatedly discovered) constitutional
requirement. Other litigation, though, involves state efforts to save facially vague aggravating
circumstances through judicially applied limiting constructions. In such states, the continued use
of problematic factors absolutely invites future litigation and likewise cannot be said to reflect
significant court intrusion into state capital schemes. As early as 1973, a report prepared by the
National Association of Attorneys General evaluated various "aggravating factors" and designated
as "poor" in terms of likely court approval the "heinous, atrocious, or cruel" factor that ultimately
generated an extraordinary amount of litigation. See NATIONAL ASs'N OF ATTORNEYS GEN.,
SUMMARY OF PROCEEDINGS 61 (x973).
160 See, e.g., Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280, 303-04 (1976) (plurality opinion).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 389 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
fundamental question of life or death.161 Other states, such as Texas
and Oregon, permitted the sentencer to consider mitigating evidence
only in the context of answering specific fact-based questions.162
Current doctrine has rendered both of these uncertainties moot, be-
cause all death-penalty schemes presently permit unconstrained consid-
eration of mitigating evidence. Accordingly, virtually all of the current
litigation concerning the individualization requirement is backward-
looking, gauging the constitutionality of statutory provisions and state
practices that are no longer in force. Ironically, then, the past twenty
years of intricate litigation over states' fulfillment of the individualiza-
tion requirement is coming to an end only because states have volun-
tarily reproduced the open-ended consideration of mitigating factors
that was a central feature of the pre-Furman statutes.
i. What Evidence Counts as Mitigating? - After Furman,
many states sought to avoid the charge of "standardless discretion" by
limiting the sentencer's consideration of mitigating evidence. Woodson
v. North Carolina63 and Roberts v. Louisiana64 invalidated the most
extreme means of constraining discretion: a mandatory death penalty
for certain
crimes.165
In the decade that followed, the Court overturned death sentences
when state law authorized consideration of some but not all potentially
mitigating factors. In Lockett v. Ohio,166 for example, the Court held
that Ohio's exclusive list of mitigating factors unconstitutionally pre-
cluded the sentencer from considering mitigating evidence regarding
the defendant's lack of specific intent to cause death, minimal partici-
pation in the crime, and age at the time of the offense. 67 In reversing
Lockett's sentence, the Court did not attempt to define the range of
mitigating evidence encompassed by the individualization requirement;
instead, the Court simply asserted that "a death penalty statute must
not preclude consideration of relevant mitigating factors.' 68 Subse-
quently, the Court likewise invalidated sentences when a state judge
refused to assign any mitigating weight to the defendant's turbulent
161 See, e.g., Act of Mar. 28, 1973, No. 74, sec. 3, ยง 27-25 3 4.I(b), 1973 Ga. Laws 157, 163-65
(codified at GA. CODE ANN. ยง 17-io-3o(b) (iggo)); Act of Aug. 5, 1976, No. 694, 1976 La. Acts
1771 (current version at LA. CODE ClrM. PRoc. ANN. arts. 9o5-905.9 (West 1984 & Supp. 1995));
Act of Mar. 29, 1977, ch. 492, art. 4.1, ยงยง 19.2-264.2 to .4, 1977 Va. Acts 733, 735 (current version
at VA. CODE ANN. ยงยง 19.2-264.2 to -264.5) (Michie '995)).
162 See OR.R Ev. STAT. ยง 163.15o(b) (iggo); Act of June 14, 1973, ch. 426, art. 37.07(b), 1973
Tex. Gen. Laws 1122, 1125 (current version at TEx. CODE CRIn. PROC. ANN. art. 37.071(2)(e)
(West Supp. 5995)).
163 428 U.S. 280 (1976).
164 428 U.S. 325 (1976).
165S ee Roberts, 428 U.S. at 336; Woodson, 428 U.S. at 3o5.
166 438 U.S. 586 (1978).
167 See id. at 608.
168 Id.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 390 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
family history and emotional disturbance169 and when state case law
precluded consideration of the defendant's good behavior while await-
ing
trial.170
In sustaining challenges to state-imposed limitations on the presen-
tation or consideration of particular mitigating evidence, the Court
seems to have concluded that all potentially mitigating factors fall
within the individualization requirement. Although the Court has oc-
casionally voiced skepticism about the relevance of some evidence of-
fered as mitigating,'7' it has yet to develop a theory about which
aspects of the individual are indispensably relevant to the death pen-
alty decision. We have argued elsewhere that a more circumscribed
theory of individualized sentencing can be drawn from the Court's
own Eighth Amendment methodology; such a theory, reflected in cur-
rent state statutes as well as in historical practices, would properly
focus on mitigating evidence concerning a defendant's reduced culpa-
bility.172 Nonetheless, the Court's emerging doctrine has motivated
every death penalty jurisdiction to permit the introduction and consid-
eration of "any" mitigating factor, and the Court will therefore have
little occasion to develop a more refined theory of individualization.
The Court's all-inclusive approach to individualization has two ob-
vious consequences. It simplifies the doctrine (because it discourages
piecemeal evaluation of the relevance of particular kinds of mitigating
evidence) and it exacerbates the tension between Woodson's insistence
on individualized sentencing and the concern in Furman and Gregg for
focused death-penalty decisionmaking. By making constitutionally rel-
evant any and all traits or experiences that distinguish one individual
from another, the Court invites arbitrary and even invidious
decisionmaking.
As Furman recognized, the greater the discretion afforded the deci-
sionmaker, the less accountable the decisionmaker will be to public
values. If standardless discretion is problematic because it gives those
with a mind to discriminate the opportunity to discriminate, uncon-
strained consideration of any kind of mitigating evidence is problem-
atic for precisely the same reason. Although such discretion cannot be
used to render a defendant death-eligible contrary to community stan-
dards, it can be used to exempt favored defendants from the death
penalty or to withhold severe punishment for crimes against despised
169 See Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104, 112-15 (1982). The trial judge refused to consider
such mitigating evidence, notwithstanding the broad language of the Oklahoma statute, which
authorized the sentencer to consider "any mitigating circumstances." Id. at ii5 n.io (quoting
OKLA. STAT. tit 2I, ยง 701.10 (I980)).
170 See Skipper v. South Carolina, 476 U.S. i, 4-5 (I986).
171 See, e.g., Boyde v. California, 494 U.S. 370, 382 n.5 (iggo) (expressing doubts about the
mitigating significance of the prize for dance choreography that the defendant won while in
prison).
172 See Steiker & Steiker, supra note 57, at 858-59.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 391 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
victims. And if, as we have argued, Furman's equal protection con-
cerns relate to both overinclusion and underinclusion, the Court's in-
sistence that the individualization requirement encompasses all
conceivably mitigating evidence undermines its effort to achieve equal-
ity in the administration of the death penalty. We still think that the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund said it best in its brief in McGautha:
"'Kill him if you want' and 'Kill him, but you may spare him if you
want' mean the same thing in any man's language."173
Although compliance with the individualization requirement has
become straightforward in that the Court requires states to allow de-
fendants to introduce any potentially mitigating evidence, litigation
over the scope of the individualization requirement has been substan-
tial. Many states, remembering the critique of open-ended discretion
in Furman, did not read Woodson to require such a complete return to
unfettered sentencer consideration of mitigating factors. Eleven years
passed before the Court revisited the Florida statute that it had provi-
sionally approved in the 1976 decisions 74 and ruled that the statute's
refusal to permit consideration of unenumerated mitigating factors vio-
lated the Eighth Amendment.75- Despite the Court's insistence in
Lockett that six members of the 1976 Court had "assumed, in approv-
ing the [Florida] statute, that the range of mitigating factors listed in
the statute was not exclusive,' 76 it was far from obvious that the indi-
vidualization requirement would be read so broadly 77 Accordingly,
the perception that the death penalty is extensively regulated in this
area stems not from intricate or stringent regulation so much as from
a miscommunication between the Court and the states regarding the
near completeness of the return to pre-Furman discretion with respect
to mitigating factors. The significance of this miscommunication was
heightened by the fact that Florida, the second most active state in
administering the death penalty since Furman,178 was among the
173 Brief Amici Curiae of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educ. Fund, Inc. and the National
Office for the Rights of the Indigent at 69, McGautha v. California, 402 U.S. 183 (ig7x) (No. 71-
203), quoted in Steiker & Steiker, supra note 57, at 864.
174S ee Proffitt v. Florida, 428 U.S. 242, 259-60 (1976) (plurality opinion).
175S ee Hitchcock v. Dugger, 481 U.S. 393, 398-99 (1987).
176 Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586, 6o6 (1978).
177 Nowhere in Proffitt, the 1976 decision concerning the Florida statute, did the Court insist
that the state courts construe the statute so as to permit consideration of unenumerated mitigating
circumstances. In a footnote in the plurality opinion, three Justices observed that the statute did
not appear to limit sentencer consideration to statutory mitigating factors. See Proffitt, 428 U.S.
at 25o n.8 (opinion of Stewart, Powell & Stevens, JJ.). But this observation seems unconnected to
any claim that such open-ended consideration of mitigating factors was constitutionally required.
178 See Capital Punishment Z993, in JAMES STEPHAN & PETER BRIEN, DEP'T OF JUSTICE,
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT 1993, at xx tbl.xo (1994) (reporting that Florida has ranked second in
number of executions since 1977); see also id. at x (reporting that as of December, 2993, Florida
ranked third in number of prisoners under sentence of death).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 392 1995-1996

I995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
states that sought to confine sentencer consideration to particular miti-
gating circumstances.
2. Channeling Consideration of Mitigating Evidence. - Two
states responded to Furman's critique of standardless discretion not by
limiting the kinds of mitigating evidence that the sentencer could con-
sider, but by structuring the sentencer's consideration of concededly
relevant mitigating evidence around particular fact-based questions.
Texas and Oregon authorized the defendant to present any mitigating
evidence at the punishment phase but permitted the consideration of
such evidence only as the sentencer decided whether the crime was
committed deliberately, whether the defendant would be dangerous in
the future, and whether the defendant had been provoked into com-
mitting the crime.179 The Court provisionally approved the Texas spe-
cial issue scheme in the 1976 decisions, 80 but later expressed doubts
about whether the special issues would adequately facilitate sentencer
consideration of certain kinds of mitigating evidence.'"
The Court subsequently concluded, in Penry v. Lynaugh,182 that
the special issue scheme was unconstitutional as applied to a mentally
retarded defendant who had a history of being abused.'83 The Court
reasoned that, under the Texas scheme, the defendant's mitigating evi-
dence of reduced culpability would likely have increased the
probability of a capital verdict because it supported rather than under-
mined a finding of future dangerousness.'84 At the same time, the
Texas courts had narrowly construed the special issue regarding the
"deliberateness" of a defendant's actions so as to preclude a more en-
compassing moral inquiry into the appropriateness of the death pen-
alty based on a defendant's limited capacity to exercise judgment and
self-restraint.lss
Two years after Penry, and fifteen years after the Court's provi-
sional approval of the Texas scheme in 1976, Texas revised its statute
by adding a separate question that authorizes unstructured considera-
tion of mitigating evidence as the jury decides between life and
179 See OR. REV. STAT. ยง 163.i5o(i)(b) (1993); Act of June 14, 1973, ch. 426, Art. 3, sec.i, art.
37.o71(a)-(b), 1973 Tex. Gen. Laws 1122, 1125 (current version at TEX. CODE CRIM. PROC. ANN.
art. 37.071 (Vernon Supp. 1995)).
180 See, e.g., Jurek v. Texas, 428 U.S. 262, 271-72 & n.7, 276 (1976).
181 See Franklin v. Lynaugh, 487 U.S. 164, i85 (x988) (O'Connor, J., concurring in the judg-
ment). Justice O'Connor noted:
If, however, petitioner had introduced mitigating evidence about his background or charac-
ter or the circumstances of the crime that was not relevant to the special verdict questions,
or that had relevance to the defendant's moral culpability beyond the scope of the special
verdict questions, the jury instructions would have provided the jury with no vehicle for
expressing its "reasoned moral response" to that evidence.
Id.
182 492 U.S. 302 (1989).
183 See id. at 328.
184 See id. at 324.
185 See Steiker, supra note 32, at 15o.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 393 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
death.186 Both before and after this statutory change, the question
whether the special-issue scheme adequately satisfies the individualiza-
tion requirement has generated enormous, and enormously compli-
cated, litigation in state and federal courts, including the U.S. Supreme
Court.
One central threshold question concerns which types of mitigating
evidence are "Penry problematic" so as to trigger a defendant's right
to an additional instruction beyond the special issues. After Penry, the
Texas state courts and the lower federal courts ruled that evidence of
abuse alone, as well as evidence of youth, could be adequately consid-
ered as mitigating under the old special issues.187 Defendants, on the
other hand, maintained that, although such mitigating evidence argua-
bly bears on future dangerousness (because a defendant might mature
with age or become less abusive when he is no longer subject to abuse
himself), the special issues did not permit consideration of such evi-
dence in its most significant and fundamental aspect - its lessening of
a defendant's culpability for the crime already committed. Hence, de-
fendants argued, the special-issue scheme precluded a jury from giving
a life sentence to an admittedly dangerous offender who nonetheless
was less deserving of death because of impaired judgment, immaturity,
186 Act of June i6, iggi, ch. 838, sec. i, art. 37.07i(e), 1991 Tex. Gen. Laws, 2898, 2899 (codi-
fied at TEX. CODE CraM. PROC. ANN. art. 37.07i(e) (Vernon Supp. 1995)) mandated the following
additional special issue that focuses on mitigating evidence:
Whether, taking into consideration all of the evidence, including the circumstances of the
offense, the defendant's character and background, and the personal moral culpability of
the defendant, there is a sufficient mitigating circumstance or circumstances to warrant
that a sentence of life imprisonment rather than a death sentence be imposed.
Oregon had already revised its statute, adding as its fourth question: "Whether a sentence of
death be imposed." Act of July 24, 1989, ch. 790, sec. 135b, ยง 163.x5o()(b)(D), 1989 Or. Laws
1301, 1327 (current version at OR.R Ev. STAT. ยง 163.15o(i)(b)(D) (1993)).
187 For representative decisions in the Texas courts, see Kemp v. State, 846 S.W.2d 289, 310
(Tex. Crim. App. 1992) (refusing to extend Penry to encompass mitigating evidence relating solely
to a defendant's youth), cert denied, 113 S.C t. 2361 (1993); Nobles v. State, 843 S.W.2d 503, 5o6
(Tex. Crim. App. 1992) (holding that defendant's childhood abuse could be adequately addressed
within the Texas special issues and therefore did not merit a special jury charge as in Penry); and
Cantu v. State, 842 S.W.2d 667, 693 (Tex. Crim. App. 1992) (holding that a twenty-year-old de-
fendant was not entitled to a Penry instruction based upon youth as a mitigating factor), cert.
denied, 113 S. Ct. 3o46 (i993). For federal decisions, see Drew v. Collins, 964 F.2d 411, 420-21
( 5 th Cir. 1992) (rejecting a Penry claim based upon defendant's youth and troubled childhood),
cert. denied, 113 S.C t. 3044 (i993); Bridge v. Collins, 963 F.2d 767, 770 (sth Cir. 1992) (holding
that because the defendant's youth could be taken into account under the question of "future
dangerousness" in Texas's capital punishment scheme, the defendant was not entitled to a special
Penry instruction), cert. denied, 113 S.C t. 3044 (I993); White v. Collins, 959 F.2d 1319, 1324 (5th
Cir.) (holding that Texas's first and second statutory punishment issues offered "a constitutionally
adequate vehicle by which the jury could give mitigating effect to [a defendant's] age'), cert.
denied, 503 U.S. 1001 (1992); and Barnard v. Collins, 958 F.2d 634, 639 (sth Cir. 1992) (stating
that a defendant must show that his difficult childhood experiences had a psychological effect
upon him before they could be invoked in support of Penry relief), cert. denied, xI3S . Ct. 99o
(1993).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 394 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
or inability to control behavior because of previous experiences as a
victim of abuse.
The Supreme Court subsequently addressed the adequacy of the
special issues with respect to youth in two separate decisions. 88 In
the first case, the Court ultimately refrained from deciding the ques-
tion because the petitioner sought relief on federal habeas corpus. 89
Applying its newly developed non-retroactivity doctrine,190 the Court
determined that its prior decisions had not decisively established the
inadequacy of the Texas scheme with respect to evidence, such as
youth, that could be given some mitigating weight under the old spe-
cial issues.191 In the second case, taken on direct review of a defend-
ant's conviction from the highest state criminal court, the Court
rejected the Penry claim on the merits, finding "no reasonable likeli-
hood that the jury would have found itself foreclosed from considering
the relevant aspects of petitioner's youth."192
That the Supreme Court reviewed the Texas special-issue scheme
on four separate occasions193 in five years itself generates the percep-
tion that the Court is micromanaging states' death penalty schemes
and imposing complicated requirements in capital cases. This percep-
tion, though, is unjustified. As the Texas experience illustrates, states
can fully satisfy the individualization requirement by simply returning
to the uncircumscribed consideration of mitigating evidence that char-
acterized virtually all pre-Furman sentencing schemes. Moreover, the
"bottom line" of the four decisions is that the former Texas scheme,
even though it substantially limited sentencer consideration of certain
kinds of evidence, is constitutional as applied to the vast number of
Texas defendants who did not have evidence of mental retardation.
Thus, the Court seems to have concluded that states may, but need
not, channel sentencer consideration of mitigating evidence.
This doctrinal conclusion should look familiar. Just as states need
not channel sentencer consideration of aggravating evidence (and need
only narrow the class of the death-eligible), states may return (and,
indeed, are encouraged to return) to unstructured consideration of
mitigating evidence. The limited intrusion into state practices that
Penry represents occurred only because Jurek, the 1976 decision con-
cerning the Texas statute, did not clearly specify the consequences of
the newly emerging individualization requirement for the special-issue
scheme. Had Jurek indicated that an additional special issue would be
188 See Johnson v. Texas, 113 S. CL 2658 (i993); Graham v. Collins, 113 S. Ct. 892 (i993).
189 See Graham, 113 S. Ct. at 9o3.
190 See Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288, 3o (1989) (narrowing the applicability of "new" law on
federal habeas).
191 See Graham, 113 S. CL at 902-03.
192 Johnson, 113 S. Ct. at 2669.
193 See Johnson v. Texas, i3 S. Ct. 2658 (1993); Graham v. Collins, 113 S. Ct. 892 (1993);
Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302 (1989); Franklin v. Lynaugh, 487 U.S. 164 (1988).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 395 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
essential in some circumstances, or had Texas responded more quickly
to the expansion of the individualization requirement in Lockett and
other early cases, an overwhelming number of Texas convictions
would have been unaffected by the Penry decision.
Even as it stands, very few inmates have prevailed on Penry
grounds.'94 Nonetheless, the litigation of Penry issues, including ques-
tions of procedural default,95 retroactivity, 96 interaction between
Penry and Sixth Amendment ineffectiveness of counsel claims, 97 and
the necessity of introducing mitigating evidence to preserve Penry
challenges,198 has generated a Penry sub-specialty in death penalty
law. It would be a mistake, though, to conflate the intricacy and fre-
quency of this litigation in the Texas and federal courts (which contin-
ues unabated to this day) with substantial regulation of state death
penalty schemes. Compliance with the individualization requirement
remains straightforward, and all of this backward-looking litigation is
merely the natural consequence of the Court's inability to communi-
cate the simple requirement clearly until decades after it entered the
constitutional fray.
194 The Fifth Circuit has granted relief under Penry in only one case. See Mayo v. Lynaugh,
893 F.2d 683, 684 (5th Cir. 19go), cert. denied, 502 U.S. 898 (xggi). For an illustrative collection
of cases in which the Fifth Circuit has rejected Penry claims, see Allridge v. Scott, 41 F.3d 213,
222-23 (5th Cir. 1994) (concluding that petitioner's evidence regarding parole ineligibility, mental
illness, and previous abuse could be adequately considered pursuant to the special issue scheme),
cert. denied, uS S. Ct. 1959 (1995); Jacobs v. Scott, 3 F.3d 1319, 1326-28 (5th Cir. x994) (hold-
ing that the special issues regarding deliberateness and future dangerousness permitted jurors to
give adequate mitigating effect to petitioner's non-triggerman status, his troubled childhood, and
his positive personality traits), cert. denied, ix5 S. Ct. 711 (x995); Lackey v. Scott, 28 F.3d 486,
488-90 (5th Cir. 1994) (rejecting petitioner's Penry claims based upon his intoxication at the time
of the offense, his drinking problem, his low intelligence, and his childhood abuse), cert. denied,
u5 S. Ct. 743 (i995); Madden v. Collins, i8 F.3d 304, 306-o8 (5th Cir. 1994) (rejecting a Penty
claim based upon petitioner's personality disorder, learning disability and troubled childhood be-
cause such information was not "constitutionally relevant mitigating evidence" (emphasis omit-
ted)), cert. denied, u5 S. Ct. 114 (1995); and Russell v. Collins, 998 F.2d 1287, 1291-93 (Sth Cir.
1993) (denying Penry relief in a case in which the sentencing jury heard evidence of petitioner's
troubled childhood and severe beating suffered as a teenager), cert. denied, H4 S. Ct. 1236 (1994).
195S ee, e.g., Selvage v. Lynaugh, 842 F.2d 89, 93-94 (sth Cir. 1988) (applying procedural de-
fault doctrine to an unpreserved Penry claim); Black v. State, 8x6 S.W.2d 350, 364 (Tex. Crim.
App. 299i) (dispensing with the procedural default bar to Penry claims), cert. denied, 5o4 U.S.
992 (1992).
196 See, e.g., Motley v. Collins, 18 F.3d 2223, 1234-35 (5th Cir.) (applying the nonretroactivity
bar to a Penry claim based on severe abuse), cert. denied, u5 S. Ct. 48 (1994).
197S ee, e.g., Marquez v. Collins, ix F.3d 1241, 1248 (Sth Cir.) (rejecting a claim that the statu-
tory scheme unconstitutionally interfered with counsel's decision whether to present mitigating
evidence at a capital trial), cert. denied, 115 S. Ct. 215 (i994).
198 See, e.g., id. at 1248 (rejecting a Penry claim based on failure to present evidence of retar-
dation at trial); Barnard v. Collins, 958 F.2d 634, 637, 639 (5th Cir. 1992) (rejecting a non-record
Penry claim), cert. denied, 113 S.C t. 990 (1993); May v. Collins, 904 F.2d 228, 232 (5th Cir. 199o)
(requiring introduction of mitigating evidence at trial to preserve a Penry claim), cert. denied, 498
U.S. Io55 (1991).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 396 1995-1996

I995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
D. Death is Different
One of the central themes of Gregg and its companion cases con-
cerned the need for "heightened reliability" in capital cases.199 Accord-
ing to the Court, the qualitative difference between death and all other
punishments justifies a corresponding difference in the procedures ap-
propriate to capital versus non-capital proceedings. The Court echoed
the "death is different" principle in a number of subsequent cases, but
close examination of the Court's decisions over the past twenty years
reveals that the procedural safeguards in death cases are not as differ-
ent as one might suspect. Although the Court has carved out a series
of protections applicable only to capital trials, it has done so in an
entirely ad hoc fashion and left untouched a substantial body of doc-
trine that relegates capital defendants to the same level of protection
as non-capital defendants.
The Court has invoked the notion of heightened reliability to per-
mit voir dire concerning racial prejudice in cases involving interracial
murders;200 to invalidate a death sentence based in part on a pre-sen-
tence report that was not made available to defense counsel;201 to pre-
vent prosecutors from deliberately misleading jurors about the
consequences of their decision by misstating the scope of appellate re-
view;202 to require the inclusion of a lesser-included offense instruction
in cases in which the evidence would support a guilty verdict for a
non-capital offense;203 and to permit the defendant to inform the jury
of the real consequences of a "life" sentence when the state argues that
the defendant would be dangerous in the future and "life" means life
without possibility of parole as a matter of state law.204 The Court
also has invoked the "death is different" doctrine in post-trial proceed-
ings to overturn a sentence based on a prior conviction that was later
invalidated,205 and to suggest that some post-trial judicial considera-
tion of newly-discovered evidence of innocence may be mandated
when the inmate makes a "truly persuasive" showing of actual (as op-
posed to legal)
innocence.206
The decisions described above, taken together with the cases elabo-
rating the requirement of individualized sentencing,207 represent the
sum total of the Court's applications of its death-is-different doctrine.
It should be apparent from the brief summary of these decisions that
199 See supra pp. 370-71.
200 See Ibrner v. Murray, 476 U.S. 28, 37 (1986).
201 See Gardner v. Florida, 430 U.S. 349, 357-62 (1977).
202 See Caldwell v. Mississippi, 472 U.S. 320, 328-30 (I985).
203 See Beck v. Alabama, 447 U.S. 625, 637-38 (i98o).
204 See Simmons v. South Carolina, 114 S. CL 2187, 2193-94 (i994).
205 See Johnson v. Mississippi, 486 U.S. 578, 584-87 (z988).
206 See Herrera v. Collins, 113 S. CL 853, 869 (1993).
207 See supra pp. 389-91.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 397 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol, 109:355
the doctrine does not reflect a systematic effort to regulate the death
penalty process so much as a series of responses to particular circum-
stances in which the Court deemed a state rule or practice manifestly
unreliable or unfair. Although certain themes unite some of the deci-
sions, such as "truth" in sentencing and the need for collateral proce-
dures in extraordinary cases, the Court has not explained precisely
how death is different from all other punishments other than to reas-
sert that death is final and severe. As a result, the Court appears to
invoke the death-is-different principle on a case-by-case basis without
a more general theory of the fundamental prerequisites to a fair and
principled death penalty scheme.
More important, that these decisions exhaustively account for the
Court's death-is-different doctrine reveals the extent to which the
death penalty is not in fact different. Although Justice Scalia describes
the most recent of the heightened reliability decisions as proof of the
increasing success of a "guerrilla war" waged by "[the heavily out-
numbered opponents of capital punishment,"208 it is worth noting the
numerous contexts in which capital defendants receive no special
safeguards.
As an initial matter, courts judge counsel in capital cases according
to the same standard applicable to all criminal cases: in order to
demonstrate ineffective assistance of counsel, a death penalty inmate
must show both that counsel's performance was "deficient" according
to prevailing standards and that the defendant suffered concrete "prej-
udice" as a result of the deficiency.209 In applying this standard, the
Court has emphasized the "highly deferential" posture that federal
courts must assume in evaluating attorneys' effectiveness in particular
210
cases.
Partly as a result of this deferential standard, representation in
capital trials remains notoriously poor, especially for indigent defend-
ants.21' Many states, including Texas, rely on court appointments
208 Simmons, 114 S. Ct. at 2205 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
209 See Strickland v. Washington, 466 U.S. 668, 686-87 (1984).
210 See id. at 689.
211 See Emanuel Margolis, Habeas Corpus: The No-Longer Great Writ, 98 DICK. L. REV. 557,
602- 09 (1994) (citing inadequate, inexperienced trial counsel in death penalty cases as the main
reason for the large number of federal habeas corpus petitions that are filed each year); Ira P.
Robbins, Toward a More Just and Effective System of Review in State Death Penalty Cases, 40
AM. U. L. REv. i, r4-27 (iggo) (reporting the American Bar Association's recommendations for
improved death penalty litigation based upon a finding that current trial representation is inade-
quate); Ronald J. Tabak & .. Mark Lane, Judicial Activism and Legislative "Reform" of Federal
Habeas Corpus: A Critical Analysis of Recent Developments and Current Proposals, 55 ALB. L.
REV. 1, 29-35 (iggi) (discussing several factors that contribute to poor representation in capital
trials, including statutory ceilings on the fees awarded to capital trial attorneys, limited state fund-
ing available for expert witnesses and investigators, and the appointment of counsel who are
unable to handle complicated death penalty cases); Note, The Eighth Amendment and Ineffective
Assistance of Counsel in Capital Trials, 107 HARv. L. REv. 2923, 1924-25 (1994) (criticizing the
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 398 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
rather than a specialized defense organization to provide representa-
tion to indigent defendants. Attorneys appointed under such schemes
are frequently underfunded, inexperienced, unsympathetic to their cli-
ents, and thoroughly incapable of mounting an effective defense during
either the guilt or punishment phases of the capital trial.212 Adhering
to the Supreme Court's admonition that "the purpose of the effective
assistance guarantee of the Sixth Amendment is not to improve the
quality of legal representation,"213 state courts and lower federal courts
have shown extraordinary reluctance to grant relief on the basis of
ineffective counsel, even in compelling
cases.214
One obvious consequence of the Court's undemanding standard for
capital representation is the perpetuation of the "caste" system that
Justice Douglas criticized in Furman. 2 1.5 Moreover, when courts toler-
ate such an extraordinarily "wide range" of representation in capital
cases, resulting sentencing decisions are more likely to reflect a diver-
gence in representation than a divergence in the circumstances of the
offense and offender.216 Thus, the Court's decision not to impose spe-
cial representational requirements in the capital context undermines
considerably the aspiration of "heightened reliability" espoused else-
where in the Court's capital jurisprudence.
Capital defendants also lack any distinctive protections in the
availability of postconviction proceedings.217 Under the Court's cur-
rent doctrine, states need not provide any postconviction proceedings
in criminal cases, including capital cases.218 In addition, the Court has
recognized that this "greater" power to deny any mechanism for post-
conviction relief permits a state to exercise the "lesser" power of deny-
ing counsel to indigent inmates should the state choose to establish
collateral proceedings.219 Capital defendants likewise fare no better
quality of representation provided to death penalty defendants and explaining that the problem is
particularly acute in the Southern states, which are often referred to as the "death belt").
212 See Bright, supra note 9, at 1845-47.
213 Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689.
214 Bright's article documents numerous cases in which the adversary process broke down,
including cases in which defense counsel referred to their clients by racial slurs, slept through
trial, were intoxicated at trial, or filed appeal briefs that contained less than five pages of argu-
ment. See Bright, supra note 9,a t 1843 & nn.s5-55.
215 See supra pp. 367-68.
216 See, e.g., Marcia Coyle, Fred Strasser & Marianne Lavelle, Fatal Defense: Trial and Error
in the Nation's Death Belt, NAT'L L.J., June xi, 199o, at 30 (concluding that results in capital
trials in six Southern states are "more like the random flip of a coin than a delicate balancing of
the scales"); see also Bright, supra note 9,a t x841-42 & nn.47-48 (citing studies of representation
in capital cases).
217 The sole exception appears to be the Court's apparent recognition of "actual innocence"
claims in which a capital defendant makes a "truly persuasive" showing that he is actually inno-
cent of the underlying offense. Herrera v. Collins, 113 S. Ct 853, 869 (i993).
218 See Murray v. Giarratano, 492 U.S. i, 13 (1989) (O'Connor, J., concurring); Pennsylvania v.
Finley, 481 U.S. 551, 556-57 (1987).
219 See Murray, 492 U.S. at 13 (O'Connor, J.,c oncurring); Finley, 481 U.S. at 555.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 399 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
than other defendants in federal habeas proceedings. Over the past
fifteen years, the Court has imposed substantial barriers to all habeas
petitioners, erecting virtually insurmountable bars to claims defaulted
in state court,220 same-claim221 and new-claim successive petitions, 222
and claims seeking the benefit of "new" law.223 These bars apply
equally to death-sentenced inmates, with the result that an increasing
number of these inmates' constitutional claims are rejected on proce-
dural grounds. Given that constitutional rights are no more effective
than the means of their enforcement, the Court's "equal" treatment of
capital and non-capital defendants in postconviction proceedings has
the effect of diluting whatever "heightened reliability" is sought by
other death-penalty doctrines'
Perhaps the most promising gauge of "heightened reliability" in
capital sentencing can be found in the actual sentencing patterns of
the various states that provide for capital punishment. Although eval-
uating the fairness and reliability of state schemes is concededly diffi-
cult even using the most sophisticated multivariate techniques, several
researchers have sought to examine the role of race in post-Furman
sentencing practices. The leading study in this area, conducted by the
Baldus group, concluded that continued sentencing disparities in Geor-
gia in the post-Furman period are likely attributable to racial discrimi-
nation.224 Similar studies have uncovered race-based sentencing
disparities in Florida, Illinois, and Georgia.225
Several capital inmates, relying on these studies, invoked the
"death-is-different" principle, in addition to the Equal Protection
Clause, as a basis for overturning their sentences. 226 According to
standard equal protection doctrine, an individual claiming harm as a
result of state-sponsored race discrimination ordinarily must prove "in-
tentional" discrimination.227 Confronted with a constitutional chal-
lenge based on the Baldus study in McCleskey v. Kemp,228 the Court
disposed of the equal protection claim on the ground that the peti-
220 See Coleman v. Thompson, ii S. Ct. 2546, 2565 (iggi); Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U.S. 72,
86-go (1977).
221 See Kuhlmann v. Wilson, 477 U.S. 436, 452-54 (1986) (plurality opinion).
222 See McCleskey v. Zant, iii S. Ct. 1454, 1470 ('99').
223 See Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288, 309-10 (x989) (plurality opinion).
224 See BALDUS, WoODwoRTH & PULASKI, supra note 8, at 185.
225 See, e.g., GRoss & MAURO, supra note 4, at 69 (finding that "the killing of a white victim
increased the odds of a death sentence by an estimated factor of 4 in Illinois, about 5 in Florida,
and about 7 in Georgia").
226 See, e.g., McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 299 (1987); Wainwright v. Adams, 466 U.S.
964, 964-66 (984) (Marshall, J., dissenting) (objecting to the lifting of the stay of execution of an
inmate challenging race discrimination in sentencing).
227 See Village of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Hous. Dev. Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 265
(I977); Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 239 (1976).
228 481 U.S. 279 (1987).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 400 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
tioner failed to demonstrate that the jury in his case had intentionally
discriminated against him on the basis of race.229
In rejecting the Eighth Amendment death-is-different challenge to
the sentencing disparities, the Court seemed to disavow any authority
to recognize one rule in the death penalty context and another for all
other punishments. According to the Court, taking McCleskey's claim
"to its logical conclusion [would] throw[] into serious question the
principles that underlie our entire criminal justice system." 30 Given
that "[t]he Eighth Amendment is not limited in application to capital
punishment, but applies to all penalties," the Court worried that "if [it]
accepted McCleskey's claim that racial bias has impermissibly tainted
the capital sentencing decision, [it] could soon be faced with similar
claims as to other types of penalty."231
The Court's answer to McCleskey's challenge, in perhaps the most
provocative test of the reach of its death-is-different principle, was
thus to deny that the Eighth Amendment permits a distinctive set of
rules in the capital context.232 In this respect, McCleskey confirms
that the Court's death-is-different doctrine does not authorize any far-
reaching challenges to states' ability to administer the death penalty.
In evaluating potential attacks on the death penalty, the Court simply
will not construe the Constitution to place "totally unrealistic condi-
tions on its use,"233 notwithstanding the Court's expressed commitment
to "heightened reliability" in capital proceedings.
In sum, despite Justice Scalia's protestations that the Court has
embarked on an elaborate scheme of death-penalty regulation - what
he termed in one opinion a "Federal Rules of Death Penalty Evi-
dence"234 - the Court's death-is-different doctrine is nothing more
than a modest, ad hoc series of limitations on particular state prac-
tices. As with the Court's other death penalty doctrines, the seemingly
intricate and demanding constraints appear quite marginal upon closer
inspection.
229 See id. at 297 ("[We hold that the Baldus study is clearly insufficient to support an infer-
ence that any of the decisionmakers in McCleskey's case acted with discriminatory purpose.").
230 Id. at 314-15. The court noted that there were already studies "allegedly" demonstrating
racial disparities in sentencing. See id. at 315 n.38.
231 Id.
232 The Court emphasized the "sameness" of the death penalty in its concluding paragraphs:
"The Constitution does not require that a State eliminate any demonstrable disparity that corre-
lates with a potentially irrelevant factor in order to operate a criminal justice system that includes
capital punishment." Id. at 319 (emphasis added).
233 Id. (quoting Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, i99 n.5o (1976) (plurality opinion)) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
234 Simmons v. South Carolina, 114 S. Ct. 2287, 2205 (994) (Scalia, J., dissenting).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 401 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
It is quite understandable that advocates of capital punishment, as
well as institutional actors charged with implementing state capital
schemes, would look at the past twenty-five years of federal constitu-
tional regulation and see an obstructionist Court imposing a confusing
morass of hyper-technical rules. Judged by the volume of cases the
Court has heard, the intricacy of the Court's resulting opinions, and
the malleability of the emerging doctrines, the Court has assumed a
prominent and seemingly powerful role in regulating the death pen-
alty. As in other areas of extensive public law litigation, the Court
appears also to have institutionalized a role for highly specialized law-
yers who, in this context, regard a conviction and sentence of death as
merely the beginning of an intensive and time-consuming process of
state and federal appeals.
Despite this perception, contemporary death penalty law is remark-
ably undemanding. The narrowing, channeling, and individualization
requirements can be simultaneously and completely satisfied by a stat-
ute that defines capital murder as any murder accompanied by some
additional, objective factor or factors and that provides for a sentenc-
ing proceeding in which the sentencer is asked simply whether the de-
fendant should live or die. No longer can death be imposed for the
crime of rape, but beyond that, the state can seek the death penalty
against virtually any murderer. As for the requirement of heightened
reliability, it surfaces unpredictably at the margins of state capital
schemes. Ironically, in the post-Furman regime, the doctrine of height-
ened reliability, rather than the death penalty itself, seems to strike
like lightning, randomly and with little effect.
The resemblance of this hypothetical scheme to the pre-Furman re-
gime is striking in itself, but all the more striking because of the wide-
spread perception that death penalty law is extremely demanding.
Our fundamental claim is that virtually all of the complexity of death
penalty law over the past twenty years stems from a failure in transla-
tion rather than an insistence on fulfilling the ambitious goals of
Furman and the 1976 decisions. This communication gap, in which
the Court rarely identified in clear and unanimous terms the minimal
obligations of states in the post-Furman era, and in which states failed
to respond quickly (or in some cases at all) to obvious, correctable de-
fects in their statutes in light of those minimal obligations, has left us
with the worst of all possible regulatory worlds. The resulting com-
plexity conveys the impression that the current system errs, if at all,
on the side of heightened reliability and fairness. And the fact of min-
imal regulation, which invites if not guarantees the same kinds of in-
equality as the pre-Furman regime, is filtered through time-consuming,
expensive proceedings that ultimately do little to satisfy the concerns
that led the Court to take a sober second look at this country's death
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 402 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
penalty practices in the first place. In short, the last twenty years
have produced a complicated regulatory apparatus that achieves ex-
tremely modest goals with a maximum amount of political and legal
discomfort.
IV. FATED FAILURE?
Our elaboration and evaluation of the Supreme Court's constitu-
tional regulation of capital punishment reveals that the Court's inter-
vention has been a stunning failure on the Court's own terms. This
failure leads us to ask why, despite two decades of multiple, yearly
pronouncements on capital punishment, the Court has made so little
progress toward achieving its purported goals. We explore two general
answers to this question, both of which are at once familiar and pow-
erful. One answer has to do with the limits of the Court as an institu-
tion. A great deal of thought has been given in the post-Warren Court
era to the question whether courts in general, federal courts in particu-
lar, and the Supreme Court most particularly can effect large-scale in-
stitutional change without the assistance - and despite the resistance
- of legislative majorities.23 5 Does the now-familiar story of judicial
impotence, told most often in the context of latter-day assessments of
Brown v. Board of Education236 and Roe v. Wade,237 explain the
Court's failure to make good on its commitments in the area of capital
punishment? The second answer has to do with the limits of the legal
process, with its focus on fact-finding and the application of legal
norms to "found" facts, when it is brought to bear on the capital sen-
tencing decision. Does the irreducibly moral (as opposed to factual or
legal) nature of the capital sentencing decision prevent its rationaliza-
tion through the refinement of legal procedures?
Although we recognize the power of these two ways of answering
our question, we find each answer incomplete and ultimately uncon-
"vincing as an account of the path of death penalty law. Most impor-
tant, we find both answers far too deterministic, too resistant to the
idea that things might have developed along any radically different
path. Although we remain profoundly agnostic on the issue whether
other approaches to rationalizing capital punishment in America
235 Compare GERALD N. ROSENBERG, THE HOLLOW HOPE: CAN COURTS BRING ABOUT SO-
CIAL CHANGE? 336-43 (i99I) (arguing that the Supreme Court is much less able to effect social
change than is conventionally believed) and Bruce Ackerman, Constitutional Politics/Constitu-
tional Law, 99 YALE L.J. 453, 546-47 (1989) (comparing the Justices of the Supreme Court to
brakemen sitting in the caboose of a train, able to make it stop but not to make it go) with LEE
EPSTEIN & JOSEPH F. KOBYLKA, THE SUPREME COURT AND LEGAL CHANGE: ABORTION AND
THE DEATH PENALTY, 299-312 (1992) (arguing that the Court is an important source of social
change) and Owen M. Fiss, The Supreme Court, z978 Term - Foreword: The Forms of Justice,
93 HARV. L. REv. 1, 5-17 (r979) (same).
236 347 U.S. 483 (1954).
237 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 403 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
would actually work, we are convinced that despite the limits of the
Court and the legal process, the law might have developed - been
developed by the Court - along very different lines.
What most distinguishes Furman from Brown and Roe is the fact
that capital punishment is regulated entirely by legal procedures in the
courtroom, while education and abortion services necessarily implicate
the participation of extra-legal institutions. On the one hand, this dif-
ference underscores the Supreme Court's relative freedom to transform
the nature of capital punishment in America; the constraints on the
Court that scholars have observed in the Brown and Roe contexts do
not map well onto the distinctive terrain of the death penalty. On the
other hand, however, the court-centered nature of capital punishment
regulation may also operate to limit the possibilities for doctrinal
change: the Supreme Court may be more reluctant either to admit de-
feat or to change radically the direction of its Eighth Amendment ju-
risprudence because to do so would be to acknowledge a failure that
could only be its own. That is, the Court may find the issue of the
fair administration of the justice system to be peculiarly within its bai-
liwick and thus necessarily amenable to reform from above. As a re-
sult, the Court may doggedly pursue a reformist agenda even in the
face of compelling evidence of failure. Consequently, other actors
within the justice system (such as jurors and lower court judges) and
the public at large may be lulled into complacency about the fairness
of "the system" of capital
punishment.238
A. The Limits of the Court
r. Furman as Brown. - When Abram Chayes named and de-
scribed the phenomenon of "public law litigation" in his oft-cited arti-
cle,239 he did so with an enthusiasm and a hope that has now become
fashionable to eschew. A cottage industry has developed questioning
the capacity of judges (and of the Justices of the Supreme Court in
particular) to effect social change in the absence of the kind of wide-
spread popular (and therefore legislative) support that would render
judicial intervention almost superfluous.240 Judges, according to this
recent account,241 lack the time, the resources, the foresight, and the
coercive power to implement successfully institutional change. The
238 We explore these ideas further below in Part VI, Final Reflections.
239 See Abram Chayes, The Role of the Judge in Public Law Litigation, 89 HARV. L. REV.
1281, 1284-1304 (1976).
240 See, e.g., ROSENBERG, supra note 235 (addressing the inability of the Supreme Court to
implement politically unpopular judgments).
241 Of course, the recent account is partly a pendulum swing - versions of the same story
have been told before. See, e.g., ALEXANDER M. BICKEL, THE LEAST DANGEROUS BRANCH: THE
SUPREME COURT AT THE BAR OF POLITICS 239 (1962) (arguing that the Supreme Court "must
pronounce only those principles which can gain 'widespread acceptance'"); ROBERT G. MCCLOS-
KEY, THE AMERICAN SUPREME COURT 220-31 (I960) (concluding that despite the noise generated
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 404 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
very nature of public law litigation described by Chayes - its wide-
spread effects, its forward-looking nature, and its requirement of con-
tinuing supervision by courts - render courts largely ineffectual in
achieving the ends of such litigation.
Ironically, Brown v. Board of Education - to many, the very icon
of successful judicial activism - is now cited as the paradigmatic ex-
ample of judicial impotence. Cass Sunstein has called Brown "the
most conspicuous confirmation of the point" that "judicial decisions
are of limited efficacy in bringing about social change."242 One recent
symposium has been devoted in large part to exploring Michael Klar-
man's thesis discounting "the relative contribution to racial change of
Brown as compared with the plethora of social, political, economic,
and other forces" tending in the same direction.243 And Gerald Rosen-
berg's recent book, The Hollow Hope: Can Courts Bring About Social
Change?244 develops its largely negative answer to the title question by
using Brown as its primary example.245
The evidence offered by these various commentators regarding the
failure of Brown runs along three main lines. First, they all describe
the war of attrition that the South cohesively waged against Brown's
implementation. Mark Tushnet has aptly termed the various forms of
battle in this war as "passive," "massive," and "violent" resistance,246
using Alabama, Virginia, and Little Rock, Arkansas, as respective ex-
amples.247 The South's opposition was not only cohesive, but also
long-lasting and fairly successful. Litigation regarding the nature of
the remedy for segregation and its implementation went on for years,
and indeed, still goes on today. Moreover, in the ten years immedi-
ately following the Supreme Court's pronouncement in Brown, "virtu-
ally nothing happened":248 as of 1964, only about two percent of black
children in the South attended desegregated schools.249 Second, the
commentators note that significant racial change did not occur until
the federal legislature and executive branch became involved in the
by certain decisions, the Court has never been either too far ahead of or too far behind American
popular sentiment).
242 Cass R. Sunstein, Three Civil Rights Fallacies, 79 CAL. L. REV. 751, 765 (1991).
243 Michael J.K larman, Brown v. Board of Education, Facts and Political Correctness, 8o VA.
L. REv. r85, 185 (1994) (replying to symposium commentators on his main article, Brown, Racial
Change, and the Civil Rights Movement, 8o VA. L. REV. 7 (1994)); see also Symposium, Brown v.
Board of Education and Its Legacy: A Tribute to Justice Thurgood Marshall, 61 FORDHAM L.
REv. i (1992) (offering a tribute to Brown's foremost champion, but revealing a strong strand of
pessimism in the comments of many contributors).
244 See ROSENBERG, supra note 235.
245 See id. at 52.
246 Mark ushnet, Public Law Litigation and the Ambiguities of Brown, 61 FoRDHAM L. REV.
23, 23 (1992).
247 See id. at 23-24.
248 ROSENBERG, supra note 235, at 52 (emphasis omitted).
249 See Sunstein, supra note 242, at 765.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 405 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
Civil Rights Movement in the i96os, years after the Supreme Court
initially jumped in.250 Finally, and most controversially, Brown's de-
tractors question Brown's influence, either direct or indirect, on the
all-important legislative and executive engagement with the Civil
Rights Movement.
25'
In light of this account of Brown, the failure of the Supreme Court
to achieve the goals that it set out for itself in Furman and Gregg
seems explainable in similar terms. As with school desegregation, the
Court attempted in the capital punishment context to impose a consti-
tutional mandate on a reluctant and cohesive South.252 One could ar-
gue that the Court's attempt to dismantle segregation was more
intrusive (and thus more fated to fail) than its rejection of the death
penalty in that segregation was a pervasive and deeply rooted social
practice as compared to merely an alternative penal sanction that was
used only rarely even in its heyday. This argument, however, ignores
the popularity of the death penalty, the genuine outrage that was
voiced at its purported abolition by the Court, and its significance as a
symbol of social hatred of and power over violent crime.
As in the desegregation context, the South mounted a highly effec-
tive effort to lessen the impact of the Court's functional abolition of
capital punishment in 1972. Some of the most vocal and indignant
opposition to Furman came from Southern politicians and law enforce-
ment officers.253 Immediately following Furman, Southern legislatures
led the charge to redraft their capital punishment schemes in an effort
to preserve as much of their authority to impose capital punishment as
they could;2 5 4 it is not accidental that the five new state schemes re-
viewed by the Court four years later were from Georgia, Florida,
Texas, North Carolina, and Louisiana.255 Indeed, by the time of
Furman, the South's experience with desegregation litigation had
250 See GEOFFREY R. STONE, LouIs M. SEIDMAN, CASS R. SUNSTEIN & MARK V. TUSHNET,
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW 510- 1i (2d ed. I991); see also ROSENBERG, supra note 235, at 52 (noting
that after 1964 desegregation "took off," reaching 91.3% by 1972). Even celebrants of Brown as a
watershed are quick to note the significance of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. See Constance B.
Motley, The Historical Setting of Brown and Its Impact on the Supreme Court's Decision, 61
FoRDHAM L. REV. 9, 17 (1992) ("With congressional enactment of the Civil Rights Act of x964,
legal segregation in America died.") (footnote omitted).
251 See, e.g., ROSENBERG, supra note 235, at 155-56 (asserting that Brown may have actually
delayed the achievement of civil rights).
252 It is fair to say that the South formed a sort of "death belt" geographically: between 1935
and 1969, more executions took place in the South than in the rest of the country combined. See
FRANKLIN E. ZIMRING & GORDON HAWKiNS, CAITAL PUNISHMENT AND THE AMERICAN
AGENDA 30 (1986).
253 See MELTSNER, supra note 15, at 290 (offering pungent quotes from Georgia's Lieutenant
Governor Lester Maddox, Alabama's Lieutenant Governor Jere Beasley, Atlanta Police Chief
John Inman, and Memphis Police Chief Bill Price).
254 See id. at 3o6-07 (describing numerous efforts by states to bring back the death penalty,
including a special session of the Florida legislature).
255 See supra notes 2-3.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 406 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
demonstrated that intransigence would work: in 1972, the Supreme
Court was still deeply mired in post-Brown litigation.256
Most significant, the central lesson of Brown was that the Court's
attempts to impose institutional reform under the Constitution re-
quired substantial legislative and executive commitment to succeed. It
was exactly this commitment that was clearly lacking in the context of
capital punishment. No majority has ever been galvanized in the
United States against capital punishment, and politicians of all stripes
have embraced the death penalty as a matter of sheer political neces-
sity.257 Moreover, the possibility that the Court as a moral force might
prod the more popular branches of government toward engagement
was notably less likely in the capital punishment context than it was
in the desegregation context: the Furman Court was badly splintered,
in terms of both votes and rationales; it did not speak with the same
clear tone of moral authority sounded in the unanimous Brown
opinion.
Thus, the account of Brown as an example of judicial impotence
has some powerful force in explaining the Court's failure to achieve its
goals in the capital punishment context. The most powerful and least
controversial part of that account - the need for substantial engage-
ment by the more popular branches of government in order to achieve
institutional transformation - has particular applicability to the capi-
tal punishment context.
Nonetheless, despite its acknowledged force, this account is not
wholly satisfactory in explaining the failure of the Court's capital pun-
ishment jurisprudence. Unlike the desegregation context and many
other settings of institutional reform, in the context of capital punish-
ment, the "institution" subject to reform was the legal process itself -
the criminal justice system. Despite the fact that the institution of
capital punishment includes legislative and law enforcement processes
as well as purely adjudicative processes, the administration of capital
punishment is much more court-centered than the education of chil-
dren, the provision of health care, or the management of environmen-
tal hazards, to name just a few classic examples of institutional reform
litigation. When the Supreme Court speaks to the reformation of the
legal process, it speaks with special experience and legitimacy. More-
over, the Supreme Court and federal courts in general have ongoing
opportunities for supervision and adjustment of their reform efforts
through direct and collateral review of criminal convictions. And un-
like the civil context, criminal defendants are provided with free coun-
2S6 See Keyes v. School Dist. No. 1,4 13 U.S. 189, 191 (i973); Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Bd. of Educ., 402 U.S. 1, 5 (1971).
257 See, e.g., Jordan Steiker, Judging the Executioners: Progressive Politicians and the Death
Penalty, 2 RmcONSTRUCTION 112, 112 (993) (discussing the pro-death penalty stance of "progres-
sive" politicians, such as former Democratic Governor Ann Richards, in death penalty states).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 407 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
sel (at least through their first appeal as of right)2 8 and with strong
incentives, especially in capital cases, to raise all possible challenges to
the status quo.
Indeed, the possibilities for transformation of the judicial process
are best illustrated by the Warren Court's "revolution" in criminal pro-
cedure in spite of strong popular opposition. Despite the frequency
with which "Impeach Earl Warren" stickers appeared, and despite
such legislative moves as the congressional "repeal" of the 1966 Mi-
randa decision,23 9 in one short decade the Supreme Court transformed
the administration of criminal justice by incorporating the right to
counsel260 and the exclusionary rule,261 and by creating new limits on
police interrogations262 and pretrial identification procedures.263 Fur-
thermore, despite widespread opposition both on and off the Court,
much of the work of the Warren Court in criminal procedure remains
entrenched today.264 Because the Warren Court's criminal procedure
revolution is the best counter-example to the judicial impotence ac-
count of Brown, we do not find that account entirely convincing when
applied to the context of capital punishment.
2. Furman as Roe. - Another strand of the judicial impotence
argument is a more subtle variant of the crude adage that "the
Supreme Court follows the election returns."263 The more subtle ac-
count maintains that the Supreme Court must restrain itself from "get-
ting out ahead" of popular majorities and attempting to lead them to
new modes of social organization under the Constitution. This strand
of the judicial impotence argument emphasizes not the inability of the
Court to implement social change (as in the Brown context), but the
undesirability for the Court and the country of such top-down imple-
mentation, even if it were feasible.
Such leadership is undesirable for the Court, the argument goes,
because the Court would rapidly lose its legitimacy should it too fre-
quently attempt such action. Stanley Ingber has evocatively described
what he calls the Court's "legitimacy account," into which deposits are
made when the Court decides cases "consistent with popularly em-
braced values," and from which withdrawals are made when the
258 See Evitts v Lucey, 469 U.S. 387, 391-4oo (i985).
259 See Crime Control Act of I968, 18 U.S.C. ยง 35o(b) (1994) (purporting to repeal Miranda v.
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966)).
260 See Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 344 (1963).
261 See Mapp v. Ohio, 367 U.S. 643, 655-56 (i96i).
262 See Miranda, 384 U.S. at 473-74; Massiah v. United States, 377 U.S. 201, 2o6 (1964).
263 See Stovall v. Denno, 388 U.S. 293, 298-99 (1967). Congress also attempted to "repeal"
Stovall in the Crime Control Act of r968. See 18 U.S.C. ยง 3502 (994).
264 For example, despite the extreme unpopularity of the exclusionary rule, manifest in recent
congressional attempts to "repeal" it, see Jackie Frank, House Votes to Ease Rules of Crime Evi-
dence, REUTERS, Feb. 8, 1995, available in LEXIS, Nexis Library, Reuters File, the rule contin-
ues to be enforced in judicial proceedings.
26S FINLEY P. DuNNE, MR.D OOLEY AT His BEST 77 (Elmer Ellis ed., 1938).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 408 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
Court attempts "to educate and direct society rather than conform to
and follow it."266 If the Court should overdraw its account, it would
"lose its legitimacy and become ineffectual. 267 On this view, judicial
leadership is undesirable for the country in that it tends to provoke
popular backlash and impede the dialogue and compromise that would
lead to more moderate efforts toward social change by the political
268
branches.
Roe is often offered as the paradigmatic example of this version of
the judicial impotence thesis. According to some critics of Roe, the
Court misjudged the extent to which its decision reflected popular
will. Mary Ann Glendon has argued that:
There is no evidence at all that "conventional moral culture" validates
the fundamental and radical message of Roe ... that no state regulation
of abortion in the interest of preserving unborn life is permissible in ap-
proximately the first six months of pregnancy, and that such regulation
in the last trimester is permissible only if it does not interfere with the
woman's physical and mental
well-being.269
The same critics of Roe argue that this failure not only forced the
Court to overdraw its account of legitimacy (in Ingber's terms), but
also cut off political dialogue and the possibility of more gradual com-
promise solutions to an intractable public debate.270 They attribute
the current divisive, even violent climate surrounding the debate over
abortion to the Court's absolutist, rights-based position.271
On these terms, Furman bears a strong resemblance to Roe. In-
deed, it is even more plausible to argue that the Court misread popu-
266 Stanley Ingber, The Interface of Myth and Practice in Law, 34 VAND. L. REV. 309, 339-40
(xg8i).
267 Id.
268 See, e.g., MICHAEL J. PERRY, MORALITY, POLITICS, AND LAW 177 (1988) (offering as one
"important reason why non-originalist constitutional adjudication must be moderate rather than
immoderate, molecular rather than molar" the likelihood that "constitutional dialogue between the
judiciary and the political community as a whole will proceed more productively if the judiciary
acts cautiously and incrementally rather than radically or imperially").
269 MARY ANN GLENDON, ABORTION AND DIVORCE IN WESTERN LAW 45 (1987) (quoting
Michael J. Perry, Abortion, the Public Morals, and the Police Power: The Ethical Function of
Substantive Due Process, 23 UCLA L. REV. 689, 733 (1976)) (emphasis in original).
270 See, e.g., id. at 45-50 (arguing that compromise abortion legislation would have been en-
acted in the absence of judicial intervention). But see LAURENCE H. TRIBE, ABORTION: THE
CLASH OF ABSOLUTES 49-51 (1992) (challenging Glendon's assertion that states would have liber-
alized their abortion laws in the absence of a Supreme Court decree). See generally GUIDO CALA-
BRESI, IDEALS, BELIEFS, ATTITUDES, AND THE LAW: PRIVATE LAW PERSPECTIVES ON A PUBLIC
LAW PROBLEM IO9-io (1985) (arguing for the importance of dialogue and compromise in the
abortion context); Robert A. Burt, ConstitutionalL aw and the Teaching of the Parables, 93 YALE
L.J. 455, 488 (1984) (emphasizing the importance of the "dialogic process" in the context of the
abortion-rights debate).
271 See, e.g., Gregory C. Sisk, Questioning Dialogue by Judicial Decree: A Different Theory of
ConstitutionalR eview and Moral Discourse, 46 RUTGERS L. REV. 1691, 1734 (1994) (noting that
rights discourse in constitutional litigation "does not foster a balanced and measured response to
conflict").
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 409 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
lar sentiment in Furman than in Roe. In 1972, the execution rate in
the United States had fallen to its lowest point since 1930, when the
Bureau of Justice Statistics first began to keep count; indeed, no one
had been executed since 1967.272 Public opinion, too, had recently hit
an all-time low regarding the death penalty: in 1966, for the first time
since Gallup began polling on the subject in 1936, more people op-
posed than favored the death penalty for murder.273 Justice White,
one of the five Justices in the Furman majority, could be excused for
asserting what most of them likely believed: that the death penalty
"ha[d] for all practical purposes run its course."274
It turned out, of course, that Justice White was way off the mark.
The dearth of executions in the years preceding Furman was more
likely a product of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund's "moratorium"
litigation strategy than it was an indication of popular attitudes about
capital punishment. In fact, at the time of Furman, there were over
6oo condemned inmates who had been sentenced to death during the
i96Os and who had simply piled up on death rows across the country
as a result of the LDF's moratorium strategy.275 Moreover, the 1966
Gallup poll turned out to be the only Gallup poll on the death penalty
question out of 21 such polls conducted between 1936 and x986 in
which more people opposed than supported the death penalty for mur-
der.276 Indeed, two Gallup polls conducted in 1972 (one before and
one after Furman) both indicated majority support for the death pen-
alty.277 Finally, the strongest evidence that the Court had misread
prevailing political winds is the immediate legislative reaction to
Furman: by 1976, 35 states and the federal government had redrafted
their capital punishment statutes in order to maintain their authority
to execute post-Furman.278 Thus, the judicial impotence theory of the
Roe variety would hold that the Supreme Court soon realized that its
commitments to rationalizing the death penalty expressed in Furman
and Gregg were simply too costly in terms of institutional legitimacy
and backed off in its attempts to make good on those commitments.
Under the same theory, the Court's sweeping edict in Furman,
which eliminated in one fell swoop almost every extant death penalty
272 See ZIMRING & HAWKINS, supra note 252, at 27.
273 The Gallup Poll conducted in 1966 revealed that 47% opposed and 42% favored the death
penalty for murder, while zI% were undecided. See Robert M. Bohm, American Death Penalty
Opinion, 1936-986: A Critical Examination of the Gallup Polls, in THE DEATH PENALTY IN
AMERICA: CURRENT RESEARCH 113, 116 (Robert M. Bohm ed., ggi).
274 Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 313 (1972) (White, J.,c oncurring).
275 See MELTSNER, supra note 15, at io6-25 (describing the moratorium and its effects). As a
result of the moratorium, the number of prisoners on death row skyrocketed to 607 by the end of
,970. See ZimRrNG & HAWKINS, supra note 252, at 34.
276 See Bohm, supra note 273, at r16.
277 See id. (finding So% "for" to 42% "against" pre-Furman and 57% to 32% post-Furman).
278 See PATERNOSTER, supra note 8, at 59.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 410 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
law in the United States, galvanized massive public outcry and polit-
ical opposition and thus rendered impossible public dialogue and more
moderate avenues of capital punishment reform through the politically
accountable branches of government. This theory gains some credence
from the fact that executive clemency was used with some regularity
prior to Furman, but declined considerably after the Court's ruling.279
This trend seems to support the strand of the judicial impotence thesis
that maintains that social change by judicial fiat stifles the impetus
toward shared responsibility for reform in other branches of
government.
Nonetheless, as with the Brown analogy, we believe that the Roe
analogy fails as a fully persuasive explanation of the Court's failure to
address the concerns it articulated in Furman. The idea that the
Court could not make good on its commitments in Furman and Gregg
because it feared the loss of its institutional legitimacy does not ex-
plain why the Court did not simply repudiate Furman as either hope-
lessly muddled in rationale or just plain wrong. Instead, the Court
went on purporting to adhere to Furman while re-creating, step-by-
step, the pre-Furman universe. Surely, the dissonance between what
the Court purported to be doing and what it was in fact doing created
a threat to the Court's "legitimacy" at least as great as did the unpop-
ular mandate of Furman
itself.280
Moreover, the idea that the Court's position in Furman blocked
more moderate paths of political reform seems much less plausible
than the same claim made about Roe. First, the Court's position in
Furman was never as absolute - as grounded in the notion of indi-
vidual "right" - as was its decision in Roe. From the start, the Court
never held that the death penalty in all cases, or even in many catego-
ries of cases,281 was per se unconstitutional; rather, it focused on the
process by which the penalty was imposed and called upon the states
to administer the punishment more fairly.282 Moreover, although it
279 See Hugo A. Bedau, The Decline of Executive Clemency in Capital Cases, 18 N.Y.U. REv.
L. & Soc. CHANGE 255, 263 (iggo-iggi) (compiling statistics from the United States Department
of Justice that demonstrate a sharp decline in the granting of death sentence commutations after
Furman and Gregg); Franklin E. Zimring, Inheriting the Wind: The Supreme Court and Capital
Punishment in the zgpos, 20 FLA. ST. U. L. REV. 7, 17 (1992) (noting that "(e]xecutive clemency
all but disappeared in the United States in the era of hands-on federal court involvement").
280 This loss of legitimacy is illustrated by the scathing scholarly criticism of the Court's death
penalty jurisprudence from all sides.
281 The Court exempted only rape from the ambit of the death penalty. See Coker v. Georgia,
433 U.S. 584, 592 (x977) (opinion of White, J.). One could construe the Court's remand order in
Eberheart v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 917 (i977), in which the defendant had been sentenced to death
for rape and kidnapping, as an exemption of kidnapping as well, but this interpretation, which
we endorse, has not yet been tested.
282 See Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 195 (1976) (opinion of Stewart, Powell & Stevens, JJ.)
(promising analysis of state capital punishment schemes on an individual basis); Furman v. Geor-
gia, 408 U.S. 238, 403-04 (1972) (Burger, CJ., dissenting) (suggesting state legislative action).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 411 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
seems fair to say that Furman galvanized political opposition to aboli-
tion,283 it seems highly implausible that in the absence of Furman, the
states would have moved on their own toward either abolition or some
greater rationalization of the death penalty. There is simply no good
evidence of a trend toward "liberalization" of the death penalty;284 in-
deed, there has never been a period in American history in which any
points could be scored in the political world by opposing the death
penalty.
B. The Limits of Legal Process: Death is Different (Reprise)
If explanations for the development of the Court's death penalty
jurisprudence are difficult to ground completely in accounts of the
Court's institutional limitations, perhaps an explanation lies in the dis-
tinctive nature of the capital sentencing decision. Indeed, in Mc-
Gautha v. California2,85 Furman's 1971 alter ego, Justice Harlan
rejected a due process challenge to standardless capital sentencing on
the ground that any attempt to impose standards on the death penalty
decision was simply predestined to fail: "To identify before the fact
those characteristics of criminal homicides and their perpetrators
which call for the death penalty, and to express these characteristics in
language which can be fairly understood and applied by the sentenc-
ing authority, appear to be tasks which are beyond present human
286
ability."
On the one hand, it is possible to read Justice Harlan's admonition
in McGautha as nothing more than a rhetorical bow in the direction
of the familiar rules versus standards debate,2 7 in which the limits of
legal language inevitably require the lodging of discretionary judgment
somewhere. Justice Harlan himself gives us reason to believe that he
is speaking generally, because he adverts to similar problems of preci-
sion in the history of the substantive law of homicide and in non-
capital sentencing procedures.288 In other words, the problem of legis-
lative foresight and drafting comes up everywhere, and we should not
be surprised to see that it comes up in capital sentencing as well.
On the other hand, it is possible to read Justice Harlan's warning,
as Robert Weisberg has done quite persuasively, in light of "the inevi-
tably unsystematic, irreducibly personal moral elements of the choice
283 See MELTSNER, supra note is,a t 306-ag; Bohm, supra note 273, at 116.
284 See supra p. 410 (explaining why falling execution rates and 1966 poll data are not good
evidence of a liberalizing trend).
285 402 U.S. 183 (z97i).
286 Id. at 204.
287 See, e.g., FREDERICK SCHAUER, PLAYING BY THE RULES: A PHILOSOPHICAL EXAMINA.
7lON OF RULE-BASED DECISION-MAKING IN LAW AND IN LIFE (1991); Pierre Schiag, Rules and
Standards, 33 UCLA L. REv. 379 (1985); Kathleen M. Sullivan, The Supreme Court, 1991 Term
- Foreword: The Justices of Rules and Standards, io6 HARV. L. REv. 22 (2992),
288 See McGautha, 402 U.S. at 204-05, 207 n.18.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 412 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
to administer the death penalty."289 If the capital punishment decision
can be neither "true" or "false" (as facts are said to be) nor "correct" or
"incorrect" (as legal judgments are said to be), but instead represents
"an existential moment of moral perception,"290 then refining the direc-
tions given to the decisionmakers (the jurors) cannot assist, but rather
will merely obscure the fundamentally moral choice that they must
make. Weisberg perceptively traced the Court's ambivalence about
the nature of the capital sentencing decision across cases,29' and he did
so long before the Court began to wrestle with the question of what it
means to be "actually innocent of the death penalty" so as to qualify
for an exception to procedural default rules on federal habeas re-
view.292 As Weisberg noted, if we recognize the irreducibly moral as-
pect of capital sentencing, all that refining directions to the sentencer
can do is reduce sentencer anxiety about the decision, thereby, per-
haps, distorting moral
sensibilities.293
The foregoing might suggest that the Supreme Court has not suc-
ceeded in rationalizing the administration of capital punishment the
way it thought it might in Furman and Gregg simply because the deci-
sion to impose the death penalty cannot be rationalized, however hard
and in good faith we might try. Under this account, the Court has
settled, either naively or disingenously, for the alleviation of anxiety
that rule-like proceedings offer actors within the legal system.
Although we agree with part of this account - that the Court's
development of formal, rule-like, quasi-scientific procedures for impos-
ing the death penalty has had a significant "anxiety-alleviating" effect
on capital sentencers294 - we do not agree that the essentially moral
dimension of the decision to impose a sentence of death cannot be ra-
tionalized beyond what the Court has currently done. We do believe
that "the sentencing moment" has just such an essentially moral di-
mension and that, in light of this recognition, it has been a mistake for
the Court to spend so much of its rationalizing energy on shaping the
thought processes of the sentencer at the moment of decision. But we
think that other means exist for the Court to rationalize the adminis-
tration of capital punishment - to render it as a system less arbitrary
289 Robert Weisberg, Deregulating Death, 1983 SuP. CT. REV. 305, 393.
290 Id. at 353.
291 See id. at 342-43, 353 (noting especially Justice Powell's dissent in Bullington v. Missouri,
4s5 U.S. 430, 447 (x98i) (Powell, J., dissenting), and then-Justice Rehnquist's concurring opinion
in Zant v. Stephens, 462 U.S. 862, 893 (1983) (Rehnquist J.,c oncurring in the judgment), as
classic examples of the "existential moment" theory of capital sentencing).
292 See Sawyer v. Whitley, 5o5 U.S. 333, 340 (1992) (struggling with the issue of how to define
"innocen[ce] of the death penalty" for purposes of the miscarriage-of-justice excuse for procedural
default on federal habeas corpus review).
293 See Weisberg, supra note 289, at 391-92 (citing STANLEY MILGRAM, OBEDIENCE TO Au-
THORITY 138-43 (i974) (illustrating the dangers of obscuring individual moral choice by deference
to the perceived authority of scientific method)).
294 See infra Part VI, Final Reflections.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 413 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
and more reliable - than merely to think of new ways to exhort and
"channel" sentencers' inevitable discretion at the moment of decision.
At the end of this Article, we will offer some more convincing ex-
planations for the Court's unfated failure in regulating the administra-
tion of capital punishment. But first, we now attempt to sketch some
of those roads not taken.
V. ROADS NOT TAKEN
One of the central lessons of two decades of death penalty regula-
tion is that "channeling" sentencer discretion is a hopeless task in a
regime that values and requires individualized sentencing. Moreover,
we believe that the current commitment to individualized sentencing,
although not fully explained and defended in the Court's decisions,
has strong constitutional foundations.295 Accordingly, "equality" in the
administration of the death penalty can be advanced, if at all, only by
considering means other than controlling sentencer discretion at the
moment of decision.
We see two possible strategies for addressing the significant arbi-
trariness of the current system that do not focus on this uncontrollable
moment. First, regulatory efforts could focus on the substantive out-
comes of the death-penalty decisionmaking process. An outcome-ori-
ented approach could involve stricter proportionality limits on the
.availability of the death penalty, fashioned either by the courts or by
state legislatures. A focus on substantive outcomes could also include
greater solicitude to claims based on statistical evidence that reveals
unexplained, severe disparities in the application of the death penalty
within a particular jurisdiction. A second approach could focus on
procedures in death penalty decisionmaking that, unlike sentencer dis-
cretion, are amenable to court supervision. Such an approach could
make good on the principle of "heightened reliability" by insisting on
greater procedural safeguards in those aspects of the death penalty
process, such as quality of counsel and the availability of postconvic-
tion review, that contribute most significantly to both the appearance
and the reality of fairness in the administration of the death penalty.
Given our discussion above of the Court's regulatory efforts over
the past two decades, it should be apparent that these approaches rep-
resent not merely roads not taken but roads deliberately forsaken. In
our view, it is worth examining whether the rejection of these paths
has contributed significantly to the unsatisfactory regulatory regime
that is now in place. In evaluating whether the Court simply took
"wrong turns" or whether regulatory failure was inevitable, we ask
whether the forsaken approaches would adequately respond to the
concerns of Furman and at what cost.
295 See Steiker & Steiker, supra note 57, at 844.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 414 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
A. Regulation of Outcomes
As we demonstrated above, current doctrine permits the death pen-
alty to be imposed upon virtually any offender involved in an offense
that results in death.296 Although states must "narrow" the class of the
death-eligible through aggravating circumstances or limited definitions
of capital murder, states can ensure (and in many cases have ensured)
that virtually all murderers are death-eligible by simply expanding the
number and breadth of those circumstances and definitions.297 As
Furman recognized, such broad death-eligibility essentially guarantees
that some defendants caught in the net will not be among the truly
"worst" offenders, especially when societal practices indicate that the
death penalty should be reserved for such a small percentage of of-
fenders who commit violent crimes resulting in death.298 The wrong-
ful inclusion of such undeserving offenders is problematic in terms of
both proportionality (excessive punishment) and equality (random in-
clusion of undeserving defendants when similarly situated offenders,
and even more deserving offenders, do not get the death penalty).
x. "Real" Narrowing by State Legislatures. - The Court could
address these proportionality and equality concerns in two ways.
First, the Court could require states to genuinely narrow the class of
the death-eligible by adopting more limited definitions of capital mur-
der and by restricting both the number and breadth of aggravating
circumstances. The Court need not specify what kinds of offenses or
offenders are most deserving of the death penalty so much as insist
that the absolute number of death-eligible offenders corresponds in
some meaningful sense to the proportion of offenders who will actually
receive the death penalty. Thus, if experience over the past two de-
cades reflects that one percent of all murders results in a death sen-
tence, the class of the death-eligible should not be tremendously
greater than, say, five or ten percent of all murderers. What was in-
tolerable at the time of Furman and what remains intolerable today is
that the ratio of death-eligibility to offenses-resulting-in-death is much
closer to ninety-to-one than five- or ten-to-one.
Forced narrowing of the class of the death-eligible in this way has
two distinct advantages. First, it leaves to the states the ultimate deci-
296 See supra pp. 373-75.
297 See supra p. 374.
298 See, e.g., Randall K. Packer, Struck by Lightning: The Elevation of ProceduralF orm over
Substantive Rationality in Capital Sentencing Proceedings, 2o N.Y.U. REv. L. & Soc. CHANGE
641, 665-66 (1993-1994) (lamenting the failure of current doctrine to ensure that states truly limit
the pool of the death-eligible); Richard A. Rosen, Felony Murder and the Eighth Amendment
Jurisprudence of Death, 31 B.C. L. REv. 1103, 1169-70 (i99o) (criticizing the broad death-eligibil-
ity of persons convicted pursuant to the felony-murder rule); Tamar Lewin, Who Decides Who
Will Die? Even Within States, It Varies, N.Y. TIMES, Feb. 23, 2995, at Ai (noting that "[i]n
every state with the death penalty.. .prosecutors seek capital punishment in only a tiny fraction
of the cases in which it is allowed").
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 415 1995-1996

416 HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
sion of which offenses and offenders are most deserving of death, and
simply requires states to specify in advance which offenses and offend-
ers call for such punishment. In this respect, such forced narrowing
follows through on Furman's demand that the decision to retain the
death penalty - and to retain it only in limited circumstances -
must be reflected in legislative decisionmaking rather than in the un-
controlled and arbitrary practices of prosecutors and sentencers within
the system. The second advantage of forced narrowing is that it is a
relatively easy doctrine to apply. Rather than speculating whether
sentencers will understand the meaning of vague aggravators, the
Court would demand that states enumerate objective factors that are
susceptible to empirical study. Thus, a state might choose to limit the
availability of the death penalty to murders involving police officers or
prison guards, murders in the course of certain felonies, or murders
committed by offenders who have killed previously. If the sum total
of death-eligible offenders reasonably corresponded to the number of
persons that were actually sentenced to death, the state would fulfill
the narrowing requirement.
The central drawback to such forced narrowing is that it might
force states to exclude factors from their definitions of capital murder
that actually do capture the worst offenses and offenders. This could
be true either because the "worst" murders according to community
standards fall within a wide range of different types of murder or be-
cause cataloging the worst murders cannot be accomplished through
the use of "objective" factors. As to the first concern, suppose the
"worst" murders occur within all categories of murder (e.g., some of
the worst murders are kidnapping-murders, some are murders of more
than one person, some are murders committed for pecuniary gain),
such that any forced legislative narrowing of death-eligibility would
fail to capture community standards. The narrowed category of death-
eligible murders would be underinclusive in that many deserving mur-
derers would be spared the death penalty. The second possibility is
that what makes a murder "worse" according to community standards
is something hopelessly vague, such as "especially heinous" crimes or
crimes reflecting a "depraved heart." Although we might all mean
something different when invoking such language, it may be our intui-
tive sense of depravity or heinousness, rather than some objective fac-
tor, that accounts for our view that some murders justify the death
penalty.
These concerns are serious ones, because they suggest the possibil-
ity that we really cannot decide in advance who deserves the death
penalty and must rely instead on subjective judgments by institutional
actors. If this is true, though, it is not merely an indictment of the
strategy of forced narrowing; it is a concession that administration of
the death penalty is inevitably arbitrary. In any case, we are not en-
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 416 1995-1996

I995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
tirely convinced by this objection because we believe that the underin-
clusion resulting from the imperfect match between narrowed state
schemes and community standards would likely be outweighed by the
reduced overinclusion that forced narrowing promises to accomplish.
Forced narrowing would thus genuinely contribute to the overall
equality of state death penalty schemes by ensuring that those exe-
cuted are truly selected from a small group of offenders. Of course,
forced narrowing cannot resolve the inevitable difficulties associated
with prosecutorial and sentencer discretion to choose who receives
death within that narrowed group.299
2. "Real" Narrowing by the Court: Proportionality. - The
Court could also address the proportionality and equality concerns of
Furman and the 1976 cases by expanding its categorical exclusions to
death eligibility. As discussed above, current doctrine prohibits impo-
sition of the death penalty for crimes other than murder,300 but places
no other meaningful limits on death eligibility. Offenders who do not
intend to kill, attempt to kill, or actually kill can still be subject to the
death penalty based on their participation in a dangerous felony.301
Youthful and mentally retarded offenders must rely on prosecutorial
and sentencing discretion to avoid execution.
In rejecting categorical exclusions for these classes of offenders, the
Court has emphasized the possibility that some small number of of-
fenders within these classes might truly deserve the death penalty ac-
cording to community standards, and that therefore such exclusions
would arbitrarily limit states' efforts to identify the worst offenses and
offenders.302 The problem with this argument is that it recognizes the
risk of underinclusion that follows from Court intervention without ac-
knowledging (much less comparing) the risk of overinclusion that ac-
companies broad death eligibility.
If the death penalty is in fact reserved for an extremely small per-
centage of deserving murderers, it seems exceedingly unlikely that, of
this select group, a substantial number would be youthful, mentally
retarded, or minimal participants in the crime. Hence, the risk that
categorically excluding such persons from death-eligibility will lead to
substantial underinclusion is quite small. On the other hand, allowing
299 See Steiker & Steiker, supra note 57, at 863-64.
300 See supra p. 376 (discussing Coker v. Georgia, 433 U.S. 584 (1977)). The crime of treason
may be an exception to this general prohibition against punishing crimes other than murder with
death.
301 See supra pp. 376-77 (discussing Tison v. Arizona, 481 U.S. 137 (1987)).
302 See, e.g., Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302, 338-39 (1989) (opinion of O'Connor, J.) (fInl ight
of the diverse capacities and life experiences of mentally retarded persons, it cannot be said on the
record before us today that all mentally retarded people, by definition, can never act with the
level of culpability associated with the death penalty."); cf. Stanford v. Kentucky, 492 U.S. 361,
378 (1989) (opinion of Scalia, J.) (refusing to use "socioscientific" evidence to exempt sixteen- and
seventeen-year-olds from the death penalty).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 417 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
states to seek the death penalty against all offenders in these categories
presents a real and substantial danger that many offenders will be se-
lected for execution who do not "deserve" it (and who will therefore be
treated more harshly than many offenders who do "deserve" death).
Accordingly, the problem with failing to restrict death-eligibility
through categorical exclusions is not merely that it is obviously
"worse" to execute someone who is undeserving of the death penalty
than to spare someone who is deserving but that the likelihood of ar-
bitrary results is much greater when the Court chooses not to regulate
(overinclusion) than when it chooses to impose limits on death-eligibil-
ity (underinclusion).
The most obvious drawback of Court-imposed categorical exclu-
sions on death-eligibility is the difficulty of drawing lines that accu-
rately reflect insufficient harm or culpability to justify the death
penalty. If "youthful" offenders are to be exempted, at what age
should death-eligibility begin? What standard should be applied to
gauge "mental retardation" or "minimal involvement" in the offense?
Although this objection is substantial, it is answered by the same
considerations that lend support to categorical exclusions in the first
place. Arbitrary line-drawing will necessarily result in some underin-
clusion, but the risk of such underinclusion is less substantial than the
gains in terms of reducing overinclusion. Limiting the death penalty
to persons over the age of eighteen, or to persons whose full-scale IQ
is above 70, will undoubtedly cast the "exclusion" net too wide and
give refuge to some very small number of deserving offenders. But
failing to cast that exclusion net at all will render thousands of unde-
serving offenders subject to the death penalty and risk massive overin-
clusion in the administration of the death penalty. This risk is borne
out in the numbers of mentally retarded and youthful offenders that
occupy seats on what remains a relatively small death row.303 As in
many areas of the law, line-drawing is cumbersome and inevitably ar-
bitrary at the margin, but often tremendously fairer than drawing no
lines at all.
3. Challenging Disparities. - The third possibility for policing
outcomes in death penalty decisionmaking is to preclude the imposi-
tion of the death penalty in jurisdictions whose sentencing disparities
exceed some threshold of acceptability. In McCleskey, of course, the
Court seemed unwilling to embrace constitutional challenges based
solely on statistical evidence.304 As the Court emphasized, states' in-
303 See Jamie M. Billotte, Student Article, Is It Justified? - The Death Penalty and Mental
Retardation, 8 NOTRE DAME J.L. ETHICS & PuB. POL'Y 333, 337 (i994) (suggesting that approxi-
mately 12% of the death-row population consists of persons with mental retardation); John H.
Blume, Representing the Mentally Retarded Defendant, THE CHAMPION, Nov. 1987, at 32 (eSti-
mating that 250 people with mental retardation were on death row in x987).
304 See supra pp. 400-01 (discussing McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279 (1987)).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 418 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS 419
ability to control sentencer discretion introduces an inevitable level of
arbitrariness into capital decisionmaking.305 Nonetheless, it is one
thing to recognize, as the Court did, that some inevitable unpredict-
ability remains in capital sentencing as a result of the individualization
requirement;306 it is quite another thing to hold that whatever level of
arbitrariness thereby results must be constitutionally tolerable because
otherwise the death penalty could not be administered at all.
In short, the Court could insist that the Eighth Amendment death-
is-different principle mandates some review of the actual outcomes of
state schemes. Of course, as with Court-imposed proportionality limits
on the death penalty, administering Court-imposed limits on arbitrari-
ness creates difficult line-drawing problems. What kinds of statistical
evidence demonstrate, for example, that race plays "too" significant a
role in capital sentencing? Disparate impact litigation is notoriously
difficult to administer in the Title VII context, the one major statutory
area in which plaintiffs need not demonstrate discriminatory intent.307
The answer to such line-drawing problems ultimately rests upon an
account of the "difference" of death. If, as Furman and the 1976 deci-
sions suggest, the death penalty must be administered fairly if at all,
the Court could insist that tolerable inequalities in non-capital sentenc-
ing become intolerable when life is at stake. Of course, jurisdiction-
by-jurisdiction litigation concerning racial equality in capital sentenc-
ing raises the specter of excessive Court intrusion into state affairs.
But if we take seriously the sentiment in Furman that a caste system
of capital punishment renders the punishment "cruel and unusual,"308
litigation over the "bottom line" of states' efforts to administer the
death penalty seems preferable to tolerating a caste system solely be-
cause we cannot precisely identify how the system operates.
One important objection to this sort of "outcome" regulation is that
it provides the wrong remedy to the kind of discrimination that is
most pervasive in current state systems. The Baldus study itself re-
vealed that the race of the victim is a more potent predictor of sen-
tencing decisions than is the race of the defendant.309 If this is true,
and the disparity reflects the unwillingness of states or sentencers to
305 See McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 311-12.
306 See id. at 312 & n.35.
307 See, e.g., Wards Cove Packing Co. v. Atonio, 490 U.S. 642, 656-58 (989) (requiring proof
that "specific" policies or practices resulted in "significant" disparate outcomes); Griggs v. Duke
Power Co., 401 U.S. 424, 431-32 (197i) (recognizing a Title VII claim without proof of discrimi-
natory intent).
308 See Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238, 255-57 (1972) (Douglas, J., concurring); see also
supra pp. 367-68.
309 See BALDUS, WOODWORTH & PULASYI, supra. note 8, at i6o, 185 (suggesting that a post-
Furman decline in race-of-defendant discrimination compared with relatively constant race-of-vic-
tim discrimination has resulted in "the principal beneficiaries of... race-of-victim discrimination
being black defendants").
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 419 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW Vol. 109:355
impose the death penalty in cases involving minority victims,110 abol-
ishing or limiting the use of the death penalty would "level down" the
protections afforded by the state (in terms of providing "death penalty
services') rather than "ratcheting up" state vindication of minority vic-
tims.31 According to this critique developed by Randall Kennedy,
rather than leveling down the protection afforded all citizens, the state
should provide to minorities the protection it currently affords mem-
bers of the majority
race.312
The "ratchet-up" response is simply unavailable, however, because
legislators and courts cannot, consistent with the Constitution, man-
date that prosecutors seek and sentencers return a death verdict in
cases involving minority victims. The individualization requirement
necessarily grants an unaccountable veto of the death penalty from
which the state cannot appeal.
This critique suggests an additional, more subtle difficulty with
recognizing "outcome-based" challenges to the death penalty. If the
background rule requires states to generate "equal" outcomes in death
penalty decisions, states may attempt to comply with this requirement
by undertaking special efforts to secure the death penalty in cases in-
volving historically underprotected groups. This kind of "quota sys-
tem" in prosecuting murders raises problems of its own. First, it is
doubtful whether state actors can constitutionally attempt to compen-
sate for anticipated sentencer discrimination by reacting differently to
murders based on the race of the victim. Second, especially vigorous
enforcement of murders involving minority victims will disproportion-
ately affect minority defendants, since the vast number of murders are
intra- rather than interracial.313 Thus, a "quota approach" in the
death penalty context will inevitably compel states to invest more re-
sources in cases involving minority defendants, an odd result given the
underpinnings of Furman and the 1976 decisions.
Of course, the Court might regard some "affirmative action" efforts
in capital sentencing as the appropriate corrective to longstanding
prosecutorial and sentencer indifference to the plight of minority vic-
tims. Nonetheless, even if the Court were to regard such efforts as
impermissible, it would not logically follow that outcome regulation
must be abandoned. Ultimately, the Court could insist on both non-
arbitrary outcomes in death cases and evenhandedness in state efforts
to secure capital verdicts. If it turns out that sentencers will inevitably
310 See Randall L. Kennedy, McCleskey v. Kemp: Race, CapitalP unishment, and the Supreme
Court, xoi HARV. L. REV. 1388, 1390-91 (i988).
311 See id. at 1433-34.
312 See id.
313 See Givelber, supra note 87, at 417 n.222 (citing statistics indicating that in x99x1, 4838
white offenders killed 4399 white victims and 347 African-American victims, while 5778 African-
American offenders killed 691 white victims and 5035 African-American victims, in cases involv-
ing a single victim and a single defendant).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 420 1995-1996

19951 SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
discriminate on the basis of race, the Court could refuse to allow
states to "even the score" by injecting "affirmative" racial considera-
tions into their own decisionmaking processes.
B. "Super Due Process"
An alternative road not taken would involve a greater focus on
procedural aspects of death penalty systems that contribute signifi-
cantly to arbitrariness. As discussed above, the "heightened reliability"
decisions issued by the Court thus far do not target the most obvious
sources of inequality.314 Rather, the Court's death-is-different doctrine
seems to demand only that states refrain from certain objectionable
practices, such as engaging in prosecutorial misconduct or promulgat-
ing misleading sentencing instructions. These types of painless inter-
vention may well be justified, but they do not represent a
comprehensive effort to equalize defendants' opportunities in their ef-
forts to escape death. A more encompassing "heightened reliability"
requirement would insist on affirmative (or "proactive') efforts on the
part of states to ensure that similarly-situated defendants have roughly
equal chances of prevailing at trial and vindicating their constitutional
rights.
i. Representational Equality. - Perhaps the most significant
source of inequality in the administration of the death penalty is the
unevenness of representation. As discussed above, the Court has
sought to address the representation issue solely by providing for post-
trial, extraordinarily deferential review of counsel's performance.315
The obvious alternative to policing counsel in this manner is to estab-
lish firm guidelines for representation in capital cases that would in-
clude, among other things, minimum standards for appointment,
adequate compensation for both counsel and experts, and presump-
tions about certain fundamental aspects of death-penalty preparation
and presentation. Such presumptions might include investigation of
both guilt-innocence and punishment phase defenses, consultation with
appropriate experts regarding physical evidence and psychiatric issues,
thorough cross-examination of state witnesses, and research and advo-
cacy regarding potential inadequacies of the state capital scheme, in-
cluding on appeal.
As it stands, it is commonplace in many states for trial counsel to
fail to present any evidence or argument at all during the punishment
phase of a capital trial.316 Attorneys on direct appeal also routinely
314 See supra Part I.D.
31S See supra pp. 398-99 (discussing the ineffectiveness standard of Strickland v. Washington,
466 U.S. 668 (1984)).
316 See, e.g., Dufour v. Mississippi, 479 U.S. 891, 892-94 (1986) (Marshall, J., dissenting from
denial of certiorari) (criticizing the failure of petitioner's trial counsel to present any mitigating
evidence during the punishment phase); Hamilton v. Zant, 466 U.S. 989, 99i (1984) (Marshall, J.,
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 421 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
fail to attend oral argument at the one post-trial hearing in which all
state law issues are subject to review. Notwithstanding these sorts of
practices, federal and state courts have consistently rejected ineffec-
tiveness of counsel
claims.317
Of course, mandating representational standards and levels of com-
pensation in capital proceedings represents a significant departure
from the Court's otherwise "costless" regulatory approach. Virtually
all of the death-is-different decisions involve particular prohibitions
rather than court-mandated expenditures of states' time and money.
Such a departure would necessarily involve the federal courts in a
more direct and substantial way in the ongoing administration of
states' criminal justice systems, with all of the hazards that federal
court supervision of state institutions has wrought in other contexts.
On the other hand, as we have argued above, the Court's current
approach is hardly "costless" when one accounts for both the erosion
of the Court's legitimacy and the failure to redress the inequalities of
post-Furman capital sentencing. If it is true, as one commentator has
argued, that the Court expends "legitimating" capital from its limited
reserve each time it construes the Constitution against deeply-held
public values,318 then the Court's extensive and highly-visible regula-
tion of the death penalty represents a substantial withdrawal. To the
extent such regulation has sought to address the concerns of Furman
and the 1976 decisions, the investment has been disastrous. Enforcing
high standards of representation - and the close supervision of states'
systems that such enforcement entails - would undoubtedly result in
yet another substantial "withdrawal" from the bank of legitimacy, but
with a potentially higher return. Virtually all of the current "height-
ened reliability" doctrines, including accuracy in sentencing instruc-
tions and curbs on prosecutorial misconduct, have little value in a
proceeding in which the adversarial process has broken down and no
one invokes on behalf of the defendant the protections that the Court
has elsewhere elaborated.
If this interventionist approach were pursued, a further means of
assuring adequate representation would involve extending the right of
effective death-penalty representation to state postconviction proceed-
ings. The lack of a guaranty of adequate state habeas counsel has
resulted in tremendously unequal opportunities for enforcement of
state and federal rights. For example, in Texas, the most active death-
dissenting from denial of certiorari) (same); Sidebottom v. Delo, 46 F.3d 744, 754 (8th Cir.) (hold-
ing that a capital defendant was not denied effective assistance of counsel despite counsel's failure
to present any evidence during the punishment phase), cert. denied, ii6 S. Ct 144 (1995); Romero
v. Lynaugh, 884 F.2d 871, 876-77 (5th Cir. 1989) (holding that a lawyer was not ineffective de-
spite his failure to offer any evidence at all at the punishment phase of his client's capital trial),
cert. denied, 494 U.S. 1012 (199o).
317 See Bright, supra note 9, at 1857-62.
318 See Ingber, supra note 266, at 339-40.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 422 1995-1996

,9951 SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
penalty state since Furman, the state did not establish any mechanism
for providing postconviction counsel to death-row inmates until this
year,319 even though the state afforded postconviction proceedings as a
matter of right. A recent independent report (commissioned by the
State Bar) assessing the quality of Texas's death-penalty representation
concluded that the state's failure to provide postconviction representa-
tion generated a "crisis" and resulted in widely uneven assistance to
capital defendants.320 Moreover, this inequality in state proceedings is
exacerbated in subsequent litigation. Under current federal habeas
doctrine, inadequate representation in state habeas not only denies the
petitioner a potential remedy in the state courts, but also impairs the
petitioner's right to merits review of federal constitutional claims in
subsequent federal habeas proceedings.
2. Expanding Postconviction Opportunities. - Although it is
commonly assumed that death-row inmates have numerous postcon-
viction opportunities in both federal and state courts to challenge the
legality of their convictions and sentences, the availability of such op-
portunities is in fact quite limited in many circumstances. As for state
habeas, the Court has firmly rejected the proposition that states must
provide any collateral mechanism for challenging criminal convictions,
capital or otherwise.321 Indeed, the Court has never disavowed its
century-old pronouncement that states need not provide appeals in
criminal cases.322 At least one death-penalty state has recently abol-
ished state collateral review of most federal claims,323 and many other
states have tightened or are tightening procedural rules regarding the
filing of state habeas
petitions.324
319 See Act of June 7, 1995, ch. 319, sec. i, art. II.07I(2)(b), x995 Tex. Sess. Law Serv. 2764,
2764 (Vernon) (providing for the appointment of counsel to represent indigent death-row inmates
in state postconviction proceedings).
320 See SPANGENBERG GROUP REPORT, A STUDY OF REPRESENTATION IN CAPITAL CASES IN
TEXAS I5I--53 (993).
321 See, e.g., Murray v. Giarratano, 492 U.S. x, 8 (1989) (quoting Pennsylvania v. Finley, 481
U.S. 551, 556-57 (1987)).
322 See McKane v. Durston, 153 U.S. 684, 687-88 (1894).
323 See Whitmore v. State, 771 S.W.2d 266, 267 & n.i (Ark. 2989) (limiting collateral review of
state convictions "to questions of whether the commitment is valid on its face or whether the
convicting court had proper jurisdiction").
324 See, e.g., Cal. A.B. 570, 1995-96 Reg. Sess. (igg5) (introduced) (seeking to amend the Cali-
fornia Penal Code and setting forth time constraints on the filing of habeas corpus petitions); Ga.
S.B. 113, 143rd Gen. Assembly, Reg. Sess. (1995) (enacted) (limiting the availability of habeas
corpus relief); Idaho S.B. 1084, 53rd Leg., ist Reg. Sess. (x995) (enacted) (prohibiting successive
postconviction petitions in many circumstances); Ohio S.B. 4, 121st Gen. Assembly, Reg. Sess.
(r9g5) (introduced) (requiring that petitions for postconviction relief be filed within 9o days of
when the trial transcript is filed with the direct appeal df the judgment); Pa. S.B. 81, ist Spec.
Sess. (igg5) (introduced Mar. xS, 1995) (providing unitary review in postconviction death penalty
cases); Tex. S.B. 44o, 74th Leg., Reg. Sess. (i9gS) (enacted) (establishing unitary procedure for
direct appeal and postconviction petitions and limiting the cognizability of successive petitions);
see also Ill. H.B. 1636, 8 th Gen. Assembly, Reg. Sess. (1995) (introduced) (revoking i8o days of
9
good conduct credit for inmates who file "frivolous" lawsuits as a litigation deterrent).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 423 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
A death-is-different theory might reduce arbitrariness in capital
cases by requiring states to provide meaningful postconviction oppor-
tunities for litigating constitutional claims. Guaranteeing postconvic-
tion review is especially essential to the fair resolution of non-record
claims, such as ineffectiveness of trial counsel, that cannot reasonably
be litigated on direct appeal. Of course, one important aspect of
"meaningful" postconviction litigation is adequate representation, such
that any Court-imposed requirement of state postconviction review
should be accompanied by a requirement that indigent petitioners re-
ceive counsel as well.
Although altering existing practice in this manner would be only
modestly intrusive, given that most states have established postconvic-
tion fora (and a substantial majority provide for some type of repre-
sentation to death-row petitioners), it is likely to be only modestly
effective as well. Even in states that provide for plenary collateral
review of federal and state constitutional issues, the reality remains
that state courts are simply not as zealous in their vindication of crim-
inal defendants' rights as are the federal courts.325 Some of this dy-
namic is no doubt attributable to political pressures in states that elect
judges.326 Special institutional arrangements also account for the dif-
ference in certain states. For instance, Texas requires an inmate to
return to the trial court of conviction with the daunting task of per-
suading the judge that constitutional error occurred in the trial over
which that judge
presided.327
A more ambitious death-is-different doctrine would alter existing
doctrines concerning the availability of federal habeas, which has be-
come, for all practical purposes, the most important source of constitu-
tional protection for state prisoners. Under current doctrine, death-
row inmates are afforded no special exemption from the elaborate ar-
ray of procedural hurdles that substantially restrict petitioners' efforts
to vindicate constitutional rights. A wealth of commentary, largely
critical, has explored the complexity of the newly-emerging federal
habeas doctrine.328 The essential point of this criticism is that inmates
should not lose their opportunities for federal review on the basis of
32S See Jordan Steiker, Incorporatingt he Suspension Clause: Is There a ConstitutionalR ight to
Federal Habeas Corpus for State Prisoners?, 92 MIcH. L. REV. 862, 907-08 (1994).
326 See Stephen P. Bright & Patrick J. Keenan, Judges and the Politics of Death: Deciding
Between the Bill of Rights and the Next Election in Capital Cases, 75 B.U. L. REV. 759, 779
(r995) (discussing the political pressures facing elected judges in capital cases and noting that 32
of the 38 death penalty states select or retain judges through elections).
327 See TEX. CODE CRmi. PROC. ANN. art. 11.07 ยง 2(b) (West Supp. i995).
328 See, e.g., Barry Friedman, A Tale of Two Habeas, 73 MINN. L. REV. 247, 252-53 (1988)
(decrying the complexity wrought by the Court's new doctrines); Yale L. Rosenberg, Kaddish for
Federal Habeas Corpus, 59 GEO. WASH. L. REV. 362, 362-63 (x991) (arguing that the Rehnquist
Court "has quietly eviscerated, if not interred, federal habeas corpus"); Jordan Steiker, Innocence
and Federal Habeas, 41 UCLA L. REv. 303, 308-o9 (1993) (discussing the Court's common-law
approach to habeas).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 424 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
matters entirely beyond their control, such as attorney failure to make
proper objections at trial,329 the timing of the favorable constitutional
decisions on which they rely,330 or attorney error in failing to raise a
meritorious claim in a prior
petition.331
However compelling these criticisms are in the non-capital context,
they have special force in capital litigation given that federal habeas
provides, for better or worse, the sole opportunity as of right for fed-
eral review of federal claims. Just as elaborate procedural protections
are valueless to the unrepresented or poorly represented defendant, so
are such protections valueless if no forum exists for their enforcement.
Of course, concerns for the finality of state judgments and timely
litigation of constitutional issues counsel against wholesale repudiation
of procedural rules in capital cases. Nonetheless, it seems odd for a
system that espouses a commitment to heightened reliability to main-
tain extraordinary limitations on capital defendants' ability to correct
errors that concededly undermine such reliability. This is especially
true given that virtually all of the limitations on habeas have been
Court-driven,332 and that the habeas statute itself seems, as a matter
of text, to impose less onerous restrictions than many of those estab-
lished in current doctrine.333 If there is sufficient play in the habeas
statute to accommodate procedurally hampered claims of capital de-
fendants, then the constitutional concerns animating the death-is-dif-
ferent doctrine could likewise support such accommodation.
Accordingly, an additional road not taken would involve careful re-
view and resolution of constitutional claims on the merits rather than
rigid adherence to the rules that promote procedural regularity in non-
capital cases.
We do not view rules regarding representation and the availability
of postconviction review as the sole examples of a "super due process"
approach to the administration of the death penalty. We offer them
only as illustrations of how the concern for heightened reliability
might have been better served by focusing on those aspects of the sys-
tem that practicing lawyers and the public at large would recognize as
fundamental to fairness. Meticulous rules regarding sentencing in-
structions and prosecutorial argument have not and will not guarantee
329 See, e.g., Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U.S. 72, 87-91 (1977) (announcing a procedural default
doctrine that is less favorable to habeas petitioners).
330 See, e.g., Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288, 305-10 (2989) (plurality opinion) (limiting retroac-
tive application of new constitutional decisions on federal habeas).
331 See McCleskey v. Zant, 499 U.S. 467, 488-96 (iggi) (substantially restricting opportunities
for filing new-claim successive petitions).
332 See Steiker, supra note 328, at 352-53.
333 See, e.g., id. at 363-65.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 425 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
nonarbitrary outcomes. Hence, one path not taken would involve a
"second look" at those procedures outside of controlling sentencer dis-
cretion that account for inequality in the present regulatory world.
VI. FINAL REFLECTIONS
We have argued that the Supreme Court's chosen path of constitu-
tional regulation of the death penalty has been a disaster, an enormous
regulatory effort with almost no rationalizing effect. Moreover, we
have suggested alternative paths, largely ignored by the Court, that
offer some possibility of greater impact. If both of these claims are
true (or even somewhat persuasive), one has to wonder why the Court
has neither abandoned its efforts altogether nor pursued one of the
alternatives.
Indeed, the attractiveness to the Court of abandoning altogether
the effort to implement Furman seems increasingly plausible in light of
our review of the enormous costs of time, energy, and legitimacy that
the Court's regulatory efforts have thus far incurred for minimal regu-
latory returns. After all, the decision in Furman itself was only 5-4
even at a time when strong vestiges of the Warren Court still re-
mained;334 the rationale of Furman was hopelessly muddled by the
badly splintered Court; the decision was widely criticized at the time
and remains unpopular today; and no strong constituency has ever
supported restricting the use of the death penalty except for a few in-
creasingly marginalized groups devoted to abolition or racial equality.
On the other hand, if the Court remains committed to addressing
in some significant sense the concerns that originally animated it in
Furman and Gregg, it is hard to see why the Court has not attempted
to flesh out the ideas for alternative regulatory regimes that we have
sketched. It is difficult to imagine a body of doctrine that is much
worse - either in its costs of implementation or in its negligible re-
turns - than the one we have now.
One answer, perhaps, is that the Court has never paused to take
systematic account of its death penalty jurisprudence. The current
body of doctrine has grown like a house without a blueprint - with a
new room here, a staircase there, but without the guidance of a master
builder to ensure that the finished product is structurally sound. Per-
haps each of the Justices has become attached emotionally or intellec-
tually to his or her own small contribution and is thus unwilling to
scrap the larger project.
This hypothesis may have considerable explanatory force for the
foundation-building first decade or so of the Court's death penalty ju-
risprudence. But it fails to account for the more recent attacks made
334 Cf Payne v. Tennessee, 5o U.S. 808, 829 (ggi) (suggesting that "narrow[] ... margins"
and "spirited dissents" affect the precedential weight of constitutional decisions).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 426 1995-1996

19951 SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
by individual members of the Court on the integrity of the edifice as a
whole. For example, Justice Scalia has argued that the "inherent ten-
sion" between the twin pillars of the Court's death penalty jurispru-
dence - the requirements that states both channel sentencer
discretion and ensure open-ended sentencer consideration of mitigating
evidence - has developed into irreconcilable incompatibility.335 As a
result, he has called (unsuccessfully) for a radical curtailment of the
scope of the Court's death penalty regulation.336 At the other extreme,
shortly before his retirement from the Court in 1994, Justice Blackmun
comprehensively canvassed the structural failings of the Court's work
and as a result advocated (likewise unsuccessfully) constitutional aboli-
tion of the death penalty.337 These sweeping challenges have forced
the Court to confront its death penalty doctrine as an integrated
whole, and thus the perpetuation of that doctrine cannot be written off
as an inadvertent failure to recognize the instability of the ultimate
structure created by years of building without a blueprint.
Instead, the persistence of the Court's death penalty doctrine de-
spite its structural failings can perhaps be better explained by the
existence of inconsistent blueprints drafted by warring architects.
From the time of Furman itself, two minority absolutist views of the
Eighth Amendment have been competing for the votes of the center.
On the one hand, Justices Brennan and Marshall formed the abolition-
ist wing of the Court, contending in every death penalty case that any
and all executions constituted cruel and unusual punishment. At the
very end of his career, Justice Blackmun, originally a Furman dis-
senter, essentially converted to this view.338 On the other hand, for-
mer Chief Justice Burger and current Chief Justice Rehnquist
advocated abolition not of the death penalty, but of the Supreme
Court's regulation of the death penalty through the Eighth Amend-
ment. Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas are contemporary heirs to
this view. Left in the middle were those - like Justice Stevens, the
only member of the Gregg plurality who remains on the Court today
- who attempted to mediate between these positions. Justice Powell,
originally a Furman dissenter, joined Justice Stevens in the Gregg plu-
rality, and Justice O'Connor is his closest contemporary counterpart in
Eighth Amendment matters.
33S See Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S. 639, 664 (i99o) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concur-
ring in the judgment) (maintaining that to acknowledge "that there is perhaps an inherent ten-
sion" between these two strands of death penalty jurisprudence "is rather like saying that there
was perhaps an inherent tension between the Allies and the Axis Powers in World War Ir1 (quot-
ing McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 363 (987) (Blackmun, Jr., dissenting)) (internal quotation
marks ommitted).
336 See id. at 671-73.
337 See Callins v. Collins, Ir 4 S. Ct. 1127, 1128-38 (1994) (Blackmun, J., dissenting from de-
nial of certiorari).
338 See id.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 427 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
Thus, despite the changing membership of the Court, the basic
configuration on Eighth Amendnient issues remained constant for two
decades after Furman: two unwavering poles competed for the
center.339 The center, however, has always lacked a distinctive vision
of its own about the nature and scope of Eighth Amendment regula-
tion of capital punishment. On the one hand, the center has been un-
willing to abandon altogether Furman's reforming mission. In part,
this reluctance has stemmed from the center's prudential commitment
to the doctrine of stare decisis.340 But beyond such prudential con-
cerns, the center has always been the home of cautious meliorism; it
has likely believed that something as court-focused as the fair adminis-
tration of capital punishment must be amenable to amelioration
through law. At the same time, the center has been reluctant to ad-
here to Furman's reforming commitments in a manner that would
place "totally unrealistic conditions" on the use of the death penalty.341
In its attempt to chart a middle course, the center has been forced to
paper over the incofnsistencies of post-Furman death penalty doctrine,
because to acknowledge such incoherence would require the Court to
give up its meliorism and choose between the extremes of abandoning
constitutional regulation of the death penalty and abandoning the
death penalty itself. Thus, it was Justice Stevens, one of the original
death penalty centrists, who attempted to mediate between the con-
flicting impulses in post-Furman doctrine toward both fairness and in-
dividualization 42 - conflicts that have been noted and condemned by
Justices at both poles of the Court.343 The center's attempts to avoid
sliding toward one or the other of the two poles has created a death
penalty doctrine whose only affirmative commitment seems to be to
the old adage that a good compromise is one that pleases nobody.
This account of the internal political dynamics of the Court, evoked
by the image of "warring architects," provides a plausible explanation
339 With the retirements of Justices Brennan, Marshall, and Blackmun in i9go, ggx, and
1994, respectively, there is no longer an abolitionist pole on the Court.
340 This centrist commitment was perhaps most powerfully illustrated by the Court's decision
in Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pa. v. Casey, 112 S. Ct. 2791 (1992), in which the centrist
coalition formed by Justices O'Connor, Kennedy, and Souter adhered to Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S.
113 (1973), as precedent while reworking its particular doctrinal implications.
34' McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 319 (x987) (quoting Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 199
n.5o (1976) (plurality opinion)).
342 See, e.g., Walton v. Arizona, 497 U.S. 639, 714-19 (199o) (Stevens, J., dissenting) (attempt-
ing to explain why the requirement that sentencer discretion be channeled is consistent with un-
limited sentencer discretion to exempt defendants from the death penalty based on mitigating
evidence).
343 Justice Scalia noted this conflict in Walton, 497 U.S. at 664 (Scalia, J., concurring in part
and concurring in the judgment), and called for the abandonment of an entire line of cases de-
manding individualized sentencing in capital cases. See id. at 671-73. Justice Blackmun later
called attention to the same conflict in his dissent from denial of certiorari in Callins v. Collins,
114 S. Ct. 1127 (1994), and argued for the constitutional abolition of the death penalty altogether.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 428 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
for the erection and maintenance of a doctrinal structure so function-
ally and aesthetically unsatisfying.
Yet the building metaphor also suggests a third and altogether dif-
ferent potential explanation for the persistence of the Court's deeply
flawed Eighth Amendment jurisprudence. Perhaps the Justices have
retained current death penalty doctrine despite its failings as a house
because at some level they appreciate its success as a facade. The
Court's doctrine can be said to work as a facade to the extent that it
is successful - and we argue below that it is344 - at making partici-
pants in the criminal justice system and the public at large more com-
fortable with the death penalty than they otherwise would be or
should be.
This argument is of a kind that legal scholars designate, not always
with completely shared definitions, as "legitimation" theory.345 The
use of the verb "to legitimate" in this context is distinct from the two
primary dictionary definitions of the word - the first being what one
might call "formal" legitimation ("to give legal status or authorization
to"346), as in "the Supreme Court legitimated an act of Congress by
upholding it against constitutional challenge"; and the second being
what one might call "normative" legitimation ("to show or affirm to be
justified"347), as in "the Supreme Court's documentation of coercive
police interrogation techniques legitimated its conclusion that Miranda
warnings were necessary to prevent involuntary confessions." Rather,
the distinctive sense of legitimation to which we refer derives from the
work of the sociologist Max Weber, and it might best be described as
an "empirical"348 or "phenomenological"349 sense of the word. The
Weberian idea of legitimation focuses on an individual's (or a group's)
experience of belief in the normative legitimacy of a social phenome-
non, such as a set of relationships, a form of organization, or an ongo-
ing custom or practice, whatever might "really" be the case. Thus, the
Weberian definition of legitimation might be, in Webster's dictionary
parlance, "to induce the belief of normative justification." We use it in
the more particular sense of inducing a false or exaggerated belief in
the normative justifiability of something in the social world - that is,
344 See infra pp. 433-37.
34S See, e.g., MARK KELMAN, A GUIDE TO CRITICAL LEGAL STUDIES 262-95 (1987); Alan D.
Freeman, Legitimizing Racial DiscriminationT hrough Antidiscrimination Law: A CriticalR eview
of Supreme Court Doctrine, 62 MINN. L. REV. 1049, 1052 (I978); Alan Hyde, The Concept of
Legitimation in the Sociology of Law, z983 Wis. L. REV. 379 passim. Despite often significant
variations in the way different theorists define "legitimation," we attempt to sketch the idea in a
fashion general enough to have widespread acceptance.
346 WEBSTER'S THIRD NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY 1291 (1986) (first definition).
347 Id. (second definition).
348 This was Weber's own description of his special sense of legitimation. See MAX WEBER,
BASIC CONCEPTS IN SOCIOLOGY 73 (H.P. Secher trans., z962).
349 See HANNA F. PITKIN, WITTGENSTEIN AND JUSTICE: ON THE SIGNIFICANCE OF LUDWIG
NVITTGENSTEIN FOR SOCIAL AND POLITICAL THOUGHT 283 (1993).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 429 1995-1996

430 HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
of inducing belief in the absence of or in contradiction to evidence of
what the phenomenon is "really" like.350
This particular sense of legitimation derives not only from the
work of Weber, but also from the ideas of Antonio Gramsci, an early
twentieth-century theorist who, inspired by the Russian Revolution, at-
tempted to explain the failure of similar Marxist insurrections in West-
ern Europe, particularly his native Italy.351 Gramsci developed the
idea of "hegemony" as the principal means by which the ruling class in
a capitalist society maintains its dominance; he theorized that the
structure of civil society is maintained not merely by state power, but
also by people's internalization of certain ideas and attitudes that
make challenges to the existing order literally unthinkable.352 Legal
scholars who write about legitimation concern themselves with the
"hegemonic" power and function of legal discourse and doctrine; they
focus on the various ways in which law in all of its manifestations
helps to generate ways of thinking that reinforce numerous aspects of
social life that might otherwise be considered normatively
353
undesirable.
These scholars write about legitimation at one of three basic levels
of generality. First, some scholars focus on what we call "internal"
legitimation - that is, the extent to which legal discourse and doctrine
affect the way actors within the legal system perceive the system and
their role within it. Second, other scholars focus on what we call "par-
ticular external" legitimation - that is, the extent to which legal dis-
course and doctrine affect the way people in general (not just those
350 'this particular spin on the Weberian concept of legitimation is common among legal schol-
ars who write about the "legitimating" or "legitimizing" power and effect of law. See, e.g., KEL-
MAN, supra note 345, at 269 (arguing that "legal thinking" legitimates, at least in part, by "giving
the appearance that the system is less harshly oppressive or biased than it could readily be");
Freeman, supra note 345, at 1052 (arguing that legal doctrine legitimizes when it convincingly
"holds out a promise" but "refrain[s] from delivering on the promise").
351 See Edward Greer, Antonio Gramsci and "Legal Hegemony," in THE POLITICS OF LAW: A
PROGRESSIVE CRITIQUE 304, 304 (David Kairys ed., 1982).
352 See ANTONIO GRAMScI, SELECTIONS FROM THE PRISON NOTEBOOKS (Quintin Hoare &
Geoffrey N. Smith trans., 1971). In describing the imperviousness of the Italian state to Russian-
style revolution, Gramsci observed that "when the State trembled a sturdy structure of civil soci-
ety was at once revealed. The State was only an outer ditch, behind which there stood a power-
ful system of fortresses and earthworks... ." Id. at 238. In the more down-to-earth language of
legal historian Robert Gordon:
This is Antonio Gramsci's notion of "hegemony," i.e., that the most effective kind of domi-
nation takes place when both the dominant and dominated classes believe that the existing
order, with perhaps some marginal changes, is satisfactory, or at least represents the most
that anyone could expect, because things pretty much have to be the way they are.
Robert Gordon, New Developments in Legal Theory, in THE POLITICS OF LAW: A PROGRESSIVE
CRITIQUE, supra note 351, at 28r, 286.
353 Many legal scholars who write about legitimation directly acknowledge their debt to Gram-
sci. See, e.g., Gordon, supra note 352, at 286-87; Karl E. Kare, JudicialD eradicalization of the
Wagner Act and the Origins of Modern Legal Consciousness, z937-1g4z 62 MINN. L. REV. 265,
,
268 n.12 (1978).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 430 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
who play a particular role in the legal system) view a specific social
practice. Finally, still other scholars emphasize what we call "general
external" legitimation - that is, the extent to which legal discourse
and doctrine affect the way people in general view the social structure
writ large (not just some particular social practice or practices).
The work of Robert Cover best exemplifies the first "internal" level
of generality. Cover's own participation in the civil rights and anti-
war movements of the ig6os permitted him to observe the self-avowed
helplessness of the judiciary to respond to the moral claims of pro-
testers and led him to undertake an inquiry into the mindset of pre-
Civil War judges who enforced the fugitive slave laws despite their
own moral opposition to slavery.354 In the book that resulted from
this inquiry, Justice Accused: Antislavery and the Judicial Process,35s
Cover explores how ideas about the nature of law in general and of
the judge's role in a constitutional system in particular helped the an-
tebellum judge suppress his own antislavery convictions and thus alle-
viate profound psychological "dissonance."356 In a later essay entitled
"Violence and the Word," which similarly focuses on the mindset of
the judge in the act of adjudication, Cover explores how "the organi-
zation of the legal system" helps to overcome judges' ordinary, human
"inhibitions against . . . violence,"357 examining in particular the role
of the judge in capital sentencing.35 8 Although these works by Cover
discuss the psychological effects of law on the mindset of judges, one
could also make "internal" legitimation arguments about other actors
in the legal system, such as jurors, lawyers, law enforcement officers,
prison wardens, parole boards, and governors.3 9
The second level of generality appears to be the most common one
in legal scholarship. A good example is Alan Freeman's "Legitimizing
Racial Discrimination Through Antidiscrimination Law,"360 which ar-
gues that the Supreme Court's interpretation of antidiscrimination law
has worked to legitimate the racial inequalities in employment, educa-
tion, housing, and political power that still persist in our society. Free-
354 See Martha Minow, Introduction: Robert Cover and Law, Judging, and Violence, in NAR-
RATIVE, VIOLENCE, AND THE LAW: THE ESSAYS OF ROBERT COVER I (Martha Minow, Michael
Ryan & Austin Sarat eds., 1992).
356 ROBERT COVER, JUSTICE ACCUSED: ANTISLAVERY AND THE JUDICIAL PROCESS (1975).
356 See id. at 226-29.
357 Robert Cover, Violence and the Word, 95 YALE L.J. 16oi, 1614 (1986).
3S8 See id. at 1622-28.
359 Some other "internal" legitimation arguments have focused, like those of Cover, on the
mindset of judges, see Mark Kelman, Interpretive Construction in the Substantive Criminal Law,
33 STAN. L. REV. 591, 670-73 (ig8i) (arguing that judges manipulate legal argument to avoid
having to make difficult choices between rules and standards), while others have addressed more
broadly "the lawyer class," Duncan Kennedy, The Structure of Blackstone's Commentaries, 28
BUFF. L. REV. 205, 353 (1979) (arguing that Blackstone's work was "designed to convince the
lawyer class, and vaguely reassure the public, that all was well in the crucial legal bailiwick").
360 Freeman, supra note 345.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 431 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
man's article exemplifies the "particular external" type of legitimation
argument by focusing on how a particular body of legal ideas (in this
case, constitutional and statutory antidiscrimination law) affects the
way the community in general views a particular social practice or
structure (in this case, pervasive racial inequality across many social
spheres). Freeman argues that legal ideas play a role in "the process of
forming or crystallizing [dominant societal moral] positions" 61 - in
this case, the morality of persistent material inequality between the
races in a purportedly equal society.362
The third level of generality is legitimation theory at its most pro-
vocative. This "general external" type of legitimation argument is ex-
emplified by historian Douglas Hay's essay on the function of capital
punishment in eighteenth-century England.363 Hay argues that the
system of expansive applicability of the death penalty (to over 200 of-
fenses, most of them crimes against property) 64 coupled with frequent
opportunities for and grants of mercy at all stages of the criminal jus-
tice system365 supported a credible "ideology of justice" that "made it
possible to disguise much of the class interest of the law."366 Hay con-
tends that legal institutions (in particular, the criminal justice system)
encouraged the public to hold exaggerated or even false beliefs in the
fairness of the social order as a whole. Or, to use Hay's own words,
legal institutions sustained "the hegemony of the English ruling
class."367 Such whole-order legitimation arguments have been devel-
oped in the American legal context as well.368
361 Id. at IosI.
362 Other examples of this type of legitimation argument abound. See, e.g., Gerald E. Frug,
The Ideology of Bureaucracy in American Law, 97 HARv. L. REv. 1276, 1285 (1984) (arguing that
administrative and corporate law legitimate bureaucracy as an organizational form by telling "a
series of stories that assure us about the acceptability of bureaucratic organizations'); Klare, supra
note 353, at 268 (chronicling how "legal consciousness, legal institutions, and legal practice" in the
area of labor law contributed to the "deradicalization" of the working class); Jonathan A. Willens,
Structure, Content and the Exigencies of War: American Prison Law After Twenty-Five Years,
rg6z-1987, 37 AM. U. L. REV. 41, 51 (1987) (contending that "the principal achievement of prison
law is the legitimation of American prisons").
363 See Douglas Hay, Property, Authority and the Criminal Law, in ALBION'S FATAL TREE:
CRIME AND SOCIETY IN EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY ENGLAND 17 (1975).
364 See id. at I8.
365 See id. at 40-49.
366 Id. at 55-
367 Id. at 56.
368 See, e.g., KELMAN, supra note 345, at 269 (arguing that "legal thinking is prone to be an
effective justificatory ideology" and thus makes "counterhegemonic thoughts ... harder to think");
Peter Gabel & Paul Harris, Building Power and Breaking Images: CriticalL egal Theory and the
Practice of Law, in CRTCAL LEGAL STUDIES 303, 303 (Allan C. Hutchinson ed., 1989) (arguing
that "the legal system works at many different levels to shape popular consciousness toward ac-
cepting the political legitimacy of the status quo"); Duncan Kennedy, A Critique of Adjudication
(fin de siecle) 427 (May 18, 1995) (unpublished manuscript, on file with the Harvard Law School
Library) (arguing that adjudication helps to legitimate "the particular set of hierarchies that con-
stitute our social arrangements").
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 432 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
We think that legitimation arguments at all three levels of general-
ity can be made about the Supreme Court's Eighth Amendment juris-
prudence. These arguments range from the powerful to the plausible
to the speculative, in inverse relation to the level of generality. At the
most specific "internal" level of generality, powerful evidence suggests
that death penalty law makes actors within the criminal justice system
more comfortable with their roles by inducing an exaggerated belief in
the essential rationality and fairness of the system. At the next level of
generality, we believe it is plausible, even probable, that death penalty
law makes members of the public at large more comfortable with the
use of capital punishment than they would be in the absence of such
law. At the greatest level of generality, one could speculate that if
death penalty law legitimates capital punishment as a social practice,
then it also legitimates the social order as a whole by making palat-
able the most awesome exercise of state power. We will consider each
of these arguments in turn.
Two separate compelling arguments support the claim that the
Court's death penalty law has an "internal" legitimation effect. First,
the Court's focus on controlling the discretion of capital sentencers
creates a false aura of rationality, even science, around the necessarily
moral task of deciding life or death. Robert Weisberg has argued con-
vincingly that the Court's attempt to tame the "existential moment"369
of decision in the capital sentencing process has had the effect of re-
ducing the anxiety that judges and juries feel about exercising their
sentencing power. The Court's current capital punishment law thus
permits such institutional actors "to reassure themselves that the sanc-
tions they inflict follow inevitably from the demands of neutral, disin-
terested legal principles, rather than from their own choice and
power."370 Weisberg powerfully, if anecdotally, illustrates this point by
comparing jury instructions and closing arguments in capital sentenc-
ing hearings before and after the innovations of Furman and Gregg.
Whereas pre-Furman jury instructions "aggressively reinforced the no-
tion that the jury could not look to the law for any relief from the
moral question of the death sentence,"371 post-Furman instructions and
prosecutorial arguments urge capital jurors to "realize that their appar-
ently painful choice is no choice at all - that the law is making it for
them"372 through a form of "legal arithmetic" that tallies aggravating
and mitigating circumstances.373 Weisberg's impressionistic account is
bolstered by the empirical work of the Baldus group, whose study of
sentencing patterns in Georgia reveals a higher per capita sentencing
369 Weisberg, supra note 289, at 353.
370 Id. at 385.
371 Id. at 364.
372 Id. at 376.
373 Id. at 377.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 433 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
rate after the Supreme Court's "reform" of capital sentencing
374
schemes.
The second "internal" legitimation argument focuses on how the
Court's constitutionalization of capital punishment has diluted sen-
tencing judges' and jurors' sense of ultimate responsibility for impos-
ing the death penalty. The Supreme Court's Eighth Amendment
jurisprudence has itself recognized the ways in which knowledge of a
lack of final responsibility for imposing the death sentence can imper-
missibly bias a sentencing jury's decision. In Caldwell v. Missis-
Sippi,375 for example, the Court reversed a death sentence imposed
after the prosecutor was permitted to argue to the sentencing jury that
its decision to impose the death sentence would be reviewed by the
state supreme court. Such an argument, opined the Court, impermissi-
bly denigrated the jury's sense of "awesome responsibility"376 for im-
posing the death penalty, especially because it was simply not true
that appellate courts could redo the moral calculus assigned to the sen-
tencing jury. Yet what the Court's Eighth Amendment law forbids
the prosecutor or judge to tell a seated sentencing jury is exactly what
the law itself "tells" every potential juror. The Court's constitutional-
ization of capital punishment under the Eighth Amendment has neces-
sarily entailed systematic federal review of all capital cases and has
prompted much greater state appellate review in order to preempt fur-
ther constitutional challenges. Given the wide coverage of such review
in the popular press377 and the number of capital cases that come to
juries as retrials of earlier convictions or sentences,378 capital sentenc-
ing juries (not to mention judges!) must know that their imposition of
a death sentence is not the end of the matter, but rather the beginning
of a lengthy chain of review.379 Yet this "fact," of which we presume a
large number of jurors are aware, is no more "true" than is the prose-
cutor's argument in Caldwell; appellate courts do not generally review
the moral appropriateness of the imposition of the death penalty.
Rather, as we have demonstrated, the vast majority of the Court's de-
374 See supra p. 375.
375 472 U.S. 320 (I985).
376 Id. at 329 (quoting McGautha v. California, 402 U.S. 183, 208 (197)) (internal quotation
marks omitted).
377 See, e.g., David G. Stout, The Lawyers of Death Row, N.Y. TiMEs, Feb. 14, 1988, ยง 6, at
46.
378 See Bedau, supra note 279, at 269 (noting that "half or more of all death sentences are
reversed in state or federal appellate courts").
379 The Supreme Court recently acknowledged the legal sophistication of sentencing juries
when it held that a capital defendant has a right to counter arguments about his future danger-
ousness with an instruction, when appropriate, that a verdict of "life imprisonment" means "with-
out possibility of parole." See Simmons v. South Carolina, 114 S. Ct. 2x87, 2196 (1994). The
possibility that jurors would bring in their outside knowledge about parole, despite the seeming
clarity of the term "life imprisonment," demonstrates the sort of widespread basic knowledge that
we posit.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 434 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
cisions regulating state death penalty practices touch peripheral, rather
than core issues. The Court's death penalty law thus leaves sentencing
judges and juries with a false sense that their power is safely
circumscribed.
Each of these two "internal" legitimation arguments made about
capital sentencers can fairly be extended to other actors within the
criminal justice system. Just as sentencers may be comforted by the
apparent mathematical precision of the new capital sentencing re-
gimes, prosecutors may feel emboldened in seeking the imposition of
the death penalty.380 And just as sentencers may be reassured by the
existence of layers of review between their sentence and the moment of
execution (if it ever comes), state appellate courts may be reassured by
the existence of federal habeas review, and governors may feel that
any sentence that survives both state and federal review is not an ap-
propriate vehicle for exercising the power of clemency. Two death
penalty scholars have made this type of argument in attempting to
account for the drastic post-Furman decline in the use of the clemency
power. Hugo Bedau has argued that the decline in clemency resulted
from by "the perception ...that death sentences are now meted out
by trial courts with all the fairness that is humanly possible, even if in
the dark pre-Furman past they were not."31 Franklin Zimring has
made a similar argument, observing that in the post-Furman world of
capital punishment, executions are regarded "as the moral responsibil-
ity of Supreme Court justices" rather than of state governors.382 The
diffusion of moral responsibility that occurs when a decision is per-
ceived (correctly or not) to be divided among a number of participants
- the aptly described "problem of many hands"3 3 - affects all par-
ticipants in the decisionmaking process, which in the capital context
may include everyone from law enforcement agents to the actual
executioner.
We think that some of the arguments we have made about "inter-
nal" legitimation carry over to the next level of generality and support
an argument about "external" legitimation of capital punishment in so-
ciety at large. Weisberg, one of the strongest proponents of the "inter-
nal" legitimation argument, doubts this broader legitimating effect on
the grounds that "[m]ost Americans are probably only barely aware
how capital punishment operates or fails to operate, much less how
380 Cf Weisberg, supra note 289, at 376-79 (describing a standard post-Furman prosecutorial
argument).
381 Bedau, supra note 279, at 268.
382 Zimring, supra note 279, at 17.
383 Dennis F. Thompson, Moral Responsibility of Public Officials: The Problem of Many
Hands, 74 Aml. POL. Sci. REv. 9o5, 905 (ig8o).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 435 1995-1996

HARVARD LAW REVIEW IVol. 109:355
the law of capital punishment has developed."384 Alan Hyde has gen-
eralized this objection to apply to "external" legitimation arguments of
all sorts: "If legal decisions and rules are largely unknown to the popu-
lation, not well-regarded when known, and cannot be shown to influ-
ence belief or behavior in the absence of sanction, how could they, by
projecting particular values, legitimate an order?"385 Although Weis-
berg and Hyde are probably correct that members of the general pub-
lic do not know much about the intricacies of the Court's death
penalty doctrine, our guess is that they think they know a great deal.
We have already argued that they know about the existence of exten-
sive review of capital sentences, and that their ignorance about the
precise nature of such review actually enhances the legitimating effect
of such "knowledge."386 Similarly, the delays that occur between death
sentence and execution are matters of common popular knowledge; in-
deed, the past decade has seen increasingly strident attempts by state
and federal legislators to address exactly this issue, in response, no
doubt, to perceived popular pressure.387 Public perceptions about the
nature of death penalty regulation legitimate not because such regula-
tion is "well-regarded" (in Hyde's parlance), but rather because the
elaborateness of the Court's death penalty jurisprudence fuels the pub-
lic's impression that any death sentences that are imposed and finally
upheld are the product of a rigorous - indeed, too rigorous - system
of constraints.
The public's vague and incomplete knowledge about an intricate
scheme of constitutional regulation of the death penalty thus acts as a
society-wide Caldwell argument. The public develops a strong but
false sense that many levels of safeguards protect against unjust or
arbitrary executions. They are thus likely to accept any executions
that finally make it through the system as being more than fair
enough. The Supreme Court's death penalty law, by creating an im-
pression of enormous regulatory effort while achieving negligible regu-
latory effects, effectively obscures the true nature of our capital
sentencing system, in which the pre-Furman world of unreviewable
sentencer discretion lives on, with much the same consequences in
terms of arbitrary and discriminatory sentencing patterns.
We can only hypothesize about the third and most general level of
legitimation argument. If we are right that the Supreme Court's death
penalty law legitimates the imposition of capital punishment both for
participants in the legal system and for the public at large, it might
384 Weisberg, supra note 289, at 384 (citing Phoebe C. Ellsworth & Lee Ross, Public Opinion
and Capital Punishment: A Close Examination of the Views of Abolitionists and Retentionists, 29
CRIME & DELINQ. ix6 (1983)).
385 Hyde, supra note 345, at 4r4.
386 See supra notes 377-379 and accompanying text.
387 See supra notes 6-7 and accompanying text.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 436 1995-1996

1995] SOBER SECOND THOUGHTS
also legitimate the larger social order. Arguably, by legitimating the
most naked use of physical force by the state, law might go a long
way toward legitimating state power generally.388 But any such argu-
ment depends on a theory about how people's perceptions of the fair-
ness of criminal justice institutions relate to their perceptions of the
"rightness" of the social structure as a whole. Such a theory is far
beyond the scope of this Article.
We began our exploration of legitimation theory in an effort to sup-
port the idea that the Court's deeply flawed death penalty law persists
because of its success as a "facade" that creates an appearance of strin-
gent regulation but hides the incoherence and ineffectiveness of the
underlying structure. Ultimately, we reject the crudest form of this
hypothesis. It is simply not plausible to suggest that the Court "in-
tended" its doctrine to deceive or mislead. Such an argument would
make two important mistakes. First, it would reify the Court by posit-
ing a single "will" or "intent" - a description that can never come
close to capturing the ever-shifting amalgam of (at least) nine separate
wills and intents. Second, it would resort to a crudely functionalist
account of the role of adjudication as ever in the service of some po-
tentially disguised extra-legal agenda. The most plausible explanation
for the persistence of the Court's flawed doctrine is not some Machia-
vellian one, but rather lies in the complicated political struggle for the
soul of the Court's centrist Justices that we described above with the
"warring architects" metaphor.389
Nonetheless, the legitimating effect of the Court's Eighth Amend-
ment jurisprudence is very real and leads us to think that we may
have started with the wrong question. Instead of asking why the
Court's doctrine has persisted despite its failure as regulation, perhaps
we should be asking whether that doctrine has any effect besides its
failure as regulation. After all, as one legal scholar has quipped,
"[Y]ou can't know that a thing is not being done well until you know
what it is that is being done."390 In this light, the Court's death pen-
alty doctrine can be seen to play a significant legitimating role in our
society, despite the fact that no one "intended" it to do so.
The short history of death penalty law thus -illustrates in a
profound way how institutions - even institutions as young and as
frequently scrutinized as the constitutional regulation of capital pun-
ishment under the Eighth Amendment - can take on lives of their
own and find a place for themselves different from the one envisioned
388 See generally Hay, supra note 363 (contending that the ruling class in eighteenth-century
England was able to maintain its dominance by creating an ideology of justice in the application
of capital punishment).
389 See supra pp. 427-28.
390 Arthur A. Leff, Economic Analysis of Law: Some Realism About Nominalism, 60 VA. L.
REV. 451, 466 (1974).
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 437 1995-1996

438 HARVARD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 109:355
by their creators. Both the death penalty abolitionists who self-con-
sciously litigated Furman and Gregg, believing that their arguments
would lead to the end of capital punishment in America, and the coa-
lition of centrist Justices who took on a more limited reformist mission
post-Furman and Gregg, would no doubt be surprised to observe the
extent to which current death penalty law acts to legitimate capital
punishment - by denying contradictions between individualized con-
sideration and fairness over a range of cases, by masking the moral
choice and wide discretion of capital sentencers, and by promoting the
appearance of intensive regulation despite its virtual absence. It is
deeply ironic that the impulse to abolish and reform the death penalty
has produced a body of law that contributes substantially to the stabi-
lization and perpetuation of capital punishment as a social practice.
We are left with the worst of all possible worlds: the Supreme Court's
detailed attention to death penalty law has generated negligible im-
provements over the pre-Furman era, but has helped people to accept
without second thoughts - much less "sober" ones - our profoundly
failed system of capital punishment.
HeinOnline -- 109 Harv. L. Rev. 438 1995-1996