96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
After McCleskey
ROBERT L. TSAI †
Abstract
In the 1987 decision, McCleskey v. Kemp, the Supreme Court rejected a
black death row inmate’s argument that significant racial disparities in the
administration of Georgia’s capital punishment laws violated the Fourteenth
Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause. In brushing aside the most sophisticated
empirical study of a state’s capital practices to date, that ruling seemingly slammed
the door on structural inequality claims against the criminal justice system. Most
accounts of the case end after noting the ruling’s incompatibility with more robust
theories of equality and meditating on the deep sense of demoralization felt by
social justice advocates. One might be forgiven for assuming that defense lawyers
abandoned structural inequality claims and the use of quantitative evidence in
capital cases altogether.
† Professor of Law and Law Alumni Scholar, Boston University School of Law. I am grateful for the help
of Mary Sidney Kelly in locating old case files at the Southern Center for Human Rights, and to Nathan
Jordan, Archives Specialist for the National Archives. Earlier versions of this article were presented at
workshops at Boston University’s School of Law, University of Colorado School of Law, University of
Connecticut Law School, Fordham Law School, New York Law School, and the University of Utah Law
School, which brought me out to Salt Lake City as the 2022 Howard Rolapp Distinguished Visitor.
Generous support from Dean Angela Onwuachi-Willig and Boston University School of Law allowed me
to complete this project. I deeply appreciate the feedback on previous drafts from Bethany Berger, Steve
Bright, Debby Denno, Jonathan Feingold, Brandon Garrett, Aya Gruber, Aziz Huq, Gary Lawson,
Benjamin Levin, Justin Murray, Sachin Pandya, David Seipp, Matt Tokson, and Mark Tushnet. Invaluable
research assistant was provided by Victoria Gallerani, Greg Margida, Colin Wagner, Allie Wainwright, and
Catherine MacCarthy.
Robert L. Tsai, After McCleskey ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate
without permission. 2/9/23 9:01 AM
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
But that would be wrong and incomplete. For the first time, this Article
recounts an unusual chapter of the fallout from the McCleskey litigation, focusing
on the litigation and social activism in the wake of that decision. It draws on
interviews with anti-death penalty lawyers working for or allied with the Southern
Center for Human Rights in Georgia, including Stephen Bright, Ruth Friedman,
Bryan Stevenson, and Clive Stafford Smith. It is also based on archival research
into their case files. Drawing from these resources, this Article shows how a subset
of cause lawyers in the late 1980’s and early 90’s had a remarkable reaction to that
demoralizing ruling: they engaged in a distinctive form of “rebellious localism.”
Instead of forsaking structural equality claims, they doubled down on them. Rather
than make peace with what they believed to be an unjust ruling, they sought to
subvert it. They also scrambled to formulate reliable quantitative evidence of
intentional discrimination. Instead of accepting existing racial disparities in the
criminal justice system, they went after prosecutors and state court judges to expose
how racial minorities and poor people wound up on death row more often than their
white, wealthier counterparts.
Understanding this untold episode of legal history teaches us about the
limits of judicial control over constitutional lawmaking, the unanticipated
consequences of trying to insulate the legal order from accountability, and the
possibilities for keeping clients alive and earning pro-equality victories when
political conditions are inhospitable. For those who pay attention, there are lessons
that might humble the most ideologically committed judges and inspire reformers
who confront challenging legal circumstances.
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………….
I. IN THE SHADOW OF AN INFAMOUS RULING………………………………
A. A Difference of Opinion at the Grassroots…………………………..
B. Rebellious Localism………………………………………………….
C. Post-McCleskey Surprises…………………………………………..
II. SHAMING THE SYSTEM…………………………………………………..
A. Expanding the Scope and Targets of Equality Claims………………
B. Unrigging Juries……………………………………………………..
C. Documenting Race-Based Peremptory Challenges………………….
D. Holding Prosecutors Accountable…………………………………...
E. Bouncing Judges………………………………………………………
III. MCCLESKEY AS A SWORD…………………………………………………
A. Horton v. Zant………………………………………………………
1. A Mini-McCleskey Hearing………………………………………
2. The Eleventh Circuit Validates Rebellious Localism…………….
B. State v. Brooks ……………………….................................................
1. Recusing All the Judges and Prosecutors of a Circuit……………………
2. Structural Racism Claims………………………………………………..
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
3. Race-Based Jury Strikes Over Time……………………………………
CONCLUSION…………………………………………………………………………
INTRODUCTION
“These people lost McCleskey because they didn’t understand racial discrimination.
They’re trying to see something from too high an altitude. You’ve got to get closer to the
ground.”
—Bryan Stevenson
Stephen B. Bright1 and his staff at the Southern Prisoners’ Defense Committee,2
later renamed the Southern Center for Human Rights (SCHR), let out a collective sigh upon
learning about the U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling in McCleskey v. Kemp.3 For months, a team
of experts led by the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund had gathered and
analyzed data on death penalty proceedings throughout the State of Georgia. David Baldus,
a University of Iowa law professor, had run sophisticated regression analyses on over 2,000
murders since the reinstatement of capital punishment in 1976. After taking account of 230
nonracial variables, racial disparities remained. The Baldus study revealed, among other
things, that defendants accused of killing white victims were 4.3 times more likely to
receive a death sentence than defendants charged with killing black victims.4
McCleskey’s attorneys offered two theories of what was happening during the
administration of capital punishment in the state, either of which would violate the Equal
Protection Clause. First, they claimed that state officials were valuing white lives at the
expense of black lives. Second, they argued that black defendants were being consistently
1 For nearly 40 years, Bright served as President of SCHR. He began teaching at Yale Law School in 1993
as the second Skelly J. Wright Fellow, and continues to teach there as the Harvey L. Karp Visiting Lecturer
in Law. Over the years, he has also taught at Harvard Law School, University of Chicago, Georgetown
University Law Center, and a number of other law schools.
2 Founded in 1976 by ministers active in the civil rights movement, SCHR was created to aid incarcerated
persons in the early decades of mass incarceration. Over the years, staff lawyer brought lawsuits to improve
prison conditions and represented individuals under a death sentence in the Deep South.
3 McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279 (1987).
4 Id. at 287. As Bhagwat and Lee note, “if the death penalty in fact has any deterrent value, then the
disinclination to impose the penalty in black-victim cases would tend to increase the murder rate against
blacks, and thus systematically provide blacks less protection.” Ashutosh Bhagwat & Evan Tsen Lee, The
McCleskey Puzzle: Remedying Prosecutorial Discrimination Against Black Victims in Capital Sentencing,
1998 SUP. CT. REV. 145, 149 (1998). Additionally, this form of unequal protection “imposes intangible but
important harms on black victims’ families. Id.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
3
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
disfavored.5 The NAACP saw McCleskey’s case as a vessel for shutting down the death
penalty for good, a reprise of its successful cause lawyering in Furman v. Georgia6
demonstrating that capital punishment was being inflicted in arbitrary fashion.
Writing for a 5-4 Court, Justice Lewis Powell’s opinion dashed those hopes. The
Court rejected McCleskey’s equality claims across the board, finding no violation of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Without identifying any flaws in the study, the majority
nevertheless seized the opportunity to make constitutional policies that tried to insulate the
criminal justice system from future racial discrimination claims based on statistical
evidence. “At most,” Justice Powell wrote, “the Baldus study indicates a discrepancy that
appears to correlate with race.”7
Most accounts of McCleskey disparage the ruling for turning a blind eye to racism
in the criminal justice system, giving plenty of attention to Justice Brennan’s dissenting
view that the majority opinion exhibited “a fear of too much justice.”8 Anthony Lewis,
writing in the pages of the New York Times, called the Court’s decision “cynical,” creating
a legal standard that “would be almost impossible” to meet.9 Others said that the decision
brought to a close the big-case phase of legal liberalism when advocates looked to the
Supreme Court as the vehicle for social change.10 For instance, Hugo Bedau said that the
ruling “effectively ends the strategy in anti-death-penalty litigation that has dominated the
thinking of civil-rights and civil-liberties activist for the past generation.”11 It may be “that
5 Since Baldus’s study, some studies have found even greater disparities in treatment based on the race of
the murder victim, particularly when execution rates are factored into the equation. See, e.g., Scott Phillips
& Justin Maceau, Whom the State Kills, 55 HARV. C.R.-C.L. 1 (2020) (finding that defendants who killed
white victims were executed at a rate 17 times greater than those convicted of killing black victims); Lee
Kovarsky, The American Execution Queue, 71 STAN. L. REV. 1163 (2019); Adam Liptak, A Vast Racial
Gap in Death Penalty Cases, New Study Finds, N.Y. TIMES, Aug. 3, 2020.
6 Furman v. Georgia, 408 U.S. 238 (1972). In Furman, a divided Court struck down death penalty statutes
around the country on the ground that they constituted cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the
Eighth Amendment, though the justices could not rally behind a single opinion beyond a curt per curiam
statement. As Justice Douglas put it in his concurring opinion, that provision requires “legislatures to write
penal laws that are evenhanded, nonselective, and nonarbitrary, and to require judges to see to it that
general laws are not applied sparsely, selectively, and spottily to unpopular groups.” Id. at 256 (Douglas, J.,
concurring). See generally Michael Meltnser, Litigating Against the Death Penalty, 82 YALE L.J. 1111
(1973).
7 McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 312.
8 McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 339 (Brennan, J., dissenting); See David G. Savage, Justices’ Use of Statistics
Baffles Experts, L.A. TIMES, Apr. 24, 1987, 19; Excerpts from Court Opinions on Death Penalty, N.Y.
TIMES, Apr. 23, 1987, B12.
9 Anthony Lewis, Bowing to Racism, N.Y. TIMES, Apr. 28, 1987.
10 See LAURA KALMAN, THE STRANGE CAREER OF LEGAL LIBERALISM (1996); Abram Chayes, The Role of
the Judge in Public Law Litigation, 89 HARV. L. REV. 1281 (1976).
11 Hugo Adam Bedau, “Someday McCleskey Will Be Death Penalty’s Dred Scott, L.A. TIMES, May 1,
1987. Randall Kennedy has leveled a different critique of McCleskey, which is “community-oriented”: he
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
4
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
in the present climate of opinion no abolitionist strategy can make much headway,” he
lamented.
The Supreme Court’s backing away from Furman left room for incremental judicial
solutions to problems with death penalty administration. Centrists and conservatives joined
forces to permit executions so long as state law guided a jury’s discretion as to whether to
impose a death sentence and a defendant was allowed the opportunity to introduce all
relevant evidence bearing on the sentencing decision.12 And in the wake of McCleskey,
defendants were left with the possibility of mounting extraordinarily difficult equality-
based challenges based on evidence of malfeasance by specific bad actors in a defendant’s
case. That hardly seemed worth it to try from the perspective of the average person charged
with a serious crime represented by an overworked lawyer and no access to the black box
of decision making by prosecutors or jurors. “Smoking gun” evidence was the stuff of
movies, not the daily reality in criminal courts across the nation. For these and other
reasons, the McCleskey decision exacerbated the crisis of legal liberalism, which for
decades had depended on courts to correct structural problems in society. But those
prospects dimmed as the necessary conditions for legal liberalism collapsed. The
appointment of conservative jurists, a major shift within the Democratic Party to
accommodate resistance to the legacy of legal liberalism, and mounting doctrine hostile to
a progressive vision of legal change emerged as structural obstacles to abolitionists.13
Drawing on interviews with key players as well as archival research, this Article
shows how a group of abolitionists based in the Deep South tried to exploit the McCleskey
decision. They did so by subverting the Court’s intentions and assumptions, challenging a
host of local practices and allegedly racist state actors. These advocates created favorable
outcomes in subsequent capital cases, and then portrayed their discoveries in ways that
says that the Baldus study shows the devaluation of black lives, but notes that the state’s failure to protect
black victims of violent crimes might be handled by more death sentences imposed for black on black
crimes and white on black crimes. Randall L. Kennedy, McCleskey v. Kemp: Race, Capital Punishment,
and the Supreme Court, 101 HARV. L. REV. 1338 (1988).
12 See, e.g., Eddings v. Oklahoma, 455 U.S. 104 (1982); Lockett v. Ohio, 438 U.S. 586 (1978).
13 For some accounts of cause lawyering and its role in legal liberal theories, see MICHAEL MCCANN, LAW
AND SOCIAL MOVEMENTS (2017); BRUCE ACKERMAN, 3 WE THE PEOPLE: THE CIVIL RIGHTS REVOLUTION
(2014); KENNETH MACK, REPRESENTING THE RACE (2012); TOMIKO BROWN-NAGIN, COURAGE TO DISSENT
(2011); MICHAEL KLARMAN, FROM JIM CROW TO CIVIL RIGHTS (2004); MARK TUSHNET, THE NAACP’S
LEGAL STRATEGY AGAINST SEGREGATED EDUCATION, 1925-1950 (1987); William Eskridge, Backlash
Politics: How Constitutional Litigation Has Advanced Marriage Equality in the United States, 93 B.U.L.
REV. 275 (2013); Reva Siegel, She the People: The Nineteenth Amendment, Sex Equality, Federalism, and
the Family, 115 HARV. L. REV. 947, 1046 (2002). For more mixed or negative views that stress backlash,
see GERALD N. ROSENBERG, THE HOLLOW HOPE (1991).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
5
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
shook the McCleskey Court’s tidy presentation of the legal system as well-functioning,
rational, structurally sound, and non-racist.14
Part I revisits the McCleskey decision, emphasizing what the Justices tried to
accomplish as well as the law of unintended consequences that often characterizes
constitutional politics. Judges write opinions to decide constitutional questions, believing
they will be able to persuade people beyond the specific litigants before them, but in reality,
judges have little control over how others will receive their rulings or what they will do
with them. In this instance, a subset of abolitionists responded by engaging in rebellious
localism, a strategy of marshaling available resources and deploying them at county and
city officials in the service of transformative ends.15 They made these adjustments to public
law advocacy so they could continue raising racial bias claims without giving up on their
structural critiques. Besides trying to save their clients’ lives, their goal was to undermine
the presumption of fairness and neutrality contained in the Supreme Court’s rulings.
Chipping away at the parsimonious vision of racial equality might then lay a foundation
for the eventual repudiation of McCleskey.
Typically, advocates who want to erode a Supreme Court precedent denounce it
across the board to try to deny social acceptance of its vision of the law. In this instance,
however, death penalty abolitionists denounced the ruling outside of the legal system but
tried to exploit assumptions contained in the ruling for a broader vision of equality in their
own cases. This adaptation was necessitated by not only the perception of hostility toward
the ideal of equal justice, but also the asymmetrical obstacles encountered by defendants
who raise fact-intensive constitutional issues. This newfound approach contained three key
facets: intensifying issues, subverting doctrine, and scaling downward.
Part II focuses on specific cases in the wake of McCleskey where SCHR lawyers or
their allies escalated their tactics in capital cases. These cause lawyers aggressively asked
for hearings (often getting them), put prosecutors and judges under oath, and moved to
recuse prosecutors who engaged in misconduct or judges who tolerated racist trial
practices. They pioneered creative strategies for gaining access to state records and
quantitative evidence to challenge everything from jury venire practices to peremptory
14 The methodological approach employed in this study is explicitly socio-legal in nature, one that focuses
on the law as a set of institutions and ideas perpetually in contest, where litigants (strong and weak) strive
to highlight contradictions between ideals and material reality, but elites and social groups have their own
agendas. See, e.g., Susan S. Silbey, Ideology, Power, and Justice, in BRYANT G. GARTH & AUSTIN SARAT,
JUSTICE AND POWER IN SOCIOLEGAL STUDIES 289 (1989) (describing an approach to the study of law that
“push[es] the justice critique beyond the condemnation of inequality to an examination of the possibilities
for resistance and transformation.”).
15 Their approach was “rebellious” in the sense that advocates resisted key Supreme Court interpretations of
the Fourteenth Amendment. It was “localist” in the sense that they accepted systems of criminal justice
were organized on largely localist terms and reoriented their strategies accordingly. These adjustments did
not entail a commitment to the local as an ideal form of social organization; rather, the localist dimension
of their advocacy was purely strategic in nature, primarily in selecting the targets of obloquy and reform.
They were committed to constitutional ideals expressed at the state and national level.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
6
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
strikes by prosecutors. Rebellious localism in this context not only kept their clients alive
and raised the costs of litigation for the state, but it also yielded valuable precedent for
future cases.
Using two case studies, Part III shows how the strategy of rebellious localism paid
off by closely examining how abolitionists’ use of these strategies unfolded in Horton v.
Zant and State v. Brooks. Special attention is paid to the synergies between litigation and
out-of-court advocacy, as well as the management of tensions between the primary goals
of harm reduction and secondary goals of legal reform.
For those who engage the politics of repudiation, the ultimate objective is to
eventually persuade an apex court to overrule a despised precedent, or water it down with
exceptions, or to stop using that case to justify policies.16 Abolitionists and racial justice
advocates have not yet achieved that, but other kinds of progress are worth noting, such as
the rejection of McCleskey by state legislators and state courts. The conclusion considers
how to evaluate success in ongoing efforts to resist a hated decision and render it infamous
in the public mind. It also considers what this episode teaches us about judicially driven
efforts to insulate the criminal justice system, as well as prospects for rebellious localism
in the future.
I. IN THE SHADOW OF AN INFAMOUS RULING
A. A Difference of Opinion at the Grassroots
Although discretion lies in the hands of several actors within the criminal justice
system, a great deal of responsibility for the disparities probably could be laid at the feet
of prosecutors. Formally, in exercising executive power, they act as gate keepers: capital
punishment can never be imposed unless prosecutor files notice to seek it.17 In practice,
most prosecutors never seek the death penalty, while a handful opt for it every chance they
get. When they do pursue death as a punishment, they also sometimes change their minds.
Some district attorneys operate under strict policies, while others don’t even consult
an office policy beyond what state law says.18 For instance, in Fulton County, where
Warren McCleskey was tried for shooting a white police officer in 1978, the District
Attorney at the time “had no written or oral policies or guidelines to determine whether a
16 On the processes of infamy, see Robert L. Tsai, Supreme Court Precedent and the Politics of
Repudiation, in LAW’S INFAMY: UNDERSTANDING THE CANON OF BAD LAW (Austin Sarat et al. eds., 2021);
Robert L. Tsai, Reconsidering Gobitis, 86 WASH. U. L. REV. 363 (2008).
17 PAUL GOWDER, THE RULE OF LAW IN THE UNITED STATES: AN UNFINISHED PROJECT OF BLACK
LIBERATION 110 (2021); ANGELA J. DAVIS, ARBITRARY JUSTICE: THE POWER OF THE AMERICAN
PROSECUTOR (2007).
18 On the need for reform of prosecutorial decision making, see RACHEL ELISE BARKOW, PRISONERS OF
POLITICS 144-64 (2019).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
7
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
capital case would be plea bargained or brought to trial.”19 The absence of consistent
policies raised the specter of unbridled discretion, exacerbating any racially biased
decisions by individual actors.
At the time, the McCleskey litigation split the abolitionist community along
generational lines, but no steps were taken to interfere with an effort driven by advocates
who had been in the trenches the longest. While the older guard represented by the brilliant
Anthony Amsterdam retained their faith that the Justices would once again use their Article
III authority to enact broad changes to criminal policy like structural reform cases in the
mold of Brown v. Board, the younger advocates were wary of what the increasingly
conservative Supreme Court might do with the case.20 Some of them turned out possess
the unique skillset for the next phase of grinding, case-by-case form of grassroots advocacy
necessitated by the high court’s rightward tilt, as exemplified by the McCleskey ruling.
Steve Bright had taken over the reins of SCHR after running D.C. Law Students in
Court. From the start, Bright had his doubts about whether the McCleskey litigation would
pay off in getting judges to declare the death penalty unconstitutional. “I don’t think it’s
going to work like that,” he told Bryan Stevenson, then just two years out of law school
and a staff attorney at SCHR.21 Bright did not believe that the Court would allow capital
punishment to resume nationwide in Gregg v. Georgia, only to shut it back down so soon
based on a broad equality rationale. He knew that Justice Lewis Powell, a centrist, had
already objected to abolition “by judicial fiat” and expressed hostility to systemic
inequality claims in Furman, saying that the penalty’s disproportionate impact on the poor
and racial minorities was “tragic,” but ultimately irremediable, and that past intentional
discrimination “is no justification for holding that capital punishment penalty is invalid in
all cases.”22 In fact, Justice Powell optimistically believed that the “discriminatory
imposition of capital punishment is far less likely today than in the past.”23
Neither Bright nor Stevenson played an active role in the McCleskey litigation.
They feared a bad outcome, even though they agreed that discrimination remained a serious
problem. In fact, Bright had even told Baldus at the time, “I see even more racism than
what you show!”24
19 ROBERT L. TSAI, PRACTICAL EQUALITY 86-91 (2019); Brief for Petitioner at 58-59, McCleskey v. Kemp,
No. 84-6811, 1986 WL 727359 (Sept. 3, 1986).
20 See RISA L. GOLUBOFF, THE LOST PROMISE OF CIVIL RIGHTS 253 (2007) (“When lawyers sought
guidance about the best strategies for the continued development of civil rights law … they drew on Brown
as both a doctrinal and a cultural resource.”).
21 Stevenson would later move to Montgomery, Alabama, to start a death penalty resource center, relying
on freshly available federal funds. Those funds would dry up, and he would turn that organization into the
Equal Justice Initiative, which he leads to this day. Since 1998, Stevenson has also taught at NYU School
of Law. Interview with Bryan Stevenson, Exec. Dir., Equal Justice Initiative (Sept. 14, 2020).
22 Furman, 408 at 421, 450 (Powell, J., dissenting).
23 Id.
24 Interview with Steve Bright, Pres. of S. Ct. for Hum. Rts. (Feb. 29, 2020).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
8
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
On April 22, 1987, by a 5-4 vote, a bitterly divided Court refused to enforce the
principle of equality in an opinion by Justice Powell, who had been on the losing side in
Furman. In doing so, the Justices made it harder for defendants nationwide to prove racial
discrimination within the criminal justice system, especially using statistical evidence
alone. Setting the constitutional bar high, the Justices weren’t satisfied by a showing of
alarming racial disparities; they simply would not act unless someone could show exactly
who was responsible for the inequities in a complex system with many moving parts.
To justify this position, Justice Powell stated that “disparities in sentencing are an
inevitable part of our criminal justice system” due to the discretionary roles afforded to
prosecutors, judges, and jurors.25 In fact, his interpretation of the Equal Protection Clause
treated discrimination as the price of mercy. A jury can decline to impose the death penalty,
Justice Powell wrote, but “whereas decisions against a defendant’s interest may be reversed
by the trial judge or on appeal, these discretionary exercises of leniency are final and
unreviewable.”26 From this point on, in order to protect a prosecutor’s “traditionally ‘wide
discretion’” in making charging decisions, “we would demand exceptionally clear proof
before we infer that the discretion has been abused.”27
This amounted to a major retreat from precedents like Furman, where the Justices
had worried about irrationality and racial discrimination infecting the administration of
criminal laws, and even Gregg, where they had allowed the death penalty to be resumed
but warned that “the penalty of death is different in kind from any other punishment” and
could not be inflicted when there existed “a substantial risk” of depriving someone’s
rights.28 The McCleskey Court worried that the defendant’s equality argument would open
the door to consideration of other disparities in the legal system—perhaps even leading to
a kind of affirmative action for death sentences.
Justice Powell in particular had become convinced that a win for McCleskey would
“throw[] into serious question the principles that underlie our entire criminal justice
system.”29 He heartily endorsed the view of prosecutors, who insisted that the defendant’s
racial equality claim strikes at the heart of the judicial system.” Absurdly, Powell feared a
kind affirmative action that flowed naturally from accepting statistics as evidence of
intentional discrimination: “What if one accepts the study as reflecting sound statistical
analysis? … Would this require that no black be sentenced to death where victim was
white?”30 He also wished to deter further attacks on the criminal justice system through the
use of statistics, troubled that accepting the form of proof represented in the Baldus Study
would “invite a system of ‘statistical jurisprudence’—unprecedented in civilized
25 McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 312.
26 Id.
27 Id. at 297.
28 STUART BANNER, THE DEATH PENALTY: AN AMERICAN HISTORY 267-75 (2003).
29 McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 315.
30 Scott E. Sundby, The Loss of Constitutional Faith: McCleskey v. Kemp and the Dark Side of Procedure,
10 OHIO ST. J. CRIM. L. 10 (2012).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
9
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
history.”31 There seemed to him “no limiting principle to judgments in criminal cases based
solely on statistics.”32 Years later, Powell would express regret for his role in pushing his
colleagues to this outcome. But far too late—the damage had been done.33
B. Rebellious Localism
Constitutional actors must calibrate their strategies to deal with shifting political
and cultural conditions. Arguments and approaches that work in one historical moment
may not work in a different moment. How would social actors in the field of action react
at a moment of crisis for legal liberalism? For decades, liberals had turned to the courts as
a vehicle for reforming society’s key institutions. The fact that the criminal justice system
was among the least affected by the Civil Rights movement did not dampen legal liberals’
ardor for court-centered projects. To the contrary, that fact simply reminded them of how
much farther judges needed to go. And yet the conservative revolution made most visible
through Nixon’s war-on-crime politics, though propelled by elites of both major parties,
put legal liberals on their heels.34 Public officials elected after complaining of the Warren
Court’s excesses secured the appointment of judges hostile to the further expansion of
many rights—especially that of criminal defendants.
On a Court reshaped by Republican presidents, Justices Powell, Rehnquist, Scalia,
and O’Connor were most skeptical of the Warren Court legacy and legal liberalism. They
would work hardest to protect the state’s crime-fighting prerogative by making it harder to
bring constitutional challenges and insulating the decisions of police officers, prosecutors,
and judges from civil lawsuits. In response to changing institutional conditions, would
activists abandon legal liberalism or find some way to rekindle their commitment to the
enterprise?
Among racial justice advocates, the immediate reaction to McCleskey was
disenchantment. Anthony Amsterdam, who argued Furman in the Supreme Court, called
McCleskey “the Dred Scott decision of our time,” one that declares that “African-American
life has no value which white men are bound to respect.”35 Bryan Stevenson felt shattered
and never fully escaped the feeling of demoralization. “Most of us were just devastated,
31 Id. at 32. But as Aya Gruber points out, Powell was not consistently opposed to the use of statistics to
prove racist intentions, and he was not inalterably opposed to equal protection claims in the capital context,
for he was the author of Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986). See Aya Gruber, Race-of-Victim
Disparities and the ‘Level Up’ Problem, 55 HARV. C.R.-C.L. 657 (2020).
32 BANNER, supra note 28, at 290.
33 Gregg v. Georgia, 428 U.S. 153, 188 (1976); JOHN C. JEFFRIES, JR., JUSTICE LEWIS F. POWELL, JR. 451
(1994).
34 AYA GRUBER, THE FEMINIST WAR ON CRIME (2020); JAMES FORMAN, LOCKING UP OUR OWN (2017).
35 Anthony G. Amsterdam, Race and the Death Penalty Before and After McCleskey, 39 COLUM. HUM.
RTS. L. REV. 34, 47 (2007); Kennedy, supra note 11, at 1389.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
10
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
most of us were just unbelievably heartbroken,” he said years later.36 “I thought about
Brown the day McCleskey was decided. I couldn’t make sense of how the United States
Supreme Court … could be talking about the inevitability of racial bias in the
administration of the death penalty.”37
He denounced McCleskey for enabling unequal application of capital punishment,
but in truth, the extinguishment of large-scale equality claims was part of a broader pattern
of judicial entrenchment of War-on-Crime policies that fanned out in different directions.
These policies included rulings that preserved police discretion on the streets and created
doctrines restricting the availability of habeas corpus.38 Eventually, McCleskey would form
a part of a losing pattern as litigation aimed at making the U.S. Supreme Court’s death
penalty jurisprudence more equitable or humane went sideways, reflected in such cases as
Stanford v. Kentucky, which refused to stop the execution of juvenile offenders and Penry
v. Lynaugh, a case that permitted the execution of a man with the mental age of a 6-year-
old child. “By the end of the 80’s, all of that stuff had failed,” Stevenson summed up.
Bright similarly believed McCleskey to be “an everlasting blight on the Supreme
Court and a badge of shame for the state of Georgia.”39 He put McCleskey in the company
of not only Dred Scott, but also Plessy v. Ferguson, the notorious ruling that upheld a
Louisiana law requiring “separate but equal” passenger coaches and emboldened
segregationists for generations.40 Thus, for many, disaffection was as predictable as an
overall reduction of system-wide legal challenges. That’s where most analyses have
stopped.41
But for some of the most committed abolitionists in the Deep South,
disenchantment about the rule of law did not lead to the wholesale abandonment of equality
claims, much less structural ones. As their work necessarily became grittier and more
pragmatic—a form of legal trench warfare—these cause lawyers not only continued to
emphasize racial inequality claims, they also broadened their critiques to encompass
poverty, a related ground that did some of the work of centering race but also had the
benefit of moving to different terrain that might pick up new segments of the community.
36 EJI’s Bryan Stevenson Pays Tribute to SCHR’s Steve Bright, YouTube (July 25, 2013),
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3HmU0t68vE0>.
37 Id.
38 See, e.g., Stanford v. Kentucky, 492 U.S. 361 (1989); Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U.S. 302 (1989); Whren v.
United States, 517 U.S. 806 (1996); Teague v. Lane, 489 U.S. 288 (1989); Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U.S.
72 (1977); Larry Yackle, The New Habeas Corpus in Death Penalty Cases, 63 AM. U. L. REV. 1791
(2014); James Liebman, More than ‘Slightly Retro:’ The Rehnquist Court’s Rout of Habeas Corpus in
Teague v. Lane, 18 N.Y.U. REV. L. & SOC. CHANGE 537 (1990). See generally LARRY YACKLE,
RECLAIMING THE FEDERAL COURTS (1994).
39 David G. Stout, The Lawyer of Death Row, N.Y. TIMES MAGAZINE, Feb. 14, 1988, 52.
40 Id.
41 Note, for instance, that Paul Butler for one has stated the strategy of “using social science to win equal
protection claims” is “doomed if the premise is that the problem is that there is not enough evidence of
discrimination or not the right kind of evidence.” Paul Butler, Equal Protection and White Supremacy, 112
NW. U.L. REV. 1457, 1461 (2018).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
11
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
In this sense, the Supreme Court’s ruling produced the first of many ironic effects:
deepening the resolve of activists to redouble their efforts to prove systemic racism.
Opponents of McCleskey would have to outmaneuver their counterparts, ratchet up their
tactics against carefully curated targets, delay the worst harms arising from unjust policies,
and persuade lower court judges to reshape doctrine to their preferred contours.42 Outside
the courthouses, they would shame local public servants and citizens into seeing their
clients as victims of unequal justice and do something about it.
Of course, rebellious localism in the capital context was not the same as the strategy
might appear in other contexts. It remained court-focused because the short-term goals of
harm reduction in this high-stakes context—namely, keeping a client alive for as long as
possible—remained paramount. But as practiced by SCHR lawyers, the method retained a
structural critique as well as a commitment to long-term transformation, with an eye
towards grassroots mobilization and construction of a counter-vision of equal justice. All
of this was directed at contesting the perception that the Constitution no longer served the
interest of the poor or racial minorities.
I call this aspect of their reaction to unfavorable law issue intensification. Instead
of giving up on equality claims in this domain, which would have been a perfectly natural
response to an increasingly hostile political and cultural climate, some social actors instead
doubled down on equality. In certain situations where anti-death penalty lawyers might
have bypassed an equality claim, they lodged one anyway to preserve the issue and in the
hope that more evidence to support it might materialize years later. Harsh procedural
changes already pushed advocates toward such an adaptation in strategy as they tried to
prolong litigation to save lives, but McCleskey reinforced their darkening expectation that
problems of proof and procedure would be held against an individual on appeal and during
collateral review.
Besides manipulating doctrine on substance and procedure in ways that disfavored
progressive liberal legal projects, high-profile judges also advocated legislative reform to
close the courthouse doors further. A year after the McCleskey decision, Justice Powell
agreed to serve on an ad hoc committee established by Chief Justice Rehnquist to propose
restrictions on habeas corpus petitions by death-row inmates. Justice Powell’s leading role
in McCleskey, followed by his subsequent call for additional restrictions on the Great Writ,
deepened abolitionist suspicions that the Supreme Court was biased against racial
minorities and wanted to speed executions regardless of the costs. The growing judicial-
legislative initiative, which would attract the support of War-on-Crime state attorneys
general, heightened their awareness that every possible trick would be used to prevent
structural injustice from being seen or addressed.43 As a result, advocates would at times
42 Of course, death penalty abolitionists were not the first to embrace strategies of delay as part of resisting
inequality. See Daniel S. Farbman, Resistance Lawyering, 107 CAL. L. REV. 1877, 1880 (describing a
“resistance lawyer” as someone who “seeks both to mitigate the worst injustices of that system and to
resist, obstruct, and dismantle the system itself”).
43 See ROBERT L. TSAI, DEMANDING THE IMPOSSIBLE, draft on file with author.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
12
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
raise more allegations of discrimination than they likely would have before McCleskey.
Although they rejected nearly every word of the McCleskey ruling in their hearts, they
managed any sense of dissonance by citing the case in court and treat it as good law, while
denouncing it in other domains.
Bright was a realist, as well as a close and creative reader of judicial decisions.
After “pulling the decision apart,” he urged fellow abolitionists to take the Justices at their
word. The key was Justice Powell’s insistence that a defendant had to prove that
decisionmakers in his own case acted with a discriminatory purpose. Bright told Stevenson
and other allies: “There’s language in here we can do something with.”44 The best response,
he said, was to identify every single situation where a judge or prosecutor might have acted
out of bias and “to litigate the hell out of it.”
Bright’s move to turn a shield fashioned for prosecutors into a sword to be wielded
by defendants should be considered a form of doctrinal subversion. Instead of acceding to
the Court’s plan to insulate the criminal justice system, SCHR and their allies redeployed
the precedent to go after some of the system’s most prominent guardians: prosecutors and
judges. This amounted to ignoring the system-insulating motives in McCleskey itself, and
to see just how far they could take the Court’s insistence that a defendant could still advance
a claim if he offered evidence “that would support an inference that racial considerations
played a part in his sentence.”45
These abolitionists even called their filings “McCleskey motions” to reclaim that
precedent on behalf of a more robust vision of equality. The Supreme Court’s ruling in
McCleskey was well on its way to becoming an infamous decision in the legal academy
and among the public interest lawyers at large, but in these Southern courtrooms, Bright
and others treated the decision as if it represented good law in demanding discovery and
hearings.
One of the things McCleskey questioned was “whether any consistent policy can be
derived by studying the decisions of prosecutors” across several different counties since so
many variables were involved in charging decisions. In other words, Justice Powell thought
the inference of intentional discrimination was greatly weakened—he said the disparities
were not “stark” enough—because of the sheer spatial expanse from which the data was
derived as well as the large number of human actors making decisions based on
“innumerable factors.”
Bright proposed a solution to this problem: identifying situations where a particular
prosecutor, judge, or local jurisdiction had a reputation for engaging in discriminatory
behavior. I call this aspect of SCHR’s effort to make equality claims more palatable to
skeptical judges the scaling down of relevant constitutional theories and the targets of
enforcement. By focusing on specific bad actors and simplifying the causal stories of
discrimination, advocates hoped they would not trigger the slippery slope problem Justice
44 Stevenson interview, supra note 21.
45 McCleskey, 481 U.S. at 292-93.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
13
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Powell found so daunting.46 The goal was to go hard after unethical prosecutors and
“hanging judges” (judges elected based on their record as tough-on-crime prosecutors) who
appeared to treat black defendants, black jurors, or black victims more harshly. So long as
the evidence was compelling, offering a judicial remedy could be isolated to particular
actors or local jurisdictions and therefore would not bring the entire justice system to its
knees, as Justice Powell feared.
All three adjustments—intensifying their emphasis on issues of equality, subverting
doctrine, and scaling down—comprised a response to negative developments in
constitutional law. Together, these tactical choices helped resuscitate belief in legal
liberalism at a time that Mike Seidman has incisively described as “an environment marked
by liberal collapse and conservative hibernation,”47 before even more muscular forms of
judicial conservatism appeared.
These shifts in strategy entailed making tradeoffs: how to continue engaging in
advocacy that might produce measurable gains through harm reduction as well as doctrinal
improvement, while managing scarce resources in a time of cultural fatigue over racial
equality claims. By making these adjustments, Bright and his allies developed a distinctive
form of rebellious localism. This major shift in strategy can be understood as an example
of what Mark Tushnet has termed “defensive crouch liberalism”48—adaptations by
progressives to the fact that federal courts became dominated by conservatives. But these
adjustments lacked the “nervous” form of advocacy Tushnet suggests is emblematic of
liberalism seen in so many quarters for fear of retaliation by conservatives. Rather,
presuming a national conservative backlash was already underway, the trick became
finding moments, spaces, and places far away from national elites where conceptions of
rights could be pushed openly and fearlessly. In doing so, SCHR and its allies began to
construct a counter-narrative that post-racial American had not yet arrived, and that the
criminal justice system had never been successfully reconstructed.
C. Post-McCleskey Surprises
A fruitful point of entry into the historical record is to consider these strategic
adaptations in the wake of seemingly unjust Supreme Court precedent as a species of
unintended consequences. Sociologist Robert Merton has called the unanticipated
consequences of purposive action “those elements which would not have occurred had the
action not taken place.” Such effects “result from the interplay of the action and the
46 Justice Powell was sold on the prosecutors’ argument that McCleskey’s equality claim “strikes at the
heart of the judicial system.” TSAI, supra note 1919, at 82. As Justice Powell wrote in his memo to
colleagues, “petitioner’s challenge is no less than to our entire criminal justice system.” He wondered
aloud: “What if one accepts the study as reflecting sound statistical analysis? Would this require that no
black be sentenced to death where victim was white?” Id. at 82-83. See also Sundby, supra note 30.
47 Louis Michael Seidman, Critical Constitutionalism Now, 75 FORDHAM L. REV. 575, 582 (2006).
48 Mark Tushnet, Abandoning Defensive Crouch Liberal Constitutionalism, BALKINIZATION, May 6, 2016.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
14
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
objective situation.”49 Most of the time we act “not on the basis of scientific knowledge,
but opinion and estimate,” Merton writes. This is especially true when it comes to law as a
species of social activity: judges create doctrine hoping that certain consequences will
happen. They tinker with doctrine, often overestimating their own ability to shape the
behavior of others. Even so, this is unavoidable: judges make doctrine predicting that
relevant social actors will internalize their pronouncements and behave in certain ways, but
in truth judges have wholly inadequate information about other social actors’ motivations,
commitments, and resources.
Merton identifies the situation where “public predictions of future social
developments” can themselves “become a new element in the concrete situation” and
thereby “change the initial developments.” Just as Marx’s prediction of progressive
concentration of wealth and increased misery of the masses helped lead to the rise of
organized labor, thereby slowing developments predicted by Marx, so too it might be said
that popular awareness of the Supreme Court’s desire to insulate the criminal justice system
from fundamental challenge and thereby wish a post-racist society into being itself became
a factor in confounding those original expectations. As Merton points out, “this
contingency may often account for social movements developing in utterly unanticipated
directions.” A case like McCleskey can become imbued with social meaning that it
becomes part of a broader struggle over legal principles, thereby facilitating surprising
shifts in organizational behavior and to the law itself.
Consider several unintended consequences. First, Justice Powell did not expect that
his decision would be used as Exhibit A in teaching a generation of lawyers and activists
about poor constitutional reasoning and the problem of judicial callousness. Within the
criminal defense bar, and among the smaller, tight-knit community of cause lawyers,
McCleskey became a rallying cry to reject the Court’s seeming command to abandon trying
to prove systemic racism. The ruling itself began to play a role in identity formation: more
criminal defense lawyers began to see themselves as cause lawyers—at least part of the
time.
In fact, the ruling spawned political efforts to repudiate the ruling’s tolerance of
racial inequities in the criminal justice system. Legislation was introduced in Congress to
permit defendants to introduce statistical evidence to demonstrate that the death penalty is
enforced in a discriminatory manner. Efforts to undermine McCleskey’s logic also emerged
at the state level. Although the Racial Justice Act has never been enacted by the Senate (it
has passed in the House), grassroots activism led to the enactment of state analogues in
North Carolina, Kentucky, and—in the most far-reaching form—California.
Second, the Court underestimated the possibility of a differentiated response to the
ruling due to the variety of criminal defense lawyers. It’s one thing to expect court-
appointed lawyers heavily dependent on judicial favor or already overburdened public
defenders to shy away from making equality claims after a doctrinal test is made harder to
49 Robert K. Merton, The Unanticipated Consequences of Purposive Social Action, 1 AM. SOC. REV. 894
(Dec. 1936).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
15
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
satisfy. It’s quite another to expect abolitionist organizations to renounce equality claims
without a fight. Groups with the capacity to draw upon out-of-jurisdiction manpower and
donations could still choose to invest in the heavy lifting necessary to pursue allegations
disfavored by the Supreme Court and do so in venues beyond that institution’s capacity to
control.
Nor did the Justices foresee that success in a single case could be leveraged
successfully to throw other death sentences, and even some convictions, into serious
doubt—and even spawn more structural equality claims. When a judge found a prosecutor
or judge engaged in unconstitutional actions, especially a violation of the principle of
equality, SCHR lawyers exploited that decision for all it was worth, arguing in other cases
involving that person or the entire office was hopelessly tainted by racism.
To these advocates, McCleskey had ripped the mask off an unjust system. If they
continued to behave like business as usual and gave such figures the benefit of the doubt,
they would be complicit in perpetuating cruelty and inequality. Instead of propping up that
illusion of neutrality, they vowed to break norms of civility and insist that judges and
prosecutors step aside—another unanticipated byproduct of the ruling.
Third, in constructing McCleskey, Powell believed he was protecting faith in the
rule of law by shutting down all but the rarest system-wide constitutional challenges.
Instead, the ruling would end up inspiring a fresh round of even more intensive equality-
based challenges at the local level. Worried about the need to document all the ways that
race and poverty shaped capital outcomes and educate fellow citizens as well as jurists,
some advocates filed more pre-trial motions than they ever did before, challenging
everything from jury selection processes to prosecutorial charging decisions. During post-
collateral proceedings and retrials, SCHR lawyers also demanded transparency, seeking
access to a prosecutor’s notes to bolster their claim that charging decisions were racially
discriminatory or that prosecutors had tried to manufacture all-white juries.
A subset of cause lawyers thus engaged in more high-risk, high-reward moves to
target bad actors involved in administering the justice system. Individual judges and
prosecutors were swept up in these efforts to expose the inner machinery of the death
penalty system, which blackened not only their reputations, but also that of state attorney
generals who chose to defend local practices. That unintended development arguably
undermined faith in the rule of law far more than endorsing McCleskey’s challenge would
have done—especially if the Court could have envisioned a path to a narrow remedy in
that dispute.50
Fourth, with the exception of Justice Scalia, who objected privately to any
suggestion that the Baldus Study was inherently unsound (he was simply more forthright
in tolerating persistent inequities),51 the Justices were uneasy with quantitative analysis.
50 I have suggested narrower constitutional violations and remedies, particularly if the Court had perceived
the primary problem in terms of fairness rather than equality. See TSAI, supra note 19.
51 John Charles Boger, McCleskey v. Kemp: Field Notes from 1977-1991, 112 NW. U. L. REV. 1637
(2018).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
16
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
The majority hoped to dissuade structural advocacy that relied upon these kinds of
statistics. Justice Powell warned his colleagues that if the Baldus study were accepted as
sufficient proof of an equality violation, it would “invite a system of ‘statistical
jurisprudence’—unprecedented in civilized history.”52 The irony, of course, is that by
expressing such a distaste for numbers and a strong preference for direct evidence of racial
hostility, the McCleskey decision may have encouraged advocates to become more
aggressive and comprehensive in introducing evidence of actions, sentiments, and
associations that at times could actually be less reliable in demonstrating racial bias.
Simpler evidence is not always better evidence. In retrospect, it may have been suboptimal
to funnel such complicated evidence of structural bias into state courts, which might have
less expertise with such evidence.
Acquiring direct as well as quantitative evidence of bias, and then arguing about its
merits openly in court, would also inevitably prolong trial proceedings and threaten to turn
them into communal spectacles. Such consequences, too, would not have been optimal
from the standpoint of the Supreme Court. Together, they comprise another factor Merton
calls ‘the imperious immediacy of interest … where the actor’s paramount concern with
the foreseen immediate consequences excludes the consideration of further or other
consequences of the same act.”
In short, Justice Powell wanted fewer structural equality claims, not more; reduced
conflicts over race rather than more intense ones. He hoped to dissuade use of statistical
proof to undermine criminal judgments and promote belief in the rule of law. As we shall
also see, the McCleskey decision certainly didn’t put an end to a battle of experts. It didn’t
even stem allegations of racism in death penalty cases. It just shifted the theater of conflict.
II. SHAMING THE SYSTEM
Litigating in the shadow of McCleskey “was a time of transition,” recalled
Stevenson.53 “Thinking more creatively about how to expose these problems became a
higher priority.” It’s important to see that rebellious localism wasn’t just about adjusting
litigation strategy; it also became about grounding these new courtroom tactics in
grassroots mobilization. The McCleskey decision felt like a historical break to these
activists. They saw it as the moment they realized “a new model would be needed.”
Others observed a decisive rhetorical shift in Bright, who from that moment on “talked
more about race, and class, and power.”54
Instead of giving up on equality claims, Bright encouraged his staff to double down
on proving inequality. McCleskey required a person to prove that specific individuals “in
his case acted with discriminatory purpose,” and that’s exactly what they would do. With
Bright leading the charge, they vowed to go county by county, prosecutor by prosecutor,
52 Sundby, supra note 30, at 32.
53 Stevenson interview, supra note 21.
54 Id.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
17
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
and judge by judge if necessary to ensure their clients got a fair trial. But they would not
let go of their sense that the problem of inequality was not that of a few individuals, but
entire offices and even jurisdictions.
“No one was prepared before McCleskey to go into some place like Swainsboro,
Georgia, and use the language of intentional discrimination in a proactive way for an
individual client,” said Stevenson. “But that’s what we did after McCleskey.”55
A. Expanding the Scope and Targets of Equality Claims
McCleskey had emboldened death penalty enthusiasts. For instance, Georgia
Attorney General Michael Bowers confidently stated, “I do not see any racial
discrimination in motive or effect in the imposition of the death penalty.”56 Bright believed
that most members of the Supreme Court simply had no idea who was involved in keeping
the machinery of death humming.57 As a result, his staff had to build a persuasive record
of bias in each case they handled. This meant two things: (1) intensifying challenges to
suspected bad actors and getting more deeply into the background of prosecutors and
judges to discern their racial attitudes; and (2) continuing to make structural inequality
claims by experimenting with creative and aggressive ways to bring such claims in capital
cases. Publicly-expressed sentiments and actions, office practices, family histories, and
even personal associations all became fair game.
In the view of SCHR lawyers, citizens and jurors became cogs in a killing machine
that policymakers tried to make more efficient; the accused, dehumanized through the legal
process. Through rebellious localism, Bright and his staff vowed to not only show the
inherent brutality of this form of punishment, but also record and dramatize its racial effects
in each case in which they played a role. They believed that citizens would be more hesitant
to impose it in specific cases, and that the community as a whole would eventually turn
away from the practice once stories of unfair and unequal administration spread.
Scaling down thus also meant bringing novel legal challenges to older forms of
racial power that many people had just accepted long ago as part of the fabric of social life
in the Deep South: Confederate battle flags in official state flags,58 a judge’s membership
in an exclusive club or voting record as a former legislator, a relative’s membership in the
Klan or participation in a lynching. Their goal was to show just how much death penalty
trials were permeated by racial bias in ways that went well beyond what the McCleskey
Court had assumed.
55 Stevenson interview, supra note 21.
56 Kathryn Kahler, Racism Charged in Death Penalty Cases, TIMES-PICAYUNE, Dec. 23, 1990, A-8.
57 Bright interview, supra note 24.
58 In a pretrial hearing during Carzell Moore’s capital trial, Bright called to the stand historian William
McFeely in a bid to demonstrate that the Confederate battle flag, incorporated into Georgia’s state flag in
1956 during widespread resistance to racial integration and Brown v. Board of Education, sent a message in
courtrooms that black citizens are still not equal before the law. WILLIAM S. MCFEELY, PROXIMITY TO
DEATH 25, 31 (2000).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
18
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Moving to recuse judges and prosecutors with a reputation for racial discrimination
became part of the arsenal. SCHR lawyers also began filing motion after motion
demanding that judges disclose how often they used the “N” word, whether they had ever
hired African Americans as clerks and staff, and whether they sent their kids to segregated
schools.
When a judge or prosecutor would resist making such disclosures, as expected,
insisting that “you can’t put me on trial here,” Bright converted the McCleskey decision
from a shield into a sword.59 “Yes, I can,” he told skeptical trial judges.60 “McCleskey v.
Kemp says I have to show whether you are prepared to give fair and just treatment to my
minority client.” This was “the kind of litigation most people ran from,” Stevenson
explained. “But Steve embraced it.”61
More so than in its early years, SCHR treated this new era of “hand-to-hand
combat” as a chance to get local communities involved. Before McCleskey, they worked
mostly with the criminal defense bar and a smattering of cause lawyers. But afterward, “the
connections with the traditional civil rights community started to take shape.” When SCHR
lawyers went into a community to defend a person against the death penalty, they would
bring a famous civil rights leader such as C.T. Vivian, who had been close to Martin Luther
King, Jr., or Dr. Joseph Lowery, president of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference.
By spending time in these local communities, they met families who had
experienced first-hand neglect and mistreatment by police and later, prosecutors and
judges. “It became apparent that civil rights were going to have to be at the heart of what
we do,” Stevenson explained. For instance, in one pre-trial hearing, SCHR lawyers put on
black witnesses who had been victims of violent crime, but had not heard much from the
district attorney’s office. In doing so, they drew sharp contrasts between how a District
Attorney’s office would maintain close relationships with white victims of murder—even
sometimes giving families a voice before major decisions in a case were made—with the
frosty relationships with black victims. This amounted to not only evidence of official bias,
but also what Monica Bell has called “legal estrangement” on the part of black residents.62
Because black citizens weren’t responding to jury summonses at the same rate as
white citizens, SCHR began holding events at black churches where a prominent civil
rights leader would give a rousing speech “creating a consciousness that there was an
obligation to serve.” Stevenson or Bright would warm up the crowd by talking about a case
they had in that county. Then a famous civil rights figure like C.T. Vivian would take the
59 Stevenson interview, supra note 37.
60 Id.
61 Id.
62 Monica C. Bell, Police Reform and the Dismantling of Legal Estrangement, 126 YALE L.J. 2054 (2017).
As Bell warns, though, procedural justice—here in the form of testifying at a capital hearing about being
mistreated by the police and prosecutors on the basis of race—can only serve as an incomplete response to
that sense of disenchantment and powerlessness. Id. at 2104.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
19
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
stage and tell stories of how he was beaten when he marched, but had gotten back up for
their right to vote and to serve on a jury. “Now when you get summoned for jury service,
I want you to walk to the courthouse like we walked to the courthouse in 1963, like we
walked across the bridge. Don’t wait until it’s your son sitting in a courtroom filled with
white people and an all-white jury.”63
Community organizing went hand-in-glove with litigation strategy. In the retrial of
William Brooks, for instance, Bright filed a creative motion to deal with the fact that the
poor response rate by black citizens to jury summonses had made it easier for prosecutors
to manufacture an all-white jury during his first trial. In trying to deal with the pervasive
problem of legal estrangement in their own case, they pointed out that “only eight of 160
summoned jurors were black” and that “a representative venire would have contained 50
black citizens.” They told the judge that “to protect the constitutional rights of the accused,”
he could not be passive but instead “should direct the service of summons to jurors be
accomplished in a way that ensures a fair cross-section of the community actually appears
for jury service.”64
They asked the judge presiding over the retrial to provide specific relief: (1) that a
“special venire of at least three hundred person be drawn with the initial selection process
taking place in open court”; (2) that the Clerk issue summonses to those jurors selected and
commanding them to appear “without making mention of the name of the case to be tried”;
(3) that personal service be made upon any jurors who fail to respond; (4) that the clerk,
sheriff, and other court personnel be directed not to disclose the case or name of the
defendant prior to the jurors appearing in the courtroom; and (5) that any and all other steps
be taken to ensure the venire represent a fair cross-section of the community. These
motions sent a powerful message to the prosecutor, the judge, and local citizens that trials
of black defendants by an all-white jury would be perceived as illegitimate.65
To ensure that poorer citizens would be able to participate, Bright also filed pre-
trial motions asking that jurors be paid “their current wage and to compensate primary
caregivers for day care costs.” They argued that “daily wage earners and primary caregivers
for young children are cognizable groups for Sixth Amendment purposes” and that their
underrepresentation in Brooks’ trial and others would violate the Constitution.66
Black citizens began appearing for hearings in SCHR’s cases, especially when they
sought to recuse judges or prosecutors or get the state flag, which contained the
Confederate flag, removed from the courtroom for the trial. Instead of an empty courtroom,
63 Stevenson interview, supra note 21.
64 Motion for a Special Venire That Represents a Cross-Section of the Community, for Personal Service on
Those Who Do Not Respond to Summons, and for Court to Determine All Excusals, State v. Brooks, No.
38888, 54606 (Super. Ct. of Muscogee Cnty.), 1-2.
65 Id. at 3.
66 See, e.g., Motion for Compensation of Jurors at Current Wages and Reimbursement to Primary
Caregivers for Day Care Costs, State v. Moore, Indictment No. 8676, Super. Ct. of Monroe County, GA, at
2, 6.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
20
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
the place would be packed with black people concerned about the quality of justice, who
transformed a mundane legal proceeding into a communal event.
That happened for the retrial of Brooks. In a letter dated September 5, 1990, Bright
and George Kendall discussed several themes that Dr. Joseph Lowery might work into an
upcoming community presentation in Columbus. The first theme was to explain that
“discrimination is worse in the criminal justice system than anywhere else, that everyone
has looked the other way for too long, and that it is urgent that something be done about
it.”67 Second, citizens could “learn more about discrimination in the justice system by going
to our hearing in the William Anthony Brooks case on discrimination.” Third, concerned
citizens could sign postcards SCHR prepared to urge members of Congress to enact the
Racial Justice Act. They could also organize to deny the current D.A. a judgeship “if he
continues his practice of discrimination in seeking the death penalty.” As Bright explained
to Dr. Lowery: “The last two District Attorneys both are judges now and both used the
death penalty to get there.”68 In fact, they wrote, “Both Whisnant and Smith are famous for
lynch-mob type closing arguments at the sentencing phase where they would ask for the
death penalty.”69
Most critically, Bright and his staff came up with imaginative ways of developing
their own evidence against the worst prosecutors and complicit trial judges. They did so,
for example, by taking advantage of a state’s “sunshine laws” to inspect state records. In
Georgia, those records extended to a prosecutor’s files once an appeal had been decided.
SCHR lawyers also began putting historians, statisticians, and other experts on the stand
during pre-trial hearings to document the state of local justice. They would litigate pre-trial
motions—including any McCleskey motions—vigorously.
“We really focused hard on this,” Stevenson recalled. It was a concerted “reaction
to McCleskey and the new world we were in. We had to more carefully articulate the nature
of racial bias.”
And so they did—by cataloging and exposing inequality and unfairness wherever
they could, in every setting in which an issue about the quality of justice could be credibly
raised. To Stevenson, this major shift in strategy was “really exciting because we all knew
the truth about how these people thought. We had experienced it.” He could see that it was
also “empowering” for Bright because “you observe bias time and time again, and the
conventions of the law require you to stay silent. To now be able to use the law in service
of saying something was very, very energizing.”
Paradoxically, SCHR was well placed to engage in rebellious localism precisely
because they were not part of the local power structure. They were based in the region, but
not insiders. The organization’s funding did not come only from court-appointed cases.
The overall strategy thus played to SCHR’s strengths. Staff could do the things that court-
appointed lawyers, whose livelihood depended on good relations with local judges and
67 Letter from George Kendall and Steve Bright to Dr. Joseph Lowery, Sept. 5, 1990.
68 Id.
69 Id.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
21
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
prosecutors, simply couldn’t do and for self-interested reasons, wouldn’t do. Bright also
believed that requirements that attorneys had to take criminal cases for free meant that
lawyers often did not care about their non-paying clients. How many times had a court-
appointed lawyer not bothered to make a constitutional claim, investigate something a
client said or contact a possible witness, or lodge an objection simply because doing so
would drag out the case or annoy members of the local power structure?
This point wasn’t about comparative or absolute resources as much as it was about
relative independence. For this strategy was deployed in the early decades of the era of
mass incarceration, when SCHR had only a shoestring budget and relied heavily on small
donations, a few grants, and fee awards from prisoner’s rights lawsuits. Yet freed from the
financial and political conditions that structured how everyday criminal cases were
handled, the organization found itself in a position to demand more of the legal system.
Bright and his staff would still insist upon being paid by the state for criminal defense work
just like local lawyers who had to eke out a living by taking court-appointed cases, even if
they ended up working longer hours that would go unreimbursed, because the principle of
equality for indigent representation mattered. At times, they would even file separate
lawsuits to lift existing restrictions on how much court-appointed defense lawyers could
earn, believing that fee caps led to less thorough investigations and less competent
representation of the poor.70
During these years, Bright began developing his critique that people were sentenced
to death not so much for the crimes they commit but rather for having an inadequate
lawyer.71 He realized that the absence of a public defender system in many places made
unfairness a built-in feature of the justice system. The already asymmetrical criminal
process left the quality of counsel for the poor completely controlled by local judges. This
often led to shoddy representation by court-appointed lawyers who often wanted to close
cases as quickly as possible and get back to paid work. Funds for experts were hard to come
by; many lawyers representing the poor never bothered to ask.
Rebellious localism yielded other benefits beyond spotlighting racial inequities. A
certain synergy arose between legal challenges to the practices of certain prosecutors and
judges on behalf of clients facing the death penalty and SCHR’s civil challenges brought
against local indigent defense systems, plea bargaining practices, and bail rules. More than
70 See, e.g., Bailey v. State, 424 S.E.2d 503, 507-08 (S.C. 1993) (holding that attorneys appointed to capital
cases must be reasonably compensated rather than limited by $ 1,000 statutory cap). As Bright himself
testified under oath once: “The basic thing that we do at our office … is represent people who can’t afford
lawyers in cases involving Eighth Amendment issues involve the cruel and unusual punishment of the
Constitution. And that is really all we do.” Pre-trial Hearing, State v. Brooks, 91.
71 On the history of the public defender movement, see SARA MAYEUX, FREE JUSTICE (2020); Stephen B.
Bright & Sia M. Sanneh, Fifty Years of Defiance and Resistance After Gideon v. Wainwright, 122 YALE
L.J. 2150 (2013); Stephen B. Bright, Neither Equal Nor Just: the Rational and Denial of Legal Services to
the Poor When life and Liberty are at Stake, 1997 NYU ANN. SURVEY OF AM. L. 783 (1997); Stephen B.
Bright, Counsel for the Poor: The Death Sentence Not for the Worst Crime but for the Worst Lawyer, 103
YALE L.J. 1835 (1994).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
22
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
once, focusing on a particular judge’s practices alerted the organization and others to
pervasive problems that could then be challenged separately. Eventually, rebellious
localism acquired a civil dimension to supplement its criminal law focus, as the Center
added a variety of civil litigation strategies to try to halt death penalty proceedings or gain
access to evidence that might bear on their claims. In showcasing the various deficiencies
of the justice system, rebellious localism also helped revive the public defender movement
within the state.72 Overall, the approach proved highly effective in attracting media
coverage of the nested problems within the criminal justice system.
B. Unrigging Juries
Because “that’s where we had the best law,” i.e., precedent vindicating the
importance of the right to a jury of one’s peers stretching back to the post-Reconstruction
Supreme Court case, Strauder v. West Virginia,73 one area of intensive focus became
challenging a jury’s composition. That case had struck down a state law that barred black
men from serving on juries. Over a hundred years later, it was still the case in many death
penalty jurisdictions that “there were no black prosecutors, no black decision makers, and
the only opportunity for a black person to play a role was on the jury,” Stevenson observed.
A good illustration was Columbus, Georgia, whose 10-person prosecutor’s office were all
white men. But, of course, in case after case Bright and others noticed “elaborate efforts
being made to exclude black people.” Through their cases, they decided to “elevate how
exclusionary the juries had been.”74
In Amadeo v. Zant,75 Bright’s first case before the U.S. Supreme Court, Justice
Thurgood Marshall invalidated Amadeo’s death sentence because of Putnam County’s
scheme to systematically underrepresent black people and women in its jury pools. The
Court singled out District Attorney Joe Briley’s memo to jury commissioners instructing
them how to permit just enough women and blacks into the pool without making it look
too suspicious. A lawyer bringing an unrelated civil rights lawsuit against the county had
discovered the “smoking gun” evidence. Based on this new evidence, a federal district
judge had granted a writ of habeas corpus, but the Eleventh Circuit reversed, saying the
claim was time-barred. Justice Marshall’s decision disagreed with the Eleventh Circuit’s
handing of the procedural default issue and restored the federal judge’s order granting
relief.
When the case was returned to Putnam County, Briley promptly had Amadeo
reindicted for murder. A secondary legal battle then ensued as the trial judge refused to
72 For an historical account of the creation of the first statewide public defender system in Georgia, see
Robert L. Tsai, The Public Defender Movement in the Age of Mass Incarceration: Georgia’s Experience, 1
J. AM. CONST. HISTORY __ (2023).
73 Strauder v. West Virginia, 100 U.S. 303 (1880).
74 Id.
75 Amadeo v. Zant, 486 U.S. 214 (1988).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
23
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
appoint Bright and his staff as attorneys of record until the Georgia Supreme Court ordered
him to do so. Instead, the judge had tried to stick Amadeo with a different set of lawyers
who knew nothing about the case.
SCHR had to battle the trial judge, the D.A., and the state attorney general’s office
to vindicate Amadeo’s right to the counsel of his choosing. Ultimately, the Georgia
Supreme Court issued a landmark decision reversing the trial judge for interfering with
Amadeo’s “relationship of trust and confidence with prior counsel.”76
Back on the case, Bright and William Warner filed a slew of pre-trial motions. One
motion sought to quash the indictment on the ground that the grand and traverse jury master
lists “do not reflect a fair cross-section of the community.” Referring to Amadeo’s earlier
win in the U.S. Supreme Court, they insisted that he could not be tried unless additional
“precautions be taken to assure that this time,” his rights were protected.77 Besides pointing
out that the county’s past jury selection methods excluded women and black people, they
added a new Equal Protection claim based on class. “The selection system utilized in this
county is not class-neutral,” they argued, “and does not assure the inclusion of persons who
are not registered to vote, persons who have recently moved to the county, and low income
persons.” Because Amadeo was not a resident of Putnam County but an indigent “outsider”
charged with serious crimes against “a highly respected member of the community,” they
objected to a system that generated juries that lacked important “experiences, opinions, and
perspectives.”
In addition, Amadeo’s team filed an ex parte motion seeking funds for an expert to
help them determine whether the county’s jury pools were, in fact, underrepresenting
“recent migrants, unemployed persons, daily wage earners, persons who are not registered
to vote.”78
In an even more daring effort, Amadeo’s attorneys moved to disqualify all judges
from the Ocmulgee Judicial District, made up of eight counties, including Putnam, based
on a violation of the Voting Rights Act. They argued that the judges of the Ocmulgee
Judicial District were elected as a result of unconstitutional procedures. The use of at-large
election procedures for superior court judges has never produced a single black judge in
the circuit, they noted, even though the population of the counties were between 37.42%
and 78.24% black.
This last motion revealed SCHR’s resolve in thinking structurally. Amadeo’s team
demanded an evidentiary hearing so they could show “total or seriously disproportionate
exclusion of black citizens from the Georgia judicial system, disproportionate impact of
76 Amadeo v. State, 384 S.E.2d 181 (Ga. 1989) (holding that trial judge abused his discretion by refusing to
appoint Bright and SCHR as capital counsel for the retrial because “the considerations favoring the
appointment of Amadeo’s previous counsel clearly out-weighed any opposing consideration, including the
desirability of involving local lawyers”).
77 Motion to Quash Grand and Traverse Juries Due to Underrepresentation of Cognizable Groups, State v.
Amadeo, No. 88-CR-257-11 (Putnam Cnty. Super. Ct.).
78 Ex Parte Motion for Funds for Expert Assistance to Investigate Grand and Petit Jury Venires, State v.
Amadeo, No. 88-CR-257-11 (Putnam Cnty. Super. Ct.).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
24
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
the decision made in the election and judicial systems of Georgia, the opportunity for
discrimination, as well as other circumstantial and direct evidence of intent to discriminate
as may be available.”79
On a couple of occasions, Bright put Stevenson on the stand as an expert witness
to testify as to the difference between comparative disparities and absolute disparities.
Stevenson had gotten a degree in public policy at the Kennedy School to go along with his
law degree from Harvard. That made him conversant in quantitative analysis when the
Center brought legal challenges to the underrepresentation of black jurors.
“The way the law is, we’d have to show an absolute disparity of over 10% before a
court will see that as significant,” Stevenson said.80 “We’d routinely go to these counties
where the county was 30% black, the jury pool would be 20%, if the county was 20%
black, the jury pool would be 10%”81 The disparity wouldn’t be big enough for a defendant
to mount a successful challenge, and yet it kept the absolute number of black citizens in
the jury pool low enough that it wasn’t hard for a prosecutor to eliminate the few black
jurors using peremptory strikes.
Preserving the legal issue would also make the verdict of an all-white jury more
vulnerable to reversal on appeal. Indeed, this frenzy of pre-trial activity created a general
awareness among trial judges and prosecutors that legal errors might unsettle a conviction.
This sensitivity improved advocates’ ability to “increase the numbers a little bit.”82 And
that’s what they always wanted: a fighting chance in front of a mixed-race jury.
They also litigated jury demographic issues hard in Michael Berryhill’s case in
Bartow County. Stevenson recalled that the jury commissioner had testified “they couldn’t
get enough women on the jury because they had to be ‘upright and intelligent citizens,’ and
we don’t have any of those or any black people.”83 However, the Georgia Supreme Court
ruled on appeal that an 11% disparity between women in the county and in the jury pool
was not “significant” enough absent evidence of “purposeful discrimination or systematic
exclusion.”84
They didn’t give up, and introduced the same evidence as part of Berryhill’s federal
habeas proceedings. This time, the Eleventh Circuit found that including only “intelligent
and upright” women to the master jury lists was “highly subjective,” leading to severe
underrepresentation. A new trial was ordered because Berryhill had been denied a jury
drawn from a fair cross section of the community.85
79 Memorandum in Support of Motion to Disqualify Unconstitutionally Elected Judge at 11, State v.
Amadeo, No. 88CR-25711 (Putnam Cnty. Super. Ct.).
80 Stevenson interview, supra note 21.
81 Id.
82 Id.
83 Id.
84 Berryhill v. State, 249 Ga. 442, 446 (1982).
85 Berryhill v. Zant, 858 F.2d 633 (11th Cir. 1988).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
25
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
C. Documenting Race-Based Peremptory Challenges
SCHR invested more and more resources into uncovering a related problem:
proving that some Georgia prosecutors systematically used peremptory challenges to
exclude black citizens from jury pools. Bright and his staff noticed that overzealous
prosecutors would try to eliminate all, or nearly all black citizens from juries, even well
into the 1980s and 1990s—especially when they wanted a death sentence against a black
defendant. The way juries were composed, and the way prosecutors were using their largely
unregulated strikes against black citizens in capital cases, seemed to be pillars holding up
a system of unequal justice.
SCHR would eventually pile up victories on this front, not only in federal but state
courts. Two of Bright’s later wins in the U.S. Supreme Court—Snyder v. Louisiana86 and
Foster v. Chatman87—would involve reversals of death penalty convictions tainted by a
prosecutor’s race-based peremptory strikes.
For now, though, they still had to deal with shifting legal standards. Until the
Supreme Court made it easier to prove racial bias in peremptory challenges in Batson v.
Kentucky,88 the governing case was Swain v. Alabama,89 which had established a standard
that almost no defendant could overcome. There, the justices rejected an Equal Protection
claim even though no black citizen had served on a jury in a criminal trial for at least the
prior 15 years. The only way for a defendant to prevail was to present proof that “the
prosecutor in a county, case after case, whatever the circumstances, whatever the crime,
and whoever the defendant or the victim may be, is responsible for the removal of Negroes
who have been selected as qualified jurors by the jury commissioners.”90
The battle over peremptory strikes also played out in Georgia’s courts. Bright and
Stevenson had gotten involved in another Georgia case that raised the jury composition
issues—that of James Ford.91 Ford, a black man, was sentenced to die by a jury that
contained only one black citizen. The prosecution used nine out of ten peremptory strikes
to remove black jurors. At trial, the prosecutor had asked the trial judge whether he needed
to explain his troubling pattern of strikes, but the judge said no, Swain didn’t require that,
and simply overruled Ford’s objection. Swain itself had confirmed that “the essential nature
of the peremptory challenge is that it is one exercised without a reason state, without
inquiry, and without being subject to the court’s control.”92
86 Snyder v. Louisiana, 552 U.S. 472 (2008).
87 Foster v. Chatman, 578 U.S. 488 (2016).
88 Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986). Batson, decided in 1986, established that removing a single
juror based on race violated the principle of equality and created a three-step process for ferreting out such
violations.
89 Swain v. Alabama, 380 U.S. 202 (1965).
90 Id. at 223.
91 Ford v. Georgia, 498 U.S. 411 (1991).
92 Id. at 220. Katie Wood, Bowers Called Hypocrite on Jury-Strike Issue, FULTON COUNTY DAILY REPORT,
Mar. 4, 1992.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
26
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
The wrinkle presented in Ford’s case was a highly technical one: whether a
defendant had lodged an objection in a timely fashion so that he could later raise the issue
on appeal. In general, a failure to object barred a person from complaining about a trial-
related error later. What made this case complicated was when the law itself was in flux.
What should be expected of lawyers during such a period of transition?
In Ford’s case, his lawyers had preemptively raised the equality issue by filing a
pretrial motion “to restrict racial use of peremptory challenges.” They alleged that the
county prosecutor had “over a long period of time” removed black jurors when a case
involved a white victim. After losing the motion, and receiving a death sentence, Ford
again raised the issue, insisting that his Sixth Amendment rights had been violated.
While Ford’s cert. petition was pending, the Supreme Court handed down Batson.
If a defendant objected contemporaneously and could make out a strong enough showing
of discriminatory conduct, a prosecutor would now have to give race-neutral reasons for
exercising each peremptory challenge, and the judge had a duty to make a finding on the
record as to whether to accept the explanations. The new constitutional rule was far from
perfect, for it was still hard to prove a nefarious motive on the fly, but it represented an
improvement upon the earlier protocol.
The U.S. Supreme Court vacated Ford’s conviction and instructed the Georgia
Supreme Court to review what happened under the new Batson test. But that court again
upheld Ford’s death sentence, without conducting an evidentiary hearing or otherwise
demanding that the prosecutor give explanations for his strikes as Batson required. In a
Kafkaesque ruling, the Georgia Supreme Court simply ruled that Ford properly raised the
Swain issue, which he had lost, but not Batson, which he was barred from raising now on
appeal, deeming it too late.
Bright convinced Charles Ogletree of Harvard Law School to plead Ford’s cause
before the U.S. Supreme Court on the return engagement. At oral argument, Ogletree
hammered the inherent unfairness of the Georgia Supreme Court splitting hairs: “It is only
after this Court’s remand, and without hearing from the parties, that the Georgia Supreme
Court for the first time says that counsel has failed to make a record of this to survive a
Batson claim.” There were “no clear rules in existence” in the state courts governing when
such an objection should be raised and “to the extent that they were, counsel complied with
them.”93
Ford’s ordeal illustrated another facet of the legal system that could undermine the
Constitution’s assurance of equality: the role of appellate judges. Whether out of
indifference to rights or in defiance of a Supreme Court ruling, a state supreme court could
exploit federalism to frustrate enforcement of constitutional guarantees. It could do so by
applying state law broadly or by giving federal law a cramped reading. When that
happened, a state court was basically daring a federal court to do something about it.
93 Transcript Oral Argument, Ford v. Georgia, 498 U.S. 411 (1991) (No. 87-6796).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
27
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Indeed, one of the most egregious acts of state court defiance took place in 1955.
That controversy also involved the Georgia Supreme Court asserting its prerogative to
execute a black man despite an order by the U.S. Supreme Court to reconsider his
constitutional rights. Like Ford, the case also raised the problem of jury manipulation.
Aubry Williams, condemned for killing a white liquor store clerk, appealed his case to the
U.S. Supreme Court. Williams was tried by a Fulton County jury at a time when a judge
monitored the races of jurors by marking citizens’ names on different colored pieces of
paper. In another case out of Fulton County called Avery v. Georgia,94 decided just two
months after Williams’ trial, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the county’s practice
violated the Fourteenth Amendment. The problem for Williams was that his lawyers didn’t
object at the time. His lawyers raised the issue for the first time in an extraordinary motion
for new trial, but the state supreme court deemed the issue waived. Under the “adequate
and independent state ground” doctrine, a state’s ruling that an issue had been procedurally
forfeited meant that a federal court had no jurisdiction to review it.95
When Williams sought certiorari, the Justices struggled with the possibility of
letting a man die because of the racist jury selection procedure. On the other hand, rules
were rules and federalism mattered. In an opinion by Justice Frankfurter, the Court vacated
Williams’ conviction and invited the members of the Georgia Supreme Court to reconsider,
appealing to their consciences that surely they would not “allow this man to go to his death
as a result of a conviction secured from a jury which the state admits was unconstitutionally
impaneled.”
Williams’s fate, as Ford’s would be a generation later, was trapped between
evolving law and warring courts. In an angry opinion, the Chief Justice of the Georgia
Supreme Court refused to give Williams a new trial and said that the U.S. Supreme Court
lacked jurisdiction. When Williams filed an emergency appeal, the Supreme Court backed
down and refused to hear the matter a second time. That cleared the way for his execution.96
Political scientist Del Dickson, who has studied that episode closely, believes that
William’s rights were sacrificed on the altar of the Warren Court’s project to desegregate
schools.97 The Court was busy battling resistance to Brown across the country and didn’t
want to open another front on race matters. Forty years later, when the same court applied
state rules to frustrate consideration of a constitutional right in Ford’s case, the Supreme
Court did not look the other way.
On February 19, 1991, Justice Souter wrote a unanimous opinion that repelled the
Georgia court’s seeming defiance of Supreme Court precedent. Ford’s attorneys had
94 Avery v. Georgia, 345 U.S. 559 (1953).
95 See ERWIN CHEMERINSKY, FEDERAL JURISDICTION (1989); Kermit Roosevelt III, Light from Dead Stars:
The Procedural Adequate and Independent State Ground Reconsidered, 103 COLUM. L. REV. 1888 (2003).
96 Williams v. Georgia, 349 U.S. 375 (1955); Williams v. State, 88 S.E.2d 376 (Ga. 1955), cert. denied, 350
U.S. 950 (1956).
97 Del Dickson, State Court Defiance and the Limits of Supreme Court Authority: Williams v. Georgia
Revisited, 103 YALE L.J. 1423-81 (1994).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
28
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
clearly raised a Swain claim. But in trying to draw a difference between these two cases,
“the State assumes a distinction between the holdings in those two cases that does not exist.
Both Swain and Batson recognized that a purposeful exclusion of members of the
defendant’s race from the jury selected to try him would work a denial of equal protection.”
Georgia’s refusal to entertain Ford’s claim under the new standard amounted to a
perverse form of logic, Justice Souter explained, because “Batson did not change the nature
of the violation recognized in Swain, but merely the quantum of proof necessary to
substantiate a particular claim.” As a result, raising the peremptory strike issue was
sufficient to preserve it, and the state court’s application of a new procedural rule
announced two years later was not an “adequate independent state ground” to prevent
federal review.
To Bright, the lesson from handling Ford’s appeal was that they’d have to battle
appellate judges as much as prosecutors to ensure that basic rights would be enforced. Even
so, their intensification of trial tactics proved to be worth it. Ford’s lawyers had earned him
the right to a hearing. Once a hearing was finally held in state court, the original prosecutor
was forced to testify as to his reasons for striking so many of the eligible black jurors. The
trial judge summarily accepted those reasons, but on appeal, the Georgia Supreme Court
reversed, building on Gamble v. State, another SCHR case and the very first time a Batson
violation had been found by the state supreme court.98
Chief Justice Norman Fletcher ruled that the D.A.’s explanations offered after the
fact were not sufficiently “concrete” and “race-neutral” so as to overcome the “strong”
pattern of discrimination in Ford’s case. As he pointed out, “of the 42 persons on the panel
from which the trial jury was chosen, 10 or 24 percent, were black.” In other words, the
prosecutor “exercised 90 percent of his strikes to strike 90 percent of the blacks from the
venire, while exercising 10 percent of his strikes to exclude a mere 3 percent of the whites
on the venire.” Quoting Ford’s brief, Justice Fletcher said that “’it does not require a
statistician … to recognize’ the very high probability that this racial disparity did not occur
strictly as a matter of chance.”99 Against the weight of this pattern, the prosecutor’s
explanations “fall short of proving that this disparity was the incidental result of neutral
selection procedures.”100
After losing in the U.S. Supreme Court and seeing the Georgia Supreme Court’s
about-face, prosecutors folded and offered Ford a life sentence. Indeed, perhaps more than
any other constitutional issue, a prosecutor’s use of peremptory strikes to prevent black
citizens from participating in criminal trials had the potential to bring together judicial
98 Gamble v. State, 357 S.E.2d 792 (Ga. 1987). In Gamble, the Georgia Supreme Court applied Batson and
overturned a death sentence against a black defendant where the prosecutor used all ten of his peremptory
strikes against ten black jurors to rig an all-white jury.
99 Ford v. State, 423 S.E.2d 245, 246 (Ga. 1992).
100 Id.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
29
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
liberals and conservatives.101 Not only did the rationale appeal to those who wished to
preserve the democratic legitimacy of criminal judgements, it also appealed to those who
might be open to upsetting a single criminal conviction without necessarily embracing
structural critiques. For conservatives, deciding a case on this ground meant protecting the
integrity of the legal system and dealing with “bad apples.”102 Of course, judges couldn’t
completely control how advocates would characterize the violations that were discovered,
and abolitionists tended to declare such misconduct evidence of structural flaws.
D. Holding Prosecutors Accountable
After prevailing in the Georgia Supreme Court and being reinstated as counsel for
Amadeo’s retrial, Bright and his co-counsel filed a giant pile of motions. The most
important one sought to recuse Briley from leading the state’s case a second time. This,
too, became a part of SCHR’s arsenal whenever there was reason that a prosecutor had
been involved in an equality violation.
Amadeo’s team also arranged for legal ethics experts to file a brief in support of
the recusal motion. The signatories came from each of the state’s accredited law schools,
including Mercer Law School, where Briley had gotten his J.D. In their brief, these experts
argued that Briley’s “misconduct is shocking to the conscience” and violated his duty to
ensure that “all citizens” in the community “stand on equal footing before the law.”103
Friends of the court cited Blackstone for the proposition that “special vigilance is required
to keep our system of trial by jury ‘sacred and inviolate, not only from all open attacks, …
but also from all secret machinations, which may sap and undermine it.”104 Invoking ethical
standards created by the National District Attorneys Association as well as ABA Standards
on the Prosecution Function, they observed that “the duty of the prosecutor is to seek
justice, not merely to convict.”105
Amici thus supported SCHR’s position that qualification of Briley was “required
to protect the integrity of the adversary system, to assure public confidence in the
administration of justice, to assure that the past misconduct does not interfere” with
Amadeo’s retrial. The prosecutor’s misconduct presented “that most rare case,” they
argued, “where there is a factual determination upheld unanimously by the United States
Supreme Court that a prosecuting attorney intentionally tampered with the jury pools in an
101 For a selection of cases where even conservative jurists were willing to overturn death sentences on this
ground, see Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986); Miller-El v. Dretke, 545 U.S. 23 (2005); Snyder v.
Louisiana, 552 U.S. 427 (2007); Foster v. Chatman, 578 U.S. 488 (2016).
102 Paul Butler critiques jurists’ rhetoric that makes overly broad claims about Batson for ending racial
discrimination, calling it “racial justice rhetoric without racial justice.” Paul Butler, Mississippi Goddamn:
Flowers v. Mississippi’s Cheap Racial Justice, SUP. CT. REV. 73, 83 (2019).
103 Brief of Amicus Curiae Ad Hoc Committee of Lawyers in Support of Motion to Disqualify Prosecuting
Attorney, State v. Amadeo, Ind. No. 88CR-25-11 (Putnam Cty. Super. Ct.).
104 Id. at 4.
105 STANDARDS ON THE PROSECUTION FUNCTION 3-1.1(A) (AM. BAR. ASS’N 2017).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
30
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
effort to subvert the constitutional rights of the black jurors, and of Tony Amadeo, the
litigant.” Additionally, the manipulation of jury demographics required legal expertise as
part of the “intent to deceive” so that “a prima facie case of discrimination could not be
established.” Such misconduct also violated bar standards that prohibit “illegal
professional conduct involving moral turpitude,” “dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation,” or behavior “prejudicial to the administration of justice.”106
On the day of the hearing, witnesses were prepared to testify that Briley’s continued
participation in Amadeo’s case would taint the outcome.107 Bright had assembled Tom
Johnson, county attorney for Hennipen County, MN, Stephen H. Sachs, the former
Attorney General of Maryland, and Professor Bennett L Gershman, a leading expert on
prosecutorial ethics. In the glare of such tactics, the state blinked. Rather than go through
with a full evidentiary hearing, Briley offered a plea deal. He would withdraw the death
penalty if Amadeo pleaded guilty to murder and promised not to seek parole for at least 25
years.108
SCHR would continue to try to recuse prosecutors whenever they had proof
someone was involved in a Fourteenth Amendment violation, particularly on the basis of
race or poverty. And in the retrial of Brooks, they stepped up this tactic by enlarging their
recusal motion against an entire District Attorney’s office, attacking its death penalty
charging decisions and use of peremptory strikes over time as racially discriminatory.
E. Bouncing Judges
The first time Bright and his staff went hard after a trial judge believed to be “a
hanging judge” was in the case of George Dungee, who had an IQ of 65-69. Dungee was
one of three men who escaped from a Maryland prison and went on a crime spree. A
Seminole County jury sentenced Carl Isaacs, Wayne Coleman, and Dungee to death for the
slaying of a family.109
Hanging judges were those known as tough-on-crime figures who often looked the
other way as prosecutors cut corners, including by manufacturing all-white juries in capital
cases. Typically, they were former prosecutors themselves, elected or appointed after
securing death sentences for notorious crimes. Having rode to glory for their pursuit of Old
Testament-style justice, they often looked with favor upon other prosecutors wanted a
similar career arc.110 Walter C. McMillan, who presided over the murder trial of Isaacs,
Coleman, and Dungee, had a reputation as a hanging judge.
106 Id. at 10 (quoting ABA Code of Professional Responsibility).
107 Interview with Clive Stafford Smith (May 5, 2020); TSAI, supra note 43, at Part I.
108 MCFEELY, supra note 58, at 141; Interview with Steve Bright (Feb. 29, 2020).
109 Elliott Minor, Man Pleads Guilty in Slayings of Farm Family, ASSOC. PRESS, July 14, 1988.
110 See Stephen B. Bright and Patrick Keenan, Judges and the Politics of Death: Deciding Between the Bill
of Rights and the Next Election in Capital Cases, 75 B.U. L. REV. 759 (1995).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
31
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Yet the defendants’ first convictions were overturned due to the trial judge’s failure
to deal with prejudicial pre-trial publicity. In 1987, when Dungee’s case returned to
Seminole County for a retrial, Bright and his team moved to prevent Judge McMillan from
overseeing the trial a second time, alleging “invidious discrimination against poor people
and black people.”111 Although the issues were “somewhat painful” and “delicate,” it was
necessary to probe the judge’s beliefs and past actions. Because this was “a racially
sensitive” death penalty trial, they argued that it was “inappropriate for him to sit on this
case.”112 Bright alleged that “George Dungee was called a ‘n*gger’ in Open Court in his
last trial” overseen by McMillan and that he had done nothing about it.113
They also pointed to Judge McMillan’s membership in an all-white country club,
which they insisted violated the canons of judicial conduct, as well as his past political
support for Ernest Vandiver, who ran for governor in 1959 on a platform of “No, Not
One”—meaning not one black child in white schools, which they believed showed the
judge was prejudiced. As Bright also noted during the recusal hearing, McMillan had never
appointed a non-white jury commissioner for the counties he oversaw, “not a single time,”
in over twenty years on the bench. These commissioners exploited discretionary state law
to underrepresent black people on juries, despite the fact that two counties within his
jurisdiction were majority-black.114 As a result, Bright argued, Judge McMillan was “very
much a part of that system of white dominance.”115 Indeed, to bolster structural arguments
of bias, Bright insisted that the judge had helped perpetrate “systematic mistreatment of
indigent defendants” and black people, and not merely isolated acts of discrimination.116
During the hearing, Bright called Judge McMillan himself to the stand and asked
about his use of racial epithets—which the judge acknowledged under oath.117 Asked about
his views about Brown v. Board, Judge McMillan testified that “he had no quarrel with it”
now, but “don’t recall what I thought then,” though “it was controversial.”118 On the stand,
he acknowledged that he supported Vandiver for governor, and that the candidate “was
espousing a racial segregation in the schools.”119 Dungee’s lawyers also alleged that
McMillan had withdrawn his daughter from public school out of opposition to integration,
but could not get him to admit this in court.
111 A Hearing on a Motion to Recuse Before the Honorable A. Blenn Taylor, Judge, Brunswick Judicial
Circuit, and Sitting By Appointment for this Hearing [hereinafter, McMillan recusal hearing], State v.
Dungee, No. 439, 444, 449, Oct. 6-8, 1986, at 12-17.
112 Id. at 16.
113 Id.
114 Email from Stephen Bright to Robert L. Tsai (Oct. 14, 2021).
115 McMillan recusal hearing, supra note 111, at 15.
116 Id. at 16-17. Bright further described McMillan as an “arch segregationist” who had abused defendant’s
constitutional rights in part because of his “ambition for higher office.” Id. at 17-18.
117 Id. at 596-97.
118 Id. at 601-02.
119 Id. at 613.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
32
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Despite a somewhat mixed hearing record, a surprising thing did take place that
altered Dungee’s fortunes. Bright’s aggressive tactics baited the judge into committing a
misstep. Judge McMillan became so enraged at his impartiality being questioned that he
retained his own lawyer for the hearing on the motion to recuse (heard by a different judge).
Through this lawyer, he tried to intervene in the proceeding, monitor what was going on,
and influence its outcome by conferring with attorneys for the state. McMillan claimed that
he was “a participant” to the proceedings because “it’s my duty and responsibility to defend
the propriety of my office.”120
That gambit ultimately failed when the Georgia Supreme Court decided the
interlocutory appeal on the recusal motion in Dungee’s favor. Without ruling on the
ultimate issue of bias, and without mentioning “race” or “discrimination” a single time in
the opinion, the justices seized on McMillan’s aggressive efforts to protect his own
reputation as evidence that his “impartiality might reasonably be questioned.”121
Once Judge McMillan was off the case, a deal was reached to take the death penalty
off the table. Dungee pleaded guilty to three consecutive life terms.122
SCHR pulled the same move in the retrial of Willie Gamble. Judge McMillan had
presided over Gamble’s original murder trial, where prosecutors used all ten of their
peremptory strikes against black jurors to manufacture an all-white jury. That jury
sentenced Gamble to die, but the Georgia Supreme Court, citing Batson, reversed.123
Bright, Bryan Stevenson, and Clive Stafford Smith124 didn’t want McMillan
anywhere near the retrial. They moved to recuse him from overseeing Gamble’s case too,
arguing that his previous convictions were reversed “due to violations of his constitutional
rights, resulting from intentional, flagrant discrimination by the district attorney, which
was routinely approved by Judge McMillan.”125 In the very first paragraph of their motion,
they invoked McCleskey as a command that “the person on trial must show racial
discrimination in the locality and the court in which he was tried.”126 Judge McMillan was
just such a “decision maker” within the meaning of that case, they wrote, whose “racially
discriminatory acts and encouragement and support of the racially discriminatory acts” of
others already violated Gamble’s rights and would likely do so again. The unequal
imposition of the death penalty “is the result of discrimination by the District Attorney in
deciding in which cases he will seek the death penalty,” they insisted.
Gamble’s lawyers turned up the rhetoric further, calling Judge McMillan a “rubber
stamp racist,”127 and recited a litany of facts documented earlier in the Dungee case. This
120 Id. at 575.
121 Isaacs v. State, 355 S.E.2d 644 (Ga. 1987).
122 Elliot Minor, Man Pleads Guilty to Slayings of Farm Family, ASSOC. PRESS, July 14, 1988.
123 Gamble v. State, 357 S.E.2d 792 (Ga. 1987).
124 Stafford left SCHR in 1993 to establish a death penalty resource center in Louisiana. He went on to
found Reprieve and represent individuals detained in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as part of the War on Terror.
125 Motion to Recuse Judge at 3, State v. Gamble, No. 26 (Emanuel Cty. Super. Ct. Jan. 5, 1988).
126 Id. at 2.
127 Id. at 4.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
33
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
time, they also argued that Judge McMillan had demonstrated lingering “antipathy” toward
Bright’s staff because of “his public humiliation in the Dungee case” at the hands of SCHR
lawyers. Judge McMillan initially refused to appoint Stafford Smith to Gamble’s case for
the retrial, and instead came up with a plan to solicit bids to handle the defense and appoint
the lowest bidder. SCHR accused McMillan of creating “a scheme to sell off justice to the
lowest bidder,” and called it further proof of his bias. He even called up two lawyers and
begged them to take the case, which Bright believed was an effort to “preclude Mr. Gamble
from raising the issues of judicial racism at the retrial” and prevent him from “moving to
recuse Judge McMillan for bias.”128
Remarkably, Gamble’s defense team also researched Rule 11 sanctions to see how
far they might go in federal court before they landed in hot water. According to Stafford
Smith, what prompted this concern was that the team had drafted a civil RICO lawsuit
against the judge, where violations of civil rights laws would serve as the predicate
offenses. In the end, they opted not to file it.129
The full-court press via state court proceedings turned out to be enough. Judge
McMillan eventually stepped off the Gamble case. The prosecutor, seeing that Judge
McMillan would not oversee the retrial, eventually resolved the case with a plea deal
guaranteeing a life sentence.
III. MCCLESKEY AS A SWORD
Although they publicly sought to deny it moral legitimacy and constitutional
validity outside of the courtroom, inside the courtroom SCHR lawyers deployed the
McCleskey decision as a sword. They did so in several ways: (1) to justify their efforts to
build a record of discrimination by the local power structure on the basis of race and
poverty of the defendant and social worth of the victim; (2) to expand their structural
critique of unequal justice to entire criminal legal systems on a county and/or judicial
circuit basis; (3) to piggyback on those bias claims and request evidentiary hearings and
documents so as to counteract the position of information disadvantage experienced by
criminal defendants; and (4) to justify recusal of any judges and prosecutors found
responsible for unconstitutional or unethical behavior.
Uncertain of their chances of success or when their window of opportunity would
close, SCHR lawyers pushed their “McCleskey motions” as hard and as far as they could
to maximize the probability of judicial consideration of their motion, pressure the state’s
lawyers to rethink their choice to pursue a death sentence, and to draw attention to issues
of race and poverty.
128 Id. at 11-12.
129 Stafford Smith interview, supra note 107.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
34
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
A. Horton v. Zant
After Amadeo’s case, SCHR lawyers learned to build on findings of prosecutorial
misconduct to go after DA Joe Briley’s other cases. They decided to represent Jimmy Lee
Horton, a black man under a death sentence who was also prosecuted by Briley. This time,
Bright and his staff found an ingenious way to go after Briley’s use of peremptory
challenges to remove prospective black jurors.
Horton and his co-defendant, Pless Brown, Jr., had been arrested for burglarizing
an apartment and killing the companion of the homeowner during a shootout when the two
came home and surprised them. The dead man turned out to be Don Thompson, the District
Attorney of Macon Judicial District, Georgia.
Joe Briley was brought down specially from Okmulgee Judicial District to secure
death sentences against the perpetrators. Brown, who wound up with a mixed-race jury,
received a life sentence. By contrast, Horton was sentenced to die by an all-white jury. His
court-appointed lawyers did no investigation and presented no mitigating evidence during
the sentencing phase. In their closing remarks to the jury, they called their own client “a
worthless man” and praised the prosecutor’s argument.
Because Briley had such a long track record of aggressively seeking death
sentences and scoffed at charges that capital punishment practices were racist, SCHR
brainstormed ways to dig more deeply into his jury strikes over the course of his career.
Their success in doing so created a template for action in subsequent cases.130
1. A Mini-McCleskey Hearing
Judge Wilbur Owens of the Northern District of Georgia was assigned to review
Horton’s habeas petition—the same judge who had granted relief in Amadeo’s case based
on the jury rigging violation. Judge Owens scheduled an evidentiary hearing on Horton’s
petition and ordered the state to engage in “expeditious discovery.” At that time, before
enactment of the AEDPA,131 it was still possible to get evidentiary hearings on habeas
petitions. Only later would federal judges increasingly deny claims based on the papers
alone.132
130 Sonji Jacobs, Where Cases Diverge, ATLANTA J.-CONST., Sept. 24, 2007, at A8; Maura Dolan,
Executions: The South—Nation’s Death Belt, L.A. TIMES, Aug. 25, 1985; KATYA LEZIN, FINDING LIFE ON
DEATH ROW 139-40 (1999).
131 The Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996, which amended 28 U.S.C. Sec. 2254,
imposes a statute of limitations on writs of habeas corpus for the first time and prevents federal judges from
granting relief to prisoners under a state conviction unless person could show that a judgment was
“contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law.”
132 Horton v. Zant, 687 F. Supp. 594 (M.D. Ga. 1988).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
35
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
On October 18, 1989, Bright handled the live hearing.133 He called Briley to the
stand to authenticate the jury-rigging memo. That memo, which had led to Amadeo’s
conviction being overturned in the U.S. Supreme Court for jury manipulation,134 now
became evidence in Horton’s case, as Bright argued that the document ought to be treated
as proof that the prosecutor had a history of racially discriminatory behavior. Bright wanted
the judge to infer that Horton’s case, too, was tainted by Briley’s participation.
McCleskey v. Kemp hung over every facet of this pre-trial hearing. “The issue is
who is the person behind this discrimination?” Bright reminded.135 He was concerned about
Justice Powell’s insistence in McCleskey that legal theories of inequality must be traced to
specific perpetrators. If the proof of discrimination wasn’t in the record, if the judge didn’t
find that someone in particular was responsible for purposeful discrimination that occurred
in his client’s case, then Horton couldn’t benefit even if there were racial disparities.
“Your Honor, Mr. Briley in case after case was resisting jury challenges, taking
advantage of the fact that people weren’t prepared for jury challenges,” Bright argued. “All
of that flies in the face of this testimony that in this one particular case he was advising the
judge that he ought to put the full number of blacks and women in the pool.”136
“You’re not going to win or lose based upon that one incident,” Judge Owens said.
“The pattern of years, all these cases,” was what mattered.137
Bright turned to a study compiled by SCHR staff on Briley’s juror strikes over his
career. In the months leading up to the hearing, the staff hunted down old case files, trying
to reconstruct the twists and turns of jury selection in the cases tried by Briley across eight
different counties since 1974. Three of the counties did not retain the records, but they
successfully charted 25 capital and 159 non-capital cases of Briley’s. They then had to
cross-reference that information with county voter registration lists to identify each juror’s
race.138
Displaying the document in his hand, Bright asked Briley: “In 1977 you also tried
the Walker case in Jasper Country… And in that case you used seven of your peremptory
strikes against seven black people; is that correct?”
“If that’s what the record shows,” Briley shrugged.
“You’re not able to recall any reasons why you struck those people?”
“No sir,” Briley responded.
Bright said to Briley: “It is your testimony that the fact that all seven happened to
be black people is just coincidental?”
“Yes sir.”
133 Interview with Andy Lipps (Mar. 5, 2020); “Did you prepare that document, Mr. Briley?” Bright asked.
“I believe I did,” Briley replied. Q: “Is it in your handwriting?” A: “I would say that it is.”
134 Amadeo, 486 U.S. 214.
135 Transcript of Hearing Before Honorable Wilbur D. Owens, Jr. at 61-62, Horton v. Zant, Civil No. 88-
46-1-MAC, Oct. 18, 1989.
136 Id.
137 Id.
138 Interview with Mary Sinclair (Mar. 17, 2020); LEZIN, supra note 130, at 149-50.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
36
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
“In the Finney case in Jones County you used seven of your strikes against black
people?” Bright inquired. “Are you able to recall any of the reasons for that?”
“No sir,” Briley testified. His strategy as a witness was to deny any memory of why
he rejected so many black citizens as prospective jurors and hope that the silence in the
record would be enough to satisfy tolerant judges.
After leading him through the exhibit and getting Briley to admit to the disturbing
pattern of decisions to excuse black jurors from his trials over many years, Bright got Briley
to admit that he used nine out of ten strikes against black jurors in Brown’s case. And in
Mr. Horton’s case, he also used nine out of ten strikes against black jurors.
On cross-examination, the state’s lawyer, Paula Smith, asked Briley to describe the
process of jury selection in Georgia. He explained that “you’ve got to have all twelve jurors
to vote for the death penalty because if one of them votes against the death penalty . . . it is
a life sentence. So it takes a perfect score.”139
On redirect, Bright tried to underline the racial patterns. “You used ninety-six of
your hundred and three strikes, 94% of your strikes, against black people. Do you know
why these reasons you have tend to fall so heavily upon black people?” Briley had no
explanation.
When Briley had a case with a black defendant and black victim, he exercised
seventy-three of eighty-six jury strikes against black jurors. Yet when it came to cases
involving white defendants, the prosecutor did not exhibit the same enthusiasm for
excluding black jurors. In such cases, Bright pointed out, “you only used a third of your
strikes against blacks.”
Next, Horton’s lawyers called Gary Liberson, a PhD in mathematical statistics to
the stand.140 Liberson testified that he examined Briley’s juror strikes over many years on
a county-by-county basis to see whether they were “consistent with the ratio or percentage
of blacks in the population for that particular county.” What was the probability that
Briley’s decisions reflected “just the random selection of jurors” who “just happened to be
black?” He answered that “there was about one chance in a hundred thousand that that
would have been so.”141
As to Briley’s comparatively less vigorous use of juror strikes in cases with white
defendants, it was also roughly “one chance in a hundred thousand” that the pattern was a
random one. On cross-examination, the state’s attorney got Liberson to admit that “the
most your analysis would reveal is that the numbers do not show what one would expect if
the prosecutor struck at random.” She tried to suggest that any number of subjective factors
not considered by the expert could explain the disparity. In response, Liberson said that
even if there were some other set of components that were strongly associated with race,
“they would dampen the results” but not “make the results non-significant.”
139 Horton v. Zant, hearing transcript, supra note 135, 85-86.
140 Id. at 95; Lipps interview, supra note 133.
141 Horton v. Zant, hearing transcript, supra note 135, at 108-09.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
37
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
The state’s lawyers called to the stand Joseph Katz, the very statistician Georgia
had used in the McCleskey case to rebut the Baldus study. Katz disputed Liberson’s
conclusions but didn’t offer any alternative study or explanation, saying “some things don’t
easily reduce to numbers.” Under cross-examination, he conceded that Liberson’s methods
were “appropriate” and that he did not try to replicate Liberson’s findings. He also
acknowledged the probability of Briley’s pattern of strikes being random was “very low.”
In fact, he agreed that Liberson’s finding of racial disparity to be “statistically significant”
because “if you were a black defendant Mr. Briley was more likely” to strike black jurors.
After all the witnesses and exhibits were entered into the record, Bright addressed
Judge Owens. What the evidence showed was that “Mr. Briley has a remarkable history of
striking black people from juries.” In capital cases “90% of the time he used his strikes
against black jurors.” The “only time he changes,” Bright argued, “is when he has white
people on trial.”142 Summing up, Bright urged Judge Owens to find that when he picked
his client’s jury, he “deprived members of Mr. Horton’s race of participation in the judicial
process.”
During her remarks, Smith acknowledged that Horton had shown that the state “has
struck a higher proportion of black jurors than white jurors,” but said that still didn’t violate
the Constitution. The petitioner’s burden under Swain was to prove “historic systemic
exclusion,” she insisted.
On April 12, 1990, Judge Owens denied the writ. On the most promising claim,
Judge Owens concluded that Horton “did not show that the prosecuting attorney has
historically and systematically excluded blacks from serving on trial juries.” He made
quick work of Horton’s remaining claims, leaving his conviction undisturbed.143
2. The Eleventh Circuit Validates Rebellious Localism
Horton’s Eleventh Circuit brief put the jury issue front and center. “Swain does not
require a defendant who has been victimized by the prosecutor’s racially motivated abuse
of peremptory challenges to show … that the prosecutor always successfully obtained all-
white juries in the past,” they argued. Instead, “the central question is purposeful
discrimination.” And on that issue, the actual “history of Mr. Briley’s practices reveals his
intent and strips his anti-black peremptory challenges at Mr. Horton’s trial of any
presumption of propriety.”144
On September 3, 1991, the Eleventh Circuit issued a unanimous ruling reversing
Judge Owens. Judge Frank Johnson first took up the issue of peremptory challenges.
Although the Supreme Court in Batson made it easier for a defendant to challenge jury
strikes, Horton could not rely on that decision because his trial took place before that case
was decided. Instead, he was bound by Swain. There, a black man convicted of rape by an
142 Id. at 205-14.
143 Order of the Court, Horton v. Zant, No. 88-46-1-MAC (WDO), Apr. 12, 1990.
144 Brief of Appellant at 11, 13-30, Horton v. Zant, No. 90-8522 (Nov. 16. 1990).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
38
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
all-white jury after a prosecutor used his peremptory challenges to remove all the black
citizen from the pool. He also showed that there had never been a single black person
allowed to serve on a criminal trial in Talladega County, Alabama, since 1950 even though
the county was 26% black. Yet the fact that the jury panels were consistently
underrepresented at 10-15% was deemed by the Swain Court not enough to make out a
violation of the Equal Protection Clause. No one is entitled “to demand a proportionate
number of his race on the jury which tries him,” Justice Byron White wrote. A defendant
is entitled only to a trial free of intentional discrimination.
Justice White ruled in Swain that the fact that in a single trial “all Negroes were
removed from the jury” was not enough to overcome the presumption that a prosecutor is
doing so “to obtain a fair and impartial jury.” The only way to strip a public servant of the
presumption of good faith was to present proof that “the prosecutor in a county, case after
case, whatever the circumstances, whatever the crime, and whoever the defendant or the
victim may be, is responsible for the removal of Negroes who have been selected as
qualified jurors by the jury commissioners.”145
Over the years, Eleventh Circuit applied Swain, already a demanding standard, in
exacting fashion. As Judge Johnson pointed out in Horton’s case, the court had in the past
rejected claims even when a prosecutor struck every black juror in six trials during a single
week.146 Luckily, Horton’s lawyers had met that high burden. “Mr. Briley’s hardball tactics
clearly do not comport with the prosecutor’s obligation to ‘do justice,’” Judge Johnson
admonished. It was the first time the Eleventh Circuit had ever found a Swain violation in
a Georgia case.147
Citing Amadeo, Judge Johnson also emphasized Briley’s role as “author of a now
infamous memo designed to underrepresent blacks, women and all individuals 18-24 years
old” in Putnam County’s juries. As for Briley’s new tale “that he should not be morally
culpable” because a now-deceased judge had instructed him to manipulate the jury pool,
“even if we were to assume Mr. Briley’s version of the story was true, we cannot condone
his behavior.” The “mere fact that a judge orders a prosecutor to engage in unconstitutional
discrimination on the basis of race and sex does not make the behavior right.” He added:
“A prosecutor has a duty to ‘do justice,” and to “not engage in the subsequent cover up.”148
After pointing to evidence of Briley’s misconduct, he turned to the pattern
uncovered by SCHR investigators. Judge Johnson embraced the weight of their findings:
“Between 1974 and 1981, Mr. Briley exercised 1,580 peremptory strikes” across three
counties, 70% of them against black jurors. In capital cases that percentage ticked even
higher: 79% to remove black jurors without explanation (184/234 strikes). When a murder
trial involved a black person charged with killing a white person, Briley exercised 96 out
145 Swain v. Alabama, 380 U.S. 202, 223 (1965).
146 In Allen v. Hardy, 478 U.S. 255 (1986), the Supreme Court held that Batson would not be applied
retroactively because it announced a new constitutional rule of criminal procedure.”
147 Horton v. Zant, 941 F.2d 1449 (11th Cir. 1991).
148 Id. at 1457.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
39
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
of 103 strikes against black jurors. The panel was impressed with Dr. Liberson, twice citing
his findings that the likelihood Mr. Briley exercised his peremptory challenges for race
neutral reasons “was less than 1 chance in 100,000.”
Judge Johnson rejected the state’s explanation for these racial patterns: “courts
cannot make a blind leap of faith that there exists some set of legitimate factors which
correlates one-to-one with the race of the venire members.” But even a prosecutor who acts
with a “mixed motive”—where race is one among other factors in striking black jurors—
is violating the Constitution. “From Horton’s statistics,” the judges said, “we cannot help
but conclude that race was a very significant factor in Mr. Briley’s decision-making
process.”149
A prosecutor’s past violation of the Equal Protection Clause in one case had actual
consequences in subsequent cases. Moreover, the mini-McCleskey strategy had worked.
Despite McCleskey, or ironically perhaps because of it, the Eleventh Circuit embraced
statistical evidence presented on a smaller scale. It’s not obvious that the statistical
evidence was more scientifically sound than the Baldus study, but the bite-sized sample,
involving one person in power across time, appealed to judges’ desire for simpler stories
about causation and evidence about racial discrimination that could be attributed to specific
individuals. Doubling down on equality, subverting doctrine, and scaling down their targets
had paid off.
This was a resounding legal victory that exposed prosecutorial misconduct, racial
inequality, and the subpar quality of justice for poor Southerners. The media called it “yet
another rebuke” of Briley “for keeping blacks off juries.”150
Faced with the prospect of having to retry the case after all these years, Briley
agreed to a plea deal that assured a life sentence for Horton. Success in Amadeo had created
legal precedent on trial fairness and racial equality, and that precedent, in turn, had been
successfully leveraged for Horton. Additionally, the Eleventh Circuit’s surprising ruling
now gave abolitionists a useful weapon. In theory, Putnam County’s jury-rigging practices
could be leveraged to force a second look at other cases—if the issue had been preserved
or else new evidence can overcome procedural obstacles.
B. State v. Brooks
William Anthony Brooks, an African American man, was charged with the
abduction, rape, and murder of a white woman, Carol Jeannine Galloway. The victim’s
mother saw her climb into Brooks’ car in front of her home, and her body was later
149 Additionally, the panel found that the legal representation afforded Horton to be constitutionally deficient
“under prevailing professional norms,” and therefore a violation of the Sixth Amendment. Horton’s original
court-appointed lawyers put on absolutely no mitigating evidence and “performed hardly any investigation.”
Id. at 1462.
150 Katie Wood, Briley Handpicks Another Defeat, FULTON COUNTY DAILY REPORT, Sept. 5, 1991; David
Goldberg, Verdict in D.A.’s Slaying Voided, ATLANTA J.-CONST., Sept. 4, 1991.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
40
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
discovered behind an elementary school. An all-white jury in Columbus, Georgia,
sentenced Brooks to die in the electric chair after Mullins Whisnant, Pullen’s predecessor,
told jurors that Georgia’s crime rate had risen since 1964, the date of the last execution,
and that “we didn’t have this kind of murder … when we had capital punishment.”
At sentencing, Whisnant invoked “the war on crime” as a reason to deal with
Brooks harshly and told jurors that it would be more expensive for taxpayers to imprison
Brooks than kill him. Whisnant urged jurors to think of themselves as “soldiers” in the
battle against a crime wave: “You can tell William Brooks, and you can tell every criminal
like him, that if you come to Columbus and Muscogee County, and you commit a crime
… you’re going to get the electric chair.”
The Eleventh Circuit found these tactics disturbing. A panel called out the
prosecutor for inviting the jurors to “forego an individualized consideration of Brooks’
case and instead choose to kill him merely because he was part of the broad ‘criminal
element’ terrorizing American society.” Bright and Kendall, who took on Brooks’ appeal,
emphasized Whisnant’s improper political rhetoric inside the courtroom, but the Eleventh
Circuit ultimately found these remarks amounted to “harmless error” because of the
overwhelming evidence of guilt. At the same time, the panel overturned Brooks’ conviction
for a different reason: the trial court mistakenly instructed jury members that they could
presume every murder to be “malicious.” Doing so improperly shifted the state’s burden
of proof to the defendant.151
Brooks had been tried in 1977 before an all-white jury and sentenced to death even
though black people made up 30% of the community. Bright believed that race had played
a significant role in Brooks’ case—and not just because of Whisnant’s conduct. John Henry
Land, the judge who presided over Brooks’ trial, gave him two uncaring lawyers who did
little to protect him from the state. Land’s father, Aaron Brewster Land, had also
participated in two lynchings in the area when John Henry was just a boy. First elected in
1964, Judge Land himself publicly acknowledged long-held segregationist views. He had
even belonged to the States’ Rights Council of Georgia, Inc., organized to preserve “the
traditional establishment of segregation in both public and private places” and oppose
Brown v. Board, which the group derided as “the Thurgood Marshall Plan,”152 though Land
later renounced his past support for segregation.
His conduct as a proud “hanging judge,” particularly in high-profile cross-racial
murder trials, suggested something different. The more that Bright learned about Judge
Land’s handling of the first trial, the more he became convinced that Judge Land had helped
carry out a “legal lynching” of Brooks.153 Over the objections of the jurors, Land had
permitted cameras in the courtroom for the sensational cross-racial murder trial—a first in
151 Brooks v. Kemp, 762 F.2d 1383, 1414-15 (11th Cir. 1985).
152 MCFEELY, supra note 58, at 123; Brochure, The Aims and Purposes of the States’ Rights Council of
Georgia; 200 Political Leaders Form Racial Group, MACON NEWS, Sept. 24, 1955, at 1.
153 Tim Chitwood, Powerful Judge John Henry Land Dies at Age 93, LEDGER-INQUIRER, Dec. 2, 2011.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
41
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Georgia’s history.154 Just by reading the transcripts of jury selection, Bright could guess
the race of the jurors. “I could tell by the way they treated those eight people which ones
were black because they would lead them into answering the questions in a way that got
them excluded from the jury,” Bright recalled.
During voir dire, prospective jurors who acknowledged hearing about the high-
profile killing in the news were asked follow-up questions. Judge Land and the prosecutors
would lead the white prospective jurors into saying that they could put aside what they
knew about the case and decided the case based on the evidence. With black jurors, they
would lead them into saying they had already formed an opinion about the case and would
have trouble putting it aside. Judge Land’s supervision of jury selection in Brooks’ original
trial left few prospective jurors in the pool, who were easily removed by prosecutors
through peremptory challenges.155
1. Recusing All the Judges and Prosecutors of a Circuit
Bright and Kendall remained counsel for Brooks’ retrial, adding recent Yale Law
School graduate Ruth Friedman156 as well as Columbus attorney and state senator Gary
Parker. Because Columbus had the “dubious distinction” of being an outlier—
“condemning more people to death since 1973 than any other place in Georgia”157 Bright
felt that they would have to escalate their tactics to match county officials’ strong push for
the death penalty. When the case returned to Muscogee County, they filed a 23-page
motion to recuse Judge Land because of his “intentional racial discrimination” and
requested that the case be assigned to a judge outside of the Chattahoochee Circuit.158
Although he claimed it had nothing to do with the substance of the motion, Judge
Land stepped aside, saying that “the fact that I did try it before might give an appeals court
something to hang their hat on.”159 On March 24, 1988, Bright then moved to recuse Judge
Rufe Edwards McCombs, the next judge assigned to Brooks’ case, and renewed the defense
request that the case be moved outside the circuit entirely.160 In that same motion, they
insisted that none of the judges in the circuit could be impartial given that under McCleskey
v. Kemp their client “must show the discriminatory intent of all key ‘decision makers’” and
that the key figures “in this case are friends, colleagues and associates who are part of the
154 Columbus Sees First TV Trial, Associated Press, MACON NEWS, Nov. 17, 1977, at 1.
155 The Reminisces of Stephen B. Bright, The Rule of Law Oral History Project, May 24 & 26, 2009.
156 Friedman later became a Senior Attorney at EJI. She argued Harris v. Alabama, 513 U.S. 504 (1995) in
the Supreme Court. In 2006, she became Director of the Federal Capital Habeas Project.
157 Unpublished editorial by Stephen B. Bright sent to Columbus Ledger-Enquirer, June 6, 1991, at 2.
158 Judge Will Leave Case After Racial Bias Alleged, ASSOC. PRESS, reprinted in ATLANTA CONST., Jan. 28,
1988, at 43.
159 Id.
160 Motion for Judicial Disqualification and Reassignment Outside of Chattahoochee Circuit, State v.
Brooks. Nos. 38888 & 54606, Mar. 24, 1988.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
42
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Court and judicial circuit” on which Judge McCombs and others serve.161 Judge Land, the
chief judge of the circuit, “both participated in discrimination against Mr. Brooks and
allowed it to take place before him in the previous prosecution of this case.”162
Furthermore, all of these judges regularly conferred with Judge Whisnant, who originally
prosecuted the case against Brooks, who “expects to show that as district attorney Mullins
Whisnant discriminated against black people in his decisions to seek the death penalty and
that he sought the death penalty against William Brooks as part of those discriminatory
practices.”163
Additionally, the defense signaled that they would attempt to show that the current
District Attorney William Smith, who happened to be “a candidate to join Judge McCombs
on the bench,” had merely “continued the discriminatory practices of his predecessor,” as
assistant district attorneys “have sought to exploit these discriminatory practices to get the
white vote in the current and past elections.”164 Whoever ultimately presided over the trial
would also have to evaluate evidence that other officials and employees of Muscogee
County “have conspired to deny black people full-fledged participation on jury
commissions, on the master jury lists, on grand and traverse juries, and in positions of
employment in the clerk’s office, the offices of the judges, … resulting in discrimination
against black defendants who come before the Court.”165 Bright argued that “the
appearance of a conflict of interest will be created” when Judge McCombs—or frankly any
other judge who worked closely with Judge Land in the circuit—“is called upon to
determine Mr. Brooks’ McCleskey claim.”166
Brooks’ lawyers added another motion demanding a public hearing on their recusal
motion, as well as discovery of any evidence in the possession of the District Attorney as
well as any judge or court personnel.167 Bright repeatedly deployed McCleskey offensively:
“Where the state seeks to utilize society’s ultimate sanction, it has an overriding obligation
to provide a fair forum. In the vernacular of McCleskey, its decisionmakers must stand
beyond repute. Mr. Brooks has filed a motion claiming that Muscogee county
decisionmakers fail this test.”168
The next step involved trying to hold the D.A.’s office responsible for past
discrimination by blocking their participation in subsequent cases. Seeking maximum
media coverage of their racial bias claims, Bright followed up with a motion to disqualify
161 Id. at 3.
162 Id. at 4.
163 Id.
164 Id.
165 Id. at 5.
166 Id. at 6.
167 Omnibus Motion for Discovery and Notice to Produce Information Necessary for Hearing on Motion for
Judicial Disqualification, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54606 (Apr. 13, 1988).
168 Id. at 6.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
43
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
the entire Muscogee County District Attorney’s office.169 “The current occupant of that
office is one whose political identity is based almost exclusively on the death penalty,” the
motion stated. “The death penalty was the major issue in his campaign for District
Attorney.” That public posture meant that prosecutors were violating the accused’s “due
process and other rights” by failing to consider legal reasons for whether to seek the death
penalty—i.e., “the unique circumstances of the offender and the crime.” In fact, whether
out of improper “personal or political” interests or “loyalty” to one part of the community
over another, the D.A. “has refused even to consider a sentence of less than death in this
case.”
It was a long shot, but Judge Whisnant, who handled the case when he was a
prosecutor, recused himself. Eventually, Brooks’ team got what they wanted: the case was
assigned to Judge Hugh Lawson from the Oconee Judicial Circuit.170 That key switch in
judicial personnel opened the possibility for the defense to ratchet up rebellious localism
even further.
Bright and his staff immediately moved to quash the original indictment against
Brooks from 1977, arguing that it was still tainted by the constitutional defect identified in
the Amadeo litigation. The D.A. wisely chose not to contest that motion. Instead, he
resubmitted the case to a grand jury in 1987 and received another indictment. His lawyers
then objected to the new grand jury proceeding as “fundamentally unfair” because the
District Attorney Doug Pullen gave a campaign speech during his presentation. This
motion was denied.171
2. Structural Racism Claims
Before a new judge, Brooks’ team filed multiple motions to block the death penalty,
making a variety of equality arguments. All told, Bright explained to Judge Lawson, “we
come out with about fifteen issues approximately that are worthy of the Supreme Court of
169 Motion to Disqualify the District Attorney of the Chattahoochee Judicial Circuit, State v. Brooks, Nos.
38888 & 54606 (Apr. 16, 1990).
170 Brooks’ team also moved to recuse Judge Lawson for a different reason than bias: that his judgeship was
created in violation of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 and that the method electing superior court judges in
Oconee Judicial Circuit via “majority-vote, designated-post, and circuit-wide elections … dilute the voting
strength of African Americans.” See Motion that All Further Proceedings Be Before a Judge Selected in
Compliance With the Voting Rights Act and the Constitution at 5, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54606
(Apr. 16, 1990). Not only did Brooks’ lawyers cited relevant voting rights cases, but they also threw in
McCleskey v. Kemp with the statement: “Fourteenth Amendment is violated when defendant in a capital
case shows a direct link between racial discrimination and ‘the decision makers in his case.” Id. at 7.
Lawson rejected the motion as untimely, but also ruled that recusal wasn’t warranted on June 5, 1990. The
rest of the pretrial motions were heard, and trial commenced.
171 Pretrial Hearing, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54606 (Muscogee Cty. Super. Ct. Aug. 15, 1990); Pre-
Trial Hearing at 8, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54606 (Muscogee Cty. Super. Ct. Sept. 11, 1990).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
44
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Georgia looking at.”172 In late September 1990, Judge Lawson wavered, asking Pullen
whether he “feel[s] so absolutely certain about the State’s legal position on all of these
issues that you are prepared to spend the time and money to have the trial and run the risk
that any of these could make the train jump the track when the trial is over?”173
One defense motion sought “to bar the death penalty because of racial
discrimination.”174 A second sought to “bar the death penalty because of victim-impact
evidence.” A third motion tried to stop capital punishment from being inflicted because it
“is sought based on worth and status on victim.” A fourth asked for a preliminary ruling to
“bar any prosecutorial misconduct … that has been sort of a hallmark of capital cases in
the Chattahoochee Circuit.”175 This last motion didn’t just try to stop certain kinds of racist
litigation practices during Brooks’ retrial, but also sought to bar all future capital
prosecutions in the jurisdiction. According to Bright, the constitutional violations ran deep:
[Y]ou can take the first capital case that Judge Whisnant tried when he was
district attorney and you can look at the closing argument in that case, which
was basically the kind of argument you would make on the courthouse stairs
at a lynch mob, not the kind you make in a courtroom to a jury. And you
can look [at[ an argument Mr. Pullen made the last time he argued a case
and you’ll find all those elements… They go right through Whisnant’s
arguments to Judge Smith’s arguments and to the arguments this present
day, and we suggest that the Court has to take action to stop it.176
Bright alleged that the District Attorney’s office had a practice of racial
discrimination that encompassed not just jury selection tactics but also abuse of charging
discretion and racially inflammatory oral advocacy. He wanted Brooks’ trial to become a
vehicle for documenting these overlapping racist practices that infected all capital cases
handled by the office. “Racial discrimination in Muscogee County in its criminal justice
system, and in the practices of the District Attorney’s office, is so deep-rooted and
pervasive that it is impossible to ensure that such discrimination will not play a
determinative and unconstitutional role in the outcome of Mr. Brooks’ trial,” they argued
172 Pretrial Hearing at 37, State v. Brooks (Sept. 25, 1990). One interesting pre-trial motion challenged the
state practice of having motions for the funding of experts handled in adversary proceedings. SCHR
successfully won the right to apply ex parte to a trial judge for experts and investigative assistance so as to
not disclose trial strategy, work product, and privileged communications to the prosecution. Brooks v.
State, 385 S.E.2d 81 (Ga. 1989).
173 Id. at 48.
174 Id. at 38.
175 Pre-trial Hearing, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54606 (Muscogee County Superior Court), Sept. 11,
1990, at 38.
176 Id. at 40.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
45
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
in their memorandum of law.177 “Thus, under McCleskey, this Court must prohibit the State
from seeking a sentence of death against Mr. Brooks.”178 Quoting Justice Powell’s own
words, they insisted that “any evidence which suggests that the ‘risk [of racial
discrimination is] constitutionally acceptable, McCleskey, … is valuable and probative” on
the question of whether a prosecutor has abused his prosecutorial discretion.179 Recounting
the history of racism in the state and county, the legal memo also invited judges to subvert
the original McCleskey decision by linking Justice Brennan’s dissent in that case to other
cases that documented discrimination against black residents of Georgia.
As a result, Bright demanded an injunction against the prosecutor’s office and
anyone who might be involved in carrying out a death sentence:
We will show that, first, when Judge Whisnant, then District Attorney
Whisnant, was district attorney for a number of years here, his right-hand
person was Bill Smith. During that time Mr. Pullen came into the office.
Judge Whisnant, only three months after getting the death penalty for
William Brooks in the first televised trial in Georgia history, went on to
become a judge. Judge Smith took over as district attorney. Mr. Pullen
moved up to being the chief assistant… Judge Smith tried the Carlton Gary
case, the silk-stocking stranglings. He went on to his judgeship. Mr. Pullen
moved into the district attorney’s office… it’s been a history with a lot of
racial discrimination.180
The decision whether to seek the death penalty has “been made primarily by three
white men over the last 17 years: Judge Whisnant, Judge Smith, and Mr. Pullen… those
three people have really decided which 24 people would be subject to capital cases or
not.”181 During argument on the motion, Bright insisted that their evidence of racial bias
would be stronger and more direct than that laid out in McCleskey itself. “I want to make
it clear that this is not an elaborate multiple-regression analysis that we’re going to be
177 Memorandum of Law in Support of Defendant’s Motion to Bar the Death Penalty Because it is
Arbitrarily and Discriminatorily Sought and Imposed in the Chattahoochee Judicial Circuit on
Impermissible Racial Grounds at 2, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54604 (Muscogee Cty. Super. Ct. Apr.
16, 1990).
178 Id. at 3. See also Supplemental Memorandum of Law in Support of Motion to Bar Death Penalty
Because of Race and Victim Status Grounds at 2 n.2, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54604 (June 4, 1990)
(“The Supreme Court held in McCleskey v. Kemp … that a sentencing decision based on unconstitutional
distinctions among crime victims violates the rights of the person so sentenced to equal protection and to
freedom from arbitrary government action.”).
179 Id. at 47.
180 Id. at 44.
181 Id. at 46.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
46
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
putting on.” Rather, “it’s a very straight-forward” set of exhibits demonstrating the
prosecutor office’s biased charging decisions.182
As for the motion seeking to replicate McCleskey’s findings on a smaller scale,
Bright argued that the District Attorney’s office improperly considered race in deciding
whether to seek death. He noted that “the three capital cases pending in this court,”
including that of Brooks, “all involve black people charged with murders of white
people.”183
In advance of a public hearing on these motions, Parker and Rev. Lowery held an
anti-death penalty event at the Fourth Street Baptist Church in Columbus. The two men
told the citizens assembled that race, not the nature of the offense, was “the most significant
criteria” for the death penalty in the area.184 “It’s wrong to teach our children to be
vindictive rather than preventive,” Dr. Lowery told the crowd. “It’s wrong to teach … that
white life is more valuable than black life.”185 After the event, the two men paid a visit to
Brooks’ jail cell to highlight popular complaints of local injustice. Their explicit goal was
to marry harm reduction in court and abolition outside the courtroom: “to make people in
Columbus aware of the inequities and tremendous cost inherent in this system” of killing
their own.186 The media marveled at SCHR’s strategy of rebellious localism, noting that it
involved a “dramatic” turning of the tables to focus “on the prosecution’s motives” because
of McCleskey v. Kemp.187
Pullen denied racism in the D.A.’s office and bristled at being called “nasty, nasty
names in front of the courthouse.”188 In response to the motions, he demanded access to
any raw data, any “information that went into this computer that led to this so-called
study.”189 He lashed out abolitionist death penalty lawyers, saying “they will do any deed,
tell any lie, hurt any cause, nation or individual in order to achieve the end to capital
punishment in this country.”190 Otherwise, Pullen said in court, “Let the games begin.”191
182 Id. at 49.
183 Pre-trial Hearing at 42, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54606 (Muscogee Cty. Super. Ct. Sept. 11, 1990).
A separate motion for discovery demanded “any and all records in the possession of the District Attorney
regarding each and every homicide case prosecuted in the Chattahoochee Judicial Circuit since Jan. 1,
1973.” Motion for Discovery and Notice to Produce Information Necessary for hearing on Motion to Bar
the Death Penalty Because it is Arbitrarily and Discriminatorily Sought and Imposed in the Chattahoochee
Judicial Circuit on Impermissible Racial Grounds, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54604 (Apr. 16, 1990).
184 Ken Edelstein, Civil Rights Leaders Campaign Locally Against Death Penalty, COLUMBUS LEDGER-
ENQUIRER, Sept. 9, 1990, at A-1.
185 Id.
186 Edelstein, supra note 184, at A-11.
187 Katie Wood, Proffering the Prosecution, FULTON COUNTY DAILY REPORT, Sept. 14, 1990, at 1, 4-6.
188 Pre-trial hearing, State v. Brooks, Sept. 11, 1990, at 55.
189 Id. at 56-57.
190 Kimball Perry, Brooks’ Defense Raises Race As Issue in Death Case, COLUMBUS LEDGER-ENQUIRER,
Aug. 15, 1990, at D-1.
191 Pre-trial hearing, State v. Brooks, Sept. 11, 1990, at 59.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
47
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
At one point, Bright and his staff questioned Pullen and two other former
prosecutors, including Judge Whisnant, under oath. Asked about their charging decisions,
the prosecutors recited exactly the same race-neutral criteria, i.e., whether there were
aggravating factors to justify a death sentence. Yet Brooks’ team tried to rebut their
testimony as to their charging decisions by putting on relatives of black homicide victims
who testified that the investigation and prosecution of their cases were not pursued with
the same kind of diligence as crimes against white victims. While black citizens were the
victims of 65% of homicides in the county, “almost all of the death penalty cases that have
been tried have involved white victims, 20 out of 24.”192 These family members, “their
voices quavering with emotion, described the district attorneys’ callous disregard for their
cases.”193 They said that the D.A.’s office often did not even stay in close contact with
them before resolving cases. One African American woman learned that her daughter’s
killer had already been sentenced when she called the police to see when the trial would
be. Another witness, also black, testified that the D.A.’s office allowed her husband’s killer
to plead guilty without consulting with her beforehand. By contrast, when Brooks offered
to plead guilty and accept life without parole, Pullen consulted the victim’s family before
deferring to them and refusing a deal.194
At one point, to try to stop the testimony from the family of black murder victims,
Pullen stood up and conceded that victims’ families “had been treated callously in the past”
and that as the new D.A., he had tried to make amends.195 But the judge permitted the
defense to proceed.
During a remarkable courtroom exchange, Bright objected to the judge’s initial
ruling that admissible evidence as to racism within the county’s legal system would be
limited “to the last 18 months.” Bright said that so sharply limiting the historical proof
would be tantamount to doing “what we have done for years in the South … sort of wear
blinders to sort of avoid really focusing and dealing with the problem of race and racial
discrimination in the society.”196 It would be “like saying that if there’s a change in
leadership of the Ku Klux Klan we can’t assume that that organization because we can’t
look back at the church bombings and all that because that was when J.B. Stoner headed
up the organization but now someone new has taken over.” Instead, Bright advocated a
holistic test: looking at “the totality of the facts to see to what extent the history influences
the present.”197 The evidence introduced by SCHR sought to portray “a larger historical
context of discrimination against African-Americans in Georgia and Muscogee County”
and urged that the trial of Brooks “be viewed in the context of racial violence against black
people in Muscogee county and in Columbus,” what Bright called “cradle-to-grave
192 Pre-trial hearing at 50, State v. Brooks, Sept. 11, 1990.
193 Wood, supra note 187, at 1.
194 George Kendall interview (Mar. 23, 2020).
195 Wood, at 6.
196 Id. at 40.
197 Id. at 43.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
48
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
discrimination … that includes and is most pernicious, in fact, in the criminal justice
system.”198
Judge Lawson shrewdly allowed Brooks’ defense a wide berth to introduce what
they wished into the record, but not everything could be live testimony. At one point, Bright
was permitted to proffer the testimony of a Columbus native on the history of local racial
violence, although Judge Lawson ultimately decided the testimony was not directly
relevant to the motions. As Bright explained, Bill Winn, who wrote for the Columbus
Ledger-Inquirer, would explain “the lack of trust of the criminal justice system” among
black citizens as a result of “the uninterrupted history of racial violence inside and outside
the criminal justice system in this community.” He would have spoken about the 1912
lynching of a 14-year-old “on the steps of the courthouse here in Columbus,” as well as the
lynching of a white proponent of racial equality that “caused so much racial unrest that
black people in the community threatened to burn Columbus down.”199
Bright then turned to specific evidence of historic and systematic
underrepresentation of minorities on Muscogee County juries. Bright asked Judge Lawson
to take judicial notice of several decisions: a 1966 Fifth Circuit ruling called Vanleeward
v. Rutledge200 holding “that the jury pools in Muscogee county discriminated on the basis
of race”;201 as well as Peters v. Kiff,202 a 1972 ruling in which the U.S. Supreme Court
reversed a sentence from Muscogee County, agreeing that even white defendants are
harmed when a county excludes black citizens on a systematic basis.
“An all-white country club is a terrible thing,” Bright argued, “but an all-white jury
is worse because it denies people participation in the judicial process.” He hammered the
democratic deficits uncovered through the legal process. Over half the capital cases in the
county, including that of Brooks, “have been tried with all white juries.”203 Bright
introduced “the entire record of the first trial”204 and told Judge Lawson that what happened
198 Id. at 40-41.
199 Id. at 80 (proffer of testimony of Bill Winn, Columbus native and senior writer for Columbus Ledger-
Enquirer).
200 Vanleeward v. Rutledge, 369 F.2d 584 (5th Cir. 1966). The Fifth Circuit reversed a death sentence
against a black defendant where the county’s jury selection process failed to guarantee a fair cross-section
of the community. The panel noted that before 1960, not a single black person had been called for jury
service in Muscogee County. And although Muscogee County was 30% black, out of 3470 names in the
traverse jury list at the time of trial only 25 people were black because the all-white jury commissioners
would “put on the list only the names of those person known to them or to some of them” in their effort to
comply with a state law to form juries comprised of “upright and intelligent citizens.” Id. at 586-87.
201 Pre-trial Hearing at 45, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54606 (Muscogee Cty. Super. Ct. Sept. 11, 1990).
202 Peters v. Kiff, 407 U.S. 493 (1972). After discussing Strauder, the Court reaffirmed the importance that
jury pools reflect a fair cross-section of the community. “Illegal and unconstitutional jury selection
procedures cast doubt on the integrity of the whole judicial process,” wrote Justice Thurgood Marshall.
“They create the appearance of bias in the decision of individual cases, and they increase the risk of actual
bias as well.” Id. at 502-03.
203 Brooks Pretrial Hearing, supra note 171, at 43.
204 Id. at 48.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
49
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
the first time was “a legal lynching,” which he defined as a “perfunctory criminal trial” that
accomplishes the “same result” as an extralegal act of justice “without the unseemly way
of doing it by just simply taking a person out and hanging him up.”205 According to Bright,
who laid out how one racist practice exacerbated another,
The outcome of this case was foregone conclusion. All the publicity …; the
all-white jury; the exclusion of jurors on the basis of race; the closing
argument, which … appealed to passion and racial prejudice …; a
perfunctory trial broadcast to the community; and Brooks was off to the
electric chair; and, of course, Judge Whisnant was off to the bench.206
3. Race-Based Jury Strikes Over Time
Brooks’ team lost the bulk of their pre-trial motions, but Bright persuaded Judge
Lawson to order discovery on the racial discrimination claims. This momentous turn of
events gave them time to develop a record and the opportunity to show that since the death
penalty was reinstated in Gregg, prosecutors for the Chattahoochee Judicial District had
tried 27 capital cases, with 21 involving white victims. The sample size wasn’t large, but
it also wasn’t paltry. 19 people wound up with a death sentence.
Even more damning were the patterns in the office’s juror strikes over the years. In
capital cases, prosecutors exercised peremptory challenges 59 times (85.5%) against black
jurors, and only 10 times (14.5%) against white jurors. SCHR proved that these tactics led
to eight black defendants tried for capital crimes in front of all-white juries: Joseph
Mulligan, Jerome Bowden, Jamie Lee Graves, Johnny Lee Gates, William Brooks, and
William Lewis.207 All eight involved black defendants, with seven of the eight cases
involving black defendants and white victims.
Ruth Friedman, Mary Eastland, and several investigators and interns spent the
months leading up to Brooks’ retrial going through the case files of the District Attorney.
“We went through every file, coding them” for every factor that could conceivably be
relevant to understanding prosecutorial practices such as prior offenses, the number of
victims, and so on. This amounted to some 10,000 pages of documents in the county’s files.
Denying racial bias, Pullen had said he sought a death sentence only when aggravating
factors existed, and so they went about testing whether this was true or whether, instead,
the race of the defendant or victim could be isolated as a motivating factor in a prosecutor’s
decisions.
205 Id.
206 Id.
207 Capital Cases Involving African American Defendants Tried in the Chattahoochee (Ga.) Judicial District
Since 1973, State v. Brooks, Nos. 38888 & 54606, Def. Ex. 2A.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
50
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Just as with the Horton case, SCHR hired an expert to examine the data and try “to
show that race was the constant.”208 But this time, they broadened their net to encompass
all the prosecutors from the office. After examining the data, Dr. Michael Radelet testified
that “those who kill whites are 5.9 times more likely than those who kill blacks[s]” to have
the death penalty sought against them by the D.A.’s office.209 But Pullen’s explanations,
such as that some homicides are accompanied by an additional felony such as robbery,
simply “does not explain this racial disparity.”210 Neither did the degree of relationship
between perpetrator and victim (even though more people who kill strangers have the death
penalty sought against them).211 Other details supported Brooks’ motion: “given a female
victim, those who kill whites are 5.1 times more likely to have the death penalty sought
than those who kill a black female.”212 The pattern held when comparing black male victim
versus white male victim: “those who kill white males are 11 and half times more likely to
have the death penalty sought than those who kill black males.”213
As for the state’s jury strikes over time, he testified that there was less than 1 in
1,000 chance that Pullen’s office was striking black jurors at such a high rate randomly.
Pullen admitted being out of his depth, saying he was “not familiar with statistics.”214
During cross-examination of Radelet, Pullen tried to suggest that the expert was
compromised because he appeared at defense lawyers’ press conference and handed out
sheets with details of his research, but Radelet insisted that he was not morally opposed to
the death penalty and merely had an “academic” interest. Pullen strongly implied that
Radelet did not include all factors that went into their charging decisions, such as the ages
of perpetrators and victims, but Radelet replied that he took into account the most likely
ones. When Pullen tried to get Radelet to say that the Baldus study had been rejected by
judges, he retorted: “Not my reading of McCleskey. I think the Supreme Court made it
quite clear that they accepted that study” and “that study has received some very prestigious
awards.”215
At one point, Pullen lost his cool. “You’re telling me that when you’re calling me
and my two predecessors racists—”216 Parker objected, saying that “he has never said that
the evidence indicates that he is a racist. He says the evidence raises a strong suggestion of
racial discrimination in the application of the death penalty in this circuit.” Judge Lawson
sustained the objection.
Pullen moved on to inquire why Radelet chose not to focus on the race of
defendants, and Radelet explained that Bright asked him “to focus on race of victim.” This
208 Interview with Ruth Friedman (Mar. 10, 2020).
209 Pretrial Hearing, State v. Brooks, Sept. 11, 1990, supra note 171, at 119.
210 Id. at 122.
211 Id. at 127.
212 Id. at 130-31.
213 Id. at 131.
214 Id. at 88.
215 Id. at 153.
216 Id. at 154-55.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
51
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
amounted to an effort to focus on one aspect of the Baldus study (racial disparities in cross-
racial killings), and to try to replicate it on a more intimate scale. Radelet acknowledged
that the raw numbers showed that of the 45 capital cases they were discussing, 23
defendants were white and 22 were black.217 Radelet pushed back, saying that “the lesson
that we have learned from this research project and from many others done over the last
decade is that if we look at defendant’s race alone, that creates a totally misleading picture
of the effect of racial variables on the imposition of the death penalty.”218 Other factors
either could not be quantified or were not for purposes of Radelet’s study, such as strength
of a case, criminal history, whether there was provocation, degrees of premeditation,
defendant’s state of mind.219
After this hearing, the NAACP called a press conference to attract media attention
to the hearing. The NAACP hailed SCHR’s aggressive approach in Brooks’ trial as “a
model of new defense strategies” to satisfy the more stringent standard of proof for
discrimination demanded by McCleskey.220 Earl Shinholster, the NAACP’s southern
regional director, said that the evidence of racial bias tendered during the hearing proved
once again that the answer is to “abolish the death penalty.”221
Ultimately, Judge Lawson refused to bar the death penalty at the pre-trial stage. It
was always highly unlikely that a single elected judge was going to stop a capital trial on
the basis of past discrimination by prosecutors, much less issue a blanket order preventing
the entire office from seeking death sentences in the future. Nevertheless, rebellious
localism served several objectives. First, SCHR’s holistic approach to advocacy disrupted
the status quo, where a defendant in cross-racial killing was briskly tried and sentenced to
death. This more aggressive pre-trial posture litigating equality issues raised the costs of
litigation for the government, forcing prosecutors to ask themselves repeatedly whether
insisting upon a death sentence was worth it when the entire case might be more
expeditiously and securely resolved through a plea deal. Not only would a D.A.’s office
have to defend against several pre-trial motions and prepare for lengthy hearings, but they
would also have to invest in experts and build a separate case in favor of death even if they
secured a conviction. The costs would continue escalate if other issues emerged, such as
challenges to the possible method of execution, especially if a trial were delayed so a
defendant could pursue an interlocutory appeal.
Second, such litigation tactics served an educative function by surfacing the often-
subterranean racial dimensions of legal justice. They heightened awareness of the case and
led affected segments of the community in the county and state to pay closer attention and
217 Id. at 156.
218 Id. at 160.
219 Id. at 171-72.
220 Wade Lambert & Martha Brannigan, Death Penalty Case Challenged on Grounds of Racial
Discrimination, WALL ST. J., Aug. 14, 1990.
221 Kimball Perry, Brooks’ Defense Raises Race as Issue in Death Case, COLUMBUS LEDGER-ENQUIRER,
Aug. 15, 1990, D-4.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
52
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
even participate in the proceedings. While Bright and his staff never lost sight of the
primary goal of harm reduction (here, saving their client’s life), rebellious localism ensured
that constitutional issues of equality and fairness would be debated more broadly, whatever
fate befell their client in the end.
Third, by hammering the issues of race and poverty in the administration of capital
punishment so relentlessly, Brooks’ team increased the participants’ sensitivity to a greater
possibility of a reversal on appeal or during a subsequent post-conviction proceeding. The
new judge, no doubt wanting above all as clean a trial as possible on the second go-round,
had given defense lawyers plenty of leeway to raise their concerns and preserve issues for
appeal. Exploiting that desire helped them to overcome the usual obstacles to building a
robust record of discrimination during a criminal trial.
During jury selection, Pullen still used all his peremptory strikes against black
jurors. Even so, aggressive defense lawyering led to a jury seated with nine black citizens
and three white citizens—a far cry from what happened the first time around.222
Fighting so hard for racial equality now gave Brooks’ team another chance to battle
for life in front of a mixed-race jury. Their change of venue motion was granted, and the
trial took place in Morgan County. This time, the state’s case did not feature overtly racist
appeals.223 After Brooks was convicted of murder, Bright pleaded with the jury to spare his
client from the electric chair. “We get down now to the ultimate issue here: Do we kill
William Brooks?” Bright said to the jurors. “An issue about as stark and about as great a
moral decision as a human being could ever be called upon to make.”224 He proceeded to
give a textbook closing argument weaving together themes of residual doubt and the
possibility of redemption, as well as a deep dive into the aspects of Brooks’ troubled
upbringing, including childhood abuse, that favored a merciful outcome.
After deliberating for less than an hour, the jury decided to impose a life sentence.
Once again, rebellious localism had made the difference. This time, unlike in the Horton
case, rebellious localism had yielded a life sentence without necessitating an appeal and
collateral litigation.
Brooks’ ordeal illustrated another aspect of abolitionists’ harm reduction goals:
using the legal process to keep a client alive long enough for political conditions to shift
back in their direction. As Rachel Barkow has explained, “[p]opulist fears and impulses
among the electorate create pressure on prosecutors to make ill-advised short-term
decisions that end up compromising public safety”225 and violating rights. High-profile,
cross-racial murder cases during the War on Crime years tempted prosecutors into breaking
222 MCFEELY, supra note 58, at 155.
223 Austin Sarat, who observed Brooks’ retrial, believes that the prosecutors’ pleas for conviction and a
death sentence nevertheless capitalized upon older stock stories about “racial danger” and “racial
victimization.” Austin Sarat, Speaking of Death: Narratives of Violence in Capital Trials, 27 LAW & SOC.
REV. 19, 28-29 (1993).
224 State v. Brooks, Bright Closing Argument During Penalty Phase.
225 BARKOW, supra note 18, at 144.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
53
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
constitutional rules and engaging in unethical conduct. But as Bright’s strategies illustrated,
extending a life beyond a particular historical moment might lead a different prosecutor to
agree to a plea deal or, as in Brooks’ case, secure a jury with sufficient distance from highly
racialized politics to consider mercy.226
As for the cause lawyer’s goal of achieving an authoritative repudiation of
McCleskey, that would take more time.227 More lasting policy transformation, too would
require building on legal errors and structural injustice unconvered in SCHR’s cases.
Whether the issue involved abolishing capital punishment, reforming how jury lists were
constituted, reducing or eliminating peremptory strikes, or constraining how prosecutors
made charging decisions—reform would require political action, and not merely favorable
judicial decisions. Even so, what happened in Johnny Lee Gates’ case in 2018 should offer
abolitionists hope that rebellious localism can do some good for long-term goals. Citing
SCHR’s win in Foster v. Chatman, lawyers for Gates gained access to the prosecutors’
notes during his original 1977 murder trial. Gates, a black man who has always maintained
his innocence, was convicted of rape and murder of a white woman by an all-white jury.
The notes showed that prosecutors closely tracked the race of prospective jurors, marking
white jurors with “W” and black jurors as “N.”228 Additionally, prosecutors described black
jurors as “slow,” “old + ignorant,” “cocky,” “con artist,” “hostile,” and “fat.”229
Because the prosecutors were Doug Pullen and William Smith, from the same
office that had prosecuted Brooks, SCHR lawyers introduced the study they had compiled
from that earlier case. They argued that Gates was entitled to a new trial based on the
“newly discovered notes” plus “the pattern of strikes across cases establish systematic race
discrimination.” From 1975 to 1979, the state brought seven capital cases against black
defendants in Muscogee County and struck 41 black jurors—in 6 of those cases, every
single black juror was eliminated to secure all-white juries. Pullen was involved in 5 of the
7 cases, striking 27 of 27 black jurors. Smith was involved in four of those cases. According
to the affidavit of Dr. Michael Lacey, “the probability that they exercise those strikes
without considering race is 0.000000000000000000000000000004.”230
226 Lee Kovarsky has offered a normative defense of giving prosecutors more back-end mercy power.
Whatever the merits of this proposal, which must include some evaluation of whether inequality is
ameliorated or worsened, Kovarsky is correct that the prosecutor’s office is often “the local entity with the
best information and expertise” to make calls about the possibility of redemption. Lee Kovarsky,
Prosecutor Mercy, 24 NEW CRIM. L. REV. 326, 341 (2021). Indeed, deals like the one Bright and other
abolitionists seek on behalf of their clients try to capitalize on local prosecutors’ better comparative
capacity to grant mercy, at least relative to the possibility of post-conviction relief by other political actors.
227 Brandon Garrett has detected “a defense lawyering effect” from “improved defense lawyering and
greater resources,” which has produced “real differences between state death sentence rates.” BRANDON
GARRETT, END OF ITS ROPE 109 (2019).
228 Supplement to Motion for New Trial Regarding the Prosecutors’ Jury Selection Notes at 1-2, State v.
Gates, No. SU-75-CR-38335 (Mar. 19, 2018). Interview with Patrick Mulvaney (Aug. 27, 2021).
229 Id. at 2.
230 Id. at 8.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
54
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
On January 10, 2019, a state court granted Gates’ extraordinary motion for a new
trial on a separate ground: that DNA testing of evidence from the crime site did not contain
Gates’ DNA. But in the stunning opening pages of his order, the judge also accepted the
evidence of racial discrimination presented by SCHR, finding the evidence of bias
“overwhelming.”231 At last, abolitionists could point to formal recognition of historical
evidence of structural racism. Not only did the judge find that the prosecutor’s office had
a practice of race-based peremptory challenges, but he also connected that jury selection
strategy to outrageous rhetorical appeals made by prosecutors during capital trials. He
noted that arguments in front of all-white juries were more explicitly racist and deplored
the “racially charged arguments [that] spanned across multiple cases, including Gates’
case.”
The Georgia Supreme Court upheld the lower court order granting relief based on
the DNA evidence. Yet the justices, too, like the local judge, went out of their way to note
the “troubling findings” of prosecutorial misconduct in capital cases “held in the
Chattahoochee Judicial Circuit between 1975 and 1979.”232 Even if it was not the explicit
rationale for relief, the structural racism claim—with its focus on highlighting intentional
racism in particular counties and circuits—almost certainly shaped how these judges
perceived the rest of the defendant’s arguments.
This mattered because in recent years, successful arguments to end capital
punishment have not sounded in religious or other abstract rationales, such as the efficacy
of deterrence, but rather concerns about actual innocence, unequal administration on the
basis of race and poverty, and excessive costs. For instance, when the Washington State
Supreme Court halted the death penalty on state constitutional grounds in 2018, it did so
because capital punishment “is unequally applied—sometimes by where the crime took
place, or the county of residence, or the budgetary resources at any given point in time, or
the race of the defendant.”233 With Gates, abolitionists acquired another crowbar with
which to pry open the machinery of death.
CONCLUSION
Rebellious localism is a strategy of legal resistance that is most effective during
tough political times, when legal doctrine is in the process of becoming more complex
and less humanitarian in orientation, when public servants are becoming less interested in
vindicating robust theories of equality and fairness and instead focused on maximizing
other objectives. Its practitioners search for spaces within doctrine to subvert the
231 Order on Defendant’s Extraordinary Motion for New Trial, State v. Johnny Lee Gates, Case No. SU-75-
CR-38335 (Muscogee Cty. Jan. 10, 2019).
232 State v. Gates, Case No. S19A1130, 62, n.22.
233 State v. Gregory, 427 P.3d 621, 627 (Wa. 2018). Likewise, Governor Jay Inslee, who imposed a
moratorium on the death penalty in 2014, said at the time that the system “falls short of equal justice under
the law.” Governor Inslee’s Remarks Announcing a Capital Punishment Moratorium (Feb. 11, 2014).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
55
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
ideological and policymaking intentions of judges and opportunities to turn the tables on
public servants who fall short of ideals. In part to correct for the waning of trust in legal
institutions, they continue to appeal to broader, intuitive notions of what is just and fair
given the immense stakes involved in capital cases.
When those stakes were the highest—a client’s life hung in the balance—and
national political conditions were least favorable for maximalist progressive
constitutional projects, Bright and his staff were willing to do what it took to implement
this approach. It meant not giving up on wider reform goals, such as abolishing the death
penalty and improving the quality of indigent defense systems, but entailed shifting
emphasis to harm reduction and incremental advancement of structural claims by
documenting constitutional problems. From the standpoint of harm reduction, success
would be measured according to lives saved or extended. Capital cases were slowed
down, executions were put off time and again. In Georgia, a state supreme court that
began the post-Gregg era generally unwilling to review capital trials closely eventually
became alarmed by the inequities on display and, as in cases like Ford and Gamble,
started to send appalling trials back to be done over. On that score, rebellious localism
accomplished more than one might have dreamed at the outset.
If doctrine is in part a method of empowering allies and weakening adversaries,
then rebellious localism also advanced this agenda. In terms of advancing principles of
racial equality and fundamental fairness in criminal trials and resisting the impoverished
vision of justice exemplified in McCleskey, rebellious localism created fresh templates
for action and legal precedents such as Horton and Gates to build upon—often, in
situations far removed from the influence of the U.S. Supreme Court. These victories,
which included pre-trial rulings forcing the disclosure of evidence in the hands of
prosecutors or forcing public servants to testify, went the farthest. Equally useful were
rulings that excoriated the underrepresentation of jury pools or practices that denied
eligible black citizens a chance to participate in the criminal process. These rulings
showed the lengths to which some public officials were willing to go to kill fellow
citizens—mostly black people charged with serious crimes against white people. By
insisting that the misconduct uncovered was not just evidence of isolated bad actors but
rather proof of a system gone awry, SCHR’s work advanced abolitionist aims. At this
broader level, rebellious localism shamed elites by exposing the inequitable aspects of the
criminal justice system.
Nevertheless, rebellious localism was an extremely time-intensive endeavor.
Putting local systems on trial entailed front-loading and multiplying colorable
constitutional claims, as well as escalating their rhetoric. That meant consciously creating
more work for themselves and their adversaries by converting the pre-trial process into an
engine for public law-style litigation. It also meant that they could not serve quite as
many clients as they might otherwise, for the maximalist orientation toward existing
clients meant fewer cases they might take on.
The technique involved destroying the possibility of efficient capital trials and
generating friction between themselves and other legal actors who were repeat players.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
56
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
Another drawback, at least in court, was that abolitionists often chose to play to existing
stock stories about racial hostility rather than delve more deeply into what was likely a
more complicated truth. As Randall Kennedy puts it, cross-racial disparities often have to
do more with “racially selective empathy rather than racially selective hostility” because
white prosecutors, judges, and jurors “relate more fully to the suffering of white victims”
who can be readily “imagined as family or friends.”234
An advocacy group can only hope to pull off rebellious localism of this sort if it
has sufficient ties to the community and is capable of tapping the people’s sense of
history, their long-held grievances, and their own dreams of justice. It must also have the
right personnel: people who would rather be feared as adversaries than loved, willing to
battle every legal point.
SCHR could not save every client, nor did they win every motion. Yet the
organization’s successes over time—and they enjoyed several legal victories in which
they beat significant odds—suggest that a sharp theoretical dichotomy between
radicalism and gradualism is too simplistic as to be helpful. Rather, historians and
theorists should be looking for forms of gradualism that can co-exist with radical aims,
striving to better understand when hybrid approaches to legal reform might work and
when the tensions are too great to manage.
To be sure, SCHR did not accomplish these goals alone. Others were engaged in
local battles against the death penalty systems in their states, exposing inequities in terms
of race, wealth, and geography. Yet their efforts contributed to the burgeoning discourse
that capital punishment was unjust because it was administered unequally and unfairly.
This is only one part of that broader story of abolition that continues to unfold.235
From the standpoint of judges making constitutional law at the highest levels, the
lessons should be more sobering. Efforts to portray the law in terms that privilege order
over justice are not only likely to fail, but wind up horrifying the law’s subjects and
causing counterproductive effects. Such projects will engender furious resistance, even
when the winds appear to be blowing in the very direction that Justices may wish to go.
An overweening desire for legal efficiency can in fact produce its opposite: a flurry of
texts and orations that call into doubt the prospects for equal justice. Deep skepticism
about whitewashing inequality may prompt accusations of racism that taint outcomes,
practices, and judicial personnel—whether or not they are satisfactorily proven.
Concerns about the value of statistical evidence had played a role in Justice
Powell’s desire to insulate the criminal justice system in McCleskey. But he hadn’t done
much, if anything, to call into question the integrity of the Baldus study, or to explain
convincingly why that evidence was any less reliable than in other settings. His
234 Kennedy, supra note 11, at 1420.
235 The most dramatic localist effort to bring the death penalty system to a standstill occurred in the
Commonwealth of Virginia, which then legislatively abolished the punishment. See Corinna Barrett Lain &
Douglas A. Ramseur, Disrupting Death: How Specialized Capital Defenders Ground Virginia’s Machinery
of Death to a Halt, 56 U. RICH. L. REV. 183 (2021).
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
57
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646

96 SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA LAW REVIEW (2023)
solution—to neither seriously question it but to suggest statistical evidence was less
useful on a state-wide scale—did not end advocates’ efforts to quantify racism.
As SCHR’s experience demonstrates, it remained possible to use expert testimony
and quantitative evidence to shed light on prosecutorial motives in charging decisions and
peremptory strikes. It’s true that their studies involved fewer state actors, but it is not
obvious that the evidence was significantly more reliable than the Baldus study. While
replicating similar cross-racial patterns, the local studies had a smaller sample size and
considered fewer non-racial variables. In SCHR’s cases, statistical evidence of bias was
not the only evidence offered. Instead, such evidence bolstered other evidence of
discrimination by a particular bad actor or practices of a discrete jurisdiction. For this
reason, the narratives of unconstitutional behavior were simpler, more familiar. They
resonated with beliefs about the quality of local justice and pricked the consciences of
people to reflect more deeply on how much more might still need to be done.
ã 2021 by Robert L. Tsai. All rights reserved. Do not quote or circulate without permission. 2/9/23 9:01
AM
58
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4352646