DEALS – L6107
PROFESSORS GILSON AND GOLDBERG
AUTUMN 2000
This Exam consists of Two questions. You must answer both. Answers should be
typed. There is a constraint on the length of your answers. The maximum for
EACH question is Four pages (double-spaced). That translates to a 1,000 word
maximum for each question. If you believe that you need some additional facts,
state what your assumptions are and why they are reasonable.
Question 1
Phillips Petroleum plans to build an ethylene facility in its Texas petrochemical
facility at an expected cost of $400 million. Under certain economic circumstances the
location could accommodate a facility considerably larger than the one contemplated.
Rather than fund the project solely with debt, Phillips has chosen a somewhat more
complicated financing structure. Half the funds would be raised with non-recourse bank
loans to Phillips secured by the cash flow from the project. It projects that the bank loans
would pay interest in the range of 8-10%. The remainder would be provided by a
partnership between Phillips and Deerpath, Inc., with each partner putting up $100
million. Phillips would be the managing partner and make all operating decisions.
Revenue would be shared as follows. Deerpath would receive a 50% interest in
the residual cash flows until it received a 16% cumulative rate of return on its $100
million investment. That is, it would get half of all cash flow received by the partnership
that was not necessary to the operation and maintenance of the ethylene facility until its
total cumulative return on in its investment over all periods during which the investment
continued equaled 16% per annum. The remaining residual cash flows would be
distributed to Phillips.
Once Deerpath has received distributions that equaled a 16% cumulative rate of
return on its $100 million investment, Phillips would have the option to purchase
Deerpath’s investment for $100 million. The option could be exercised at any time after
this milestone had been reached. If Phillips chooses not to exercise the option, Deerpath
would receive a 16% return (subordinated to the bank loans).
During the negotiations, Deerpath’s lawyer proposed the following term:
The Managing Partner shall not, without Deerpath’s
consent, cause any substantial modification of the Ethylene
Facility prior to completion thereof or any major expansion
or contraction of the partnership’s business. Nor shall it,
without unanimous consent, cause the partnership to make
any discretionary capital expenditures in excess of $10
million in any calendar year unless that expenditure is

funded by debt. A discretionary capital expenditure is one
that materially increases the efficiency or production
capacity of the Ethylene Facility, but only to the extent
such expenditure is directly attributable to the amount of
such material increase.
Assuming that the parties are committed to the structure by which Deerpath
receives a cumulative 16% return paid from 50% of the cash flow, evaluate this term.
Under what conditions might it create problems? How might those problems be
addressed? Assess any proposals from the perspective of both parties.
Question 2
To finance their making of films, movie production companies sometimes enter
into what are called: negative pickup” deals. The production company receives a bank
loan to cover the production budget. A distribution company (for example, Paramount,
Disney or Fox) agrees in advance that it will pay off the bank loan and take ownership of
the film once production is complete. The production company receives a fixed fee plus a
share of the revenue stream. The sharing arrangements vary widely; typically the
distribution company covers its costs of acquisition and marketing before any revenue is
shared. The distributors recognize that movie making is a risky business and that only 10
to 20% of the movies they distribute will be successful. The earnings from the successful
movies provide a profit sufficient to cover the losses associated with the “dogs.” More
complicated variations on this basic theme have been developed. Your task is to analyze
one of them.
Thunderbird Films has proposed the following to Disney: Thunderbird will make
four films with a production budget of $20 - $40 million each. (The budget includes a
base fee for the production company.) The market potential of those films will be
assessed by two independent risk managers, jointly selected by the parties, who will
evaluate the films’ script and budget, as well as the talent committed to the films. Disney
need not go forward unless the risk managers provide their opinion that the films can be
made within their proposed budget and that each has a reasonable chance of commercial
success.
If Disney goes forward with the transaction, State Bank has agreed to loan
Thunderbird the funds necessary to make the films at LIBOR plus 2%, with Thunderbird
drawing down the funds as necessary to pay its bills. Upon completion of each film,
Disney will pay repay 70 % of State Bank’s loans with respect to the completed film.
Disney will then own the film and have the exclusive right to exploit it commercially.
The remainder of State Bank’s loan will be paid out of the revenues of the film, as set out
below.
Two additional features protect repayment of State Bank’s loan. First, the films
are pooled so that there is cross-collateralization. Thus, even if three of the films are

unsuccessful, the revenues from the fourth may be sufficient to pay off all loans. Second,
repayments of the loans are to be insured. If State Bank’s loan with respect to a film has
not been repaid out of revenues within 36 months after the film’s release, AGS Insurance
Company has agreed to pay the outstanding balance. Its premium will be 10 percent of
the total amount of State Bank’s loans. After making a payment with respect to a film,
all future revenues from the film would go to AGS, not State Bank. The insurance
premium would be one of the production costs funded by the bank loans, as would
interest on the loan.
A film’s revenues would be shared between Disney and State Bank in the
following manner. The initial acquisition price and all non-production costs (primarily
prints of the film and advertising) incurred by Disney are repaid before State Bank
receives anything. All “participations” (that is, payments to actors, directors or others
who are due a percentage of gross or net profits) also must be paid to Disney, which
would then distribute those amounts to the participants. In addition, Disney receives 15%
of the gross receipts as a distribution fee. After these payments are made, Disney and
State Bank split the gross revenues, with State Bank receiving 40% until the loan is paid
off. Thereafter, State Bank’s 40% is used to cover cross-collateralization payments on
the outstanding loans on the other films. After all loans are repaid, Disney receives 100%
of the revenues.
You have been hired by AGS to prepare a memorandum evaluating the
transaction. Prepare the memorandum as your answer to this question.

