(
|

}

270 3. Defining Criminal Conduct—The Elements of Just Punishment 271

Culpability

definition of negligence sufficient to support civil liability: “An act, to b
‘negligence,’ must be one which a reasonably prudent person would foreseg
as involving an unreasonable risk of injury to himself or to another and Which,
such a person, in the exercise of ordinary care, would not do.” The Suprem
Court found this instruction erroneous:] [W]hen moral condemnation ay,
social opprobrium attach to the conviction of a crime, the crime should
ically reflect a mental state warranting such contempt. ... We construe th,
intended scope of the statute as aiming to punish conduct that is morally
culpable. ... We interpret the mens rea element of negligence in the chilg
abuse statute, therefore, to require a showing of criminal negligence insteag.
of ordinary civil negligence.

onis posted additional violent language directed against fellow employ-
Bl agents who met with him, and children in local schools. He was
ed with violating 18 U.S.C. §875(c). At trial] Elonis requested a jury
ction that “the government must prove that he intended to communicate
¢ threat.” The District Court denied that request [and] instead informed

jury that

Astatement js a true threat when a defendant intentionally makes a statement
na context or under such circumstances wherein a reasonable person would
‘oresee that the statement would be interpreted by those to whom the maker
ommunicates the statement as a serious expression of an intention to inflict
odily injury or take the life of an individual.

6. When the statute is silent. In cases like Cunningham and Hazelwood
the relevant statutes gave the courts a starting place because they included
some mens rea language to interpret. But what if the statute contains no mens
rea language at all? The next case considers that issue.

‘The Government’s closing argument emphasized that it was irrelevant
ether Elonis intended the postings to be threats—“it doesn’t matter what
e thinks.” A jury convicted [and] Elonis was sentenced to three years, eight
onths’ imprisonment ....

[On appeal, the Court of Appeals held that §875(c) required only an intent
communicate words that a reasonable person would view as a threat. The
supreme Court reversed. After noting that the statute was silent on the
tiestion of mens rea, the Court observed:]

The fact that the statute does not specify any required mental state,
owever, does not mean that none exists. We have repeatedly held that
“mere omission from a criminal enactment of any mention of criminal intent”
should not be read “as dispensing with it.” This rule of construction reflects
the basic principle that “wrongdoing must be conscious to be crimi-
al.”... The “central thought” is that a defendant must be “blameworthy
in mind” before he can be found guilty, a concept courts have expressed
over time through various terms such as mens rea, scienter, malice afore-
thought, guilty knowledge, and the like. Although there are exceptions, the
“general rule” is that a guilty mind is “a necessary element in the indictment
and proof of every crime.” We therefore generally “interpret[ | criminal sta-
tutes to include broadly applicable scienter requirements, even where the
statute by its terms does not contain them.” ...

Elonis’s conviction, however, was premised solely on how his posts would
be understood by a reasonable person. Such a “reasonable person” standard is
a familiar feature of civil liability in tort law, but is inconsistent with “the
conventional requirement for criminal conduct—awareness of some wrong-
doing.” Having liability turn on whether a “reasonable person” regards the
communication as a threat—regardless of what the defendant thinks—
_ “teduces culpability on the all-important element of the crime to negligence,”
and we “have long been reluctant to infer that a negligence standard was
intended in criminal statutes.” Under these principles, “what [Elonis] thinks”
does matter.

...In light of the foregoing, Elonis’s conviction cannot stand. ... Given
Our disposition, it is not necessary to consider any First Amendment issues.

ELONIS v. UNITED STATES

Supreme Court of the United States
135 S. Ct. 2001 (2015)

Cer Justice Roserts delivered the opinion of the Court.

Federal law makes it a crime [punishable by up to five years’ imprison-
ment] to transmit in interstate commerce “any communication containing any
threat... to injure the person of another.” 18 U.S.C. §875(c). Petitioner was
convicted of violating this provision under instructions that required the jury
to find that he communicated what a reasonable person would regard as a
threat. The question is whether the statute also requires that the defendant be
aware of the threatening nature of the communication. ...

[After his wife left him, Elonis started posting on Facebook rap songs and
other material containing graphically violent language and imagery. Although
Elonis often included disclaimers that his posts were “fictitious” and “thera-
peutic” for him, the targets of his posts saw them differently. For example,
Elonis posted a script in which he wrote:]

[W]hat’s interesting is that it’s very illegal to say I really, really think someone
out there should kill my wife. .. . lalso found that it’s incredibly illegal to go on
Facebook and say something like the best place to fire a mortar launcher at her
house would be from the cornfield behind it because of easy access to a getaway
road and you’d have a clear line of sight through the sun room... .

[After viewing the posts, Elonis’s wife requested and received a state-court
order of protection. Elonis responded by posting again:]

Fold up your [protection-from-abuse] order and put it in your pocketl.] Is it
thick enough to stop a bullet? ... And if worse comes to worse[,] I’ve got
enough explosives to take care of the State Police and the Sheriff's Department.



|
|

272 3. Defining Criminal Conduct—The Elements of Just Punishment

[The Court did not decide whether the statute required knowledge oy
recklessness with respect to the threat, leaving that question for another day |

Justice ALITO, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
[W]hen Congress does not specify a mens rea in a criminal statute, we have
no justification for inferring anything more than recklessness is needed. .. .

QUESTIONS ON ELONIS

The Court made clear that a negligence standard is disfavored in criminal]
law but did not decide whether recklessness or knowledge was the right mens
tea to read into the statute. What factors should guide that decision? Justice
Alito suggests that the default should be recklessness when a statute is silent,
thus eliminating any further inquiry. Does that one-size-fits-all default rule
represent the best guide to statutory interpretation? Should the severity of the
authorized punishment matter? What about the typical mens rea for analo-
gous crimes? Recall that in Cunningham, p. 260 supra, the court held that a
statutory requirement of “malice” could be satisfied by recklessness. If a stat-
ute requiring “malice” can be met by recklessness, why should a court require
more in a statute that expressly identifies no mens rea at all? Compare the lack
of certainty in how to approach these issues in the common-law framework
with the Model Penal Code approach discussed below.

NOTE ON THE MODEL PENAL CODE REFORMS

Responding to the problems posed by common-law mens rea terminology,
the MPC proposed a fresh approach that has been extremely influential. The
Code’s mens rea framework has been adopted explicitly in more than half of
American jurisdictions, and it often influences judicial interpretation in the
remaining jurisdictions as well. The older framework for mens rea analysis
survives, however, and indeed it remains dominant in a number of jurisdic-
tions. Common-law terms are used in many state penal codes and in the
increasingly significant field of federal criminal law. The requirement of a
“willful” mens rea, for example, persists in many important federal crimes.
One study finds that “courts, legislatures, and scholars [continue to use] mean-
ingless mens rea terms such as ‘willful’; to employ the simplistic but ineffective
distinction between specific- and general-intent crimes; [and] to fail to see that
mens rea questions are element-specific.” Michael L. Seigel, Bringing Coher-
ence to Mens Rea Analysis for Securities-Related Offenses, 2006 Wis. L. Rev.
1563, 1564. It is therefore important to emphasize that this older approach
remains very much in play and must be learned as well, despite the success of
the more modern MPC framework, which we now examine.

The MPC attempts to mitigate the difficulties of mens rea analysis through
three distinct tools—manageable categories, precise definitions, and conve-
nient default rules. First, the Code eliminates the use of general intent, specific
intent, and other ambiguous common-law terms, replacing the ten-plus

p. Culpability 273

varieties of common-law mens rea with just four mental states—purpose,
knowledge, recklessness, and negligence. Second, the Code provides a rela-
tively clear, rigorous definition for each of its four mens rea terms. Third, the
Code provides rules of interpretation (default rules) to enable courts to deter-

- mine the required mental state sensibly and predictably when the statutory

Janguage concerning mens rea is silent, ambiguous, or contradictory.
Because they are technical and rigorously precise, the MPC provisions are

- pot an easy read, but mastering them is an essential prerequisite for the suc-

cessful study and practice of contemporary criminal law in any American
jurisdiction. As the first step in the process of acquiring that mastery, the
student should at this point turn to the Appendix and read with great care
the MPC provisions that embody its three mens rea reforms, specifically:

© §2.02(1), which reduces the many common-law mens rea terms to four
manageable categories;

e §§2.02(2)(a)-(d), which provide precise definitions for each of the four
mental states used in the MPC framework; and

* §§2.02(3)-(4), which provide specific default rules to govern statutory
interpretation.

The significance of these provisions and their underlying rationale is
explained in the following excerpt, which likewise should be examined
with care.

MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES
Comment to §2.02, at 229-241 (1985)

1. Objective. This section expresses the Code’s basic requirement that
unless some element of mental culpability is proved with respect to each
material element of the offense, no valid criminal conviction may be
obtained. ...

The section further attempts the extremely difficult task of articulating the
kinds of culpability that may be required for the establishment of liability. It
delineates four levels of culpability: purpose, knowledge, recklessness and
negligence. It requires that one of these levels of culpability must be proved
with respect to each “material element” of the offense, which may involve (1)
the nature of the forbidden conduct, (2) the attendant circumstances, or (3)
the result of conduct.’ The question of which level of culpability suffices to

1. Section 1.13(9) defines an “element of an offense” to include conduct, attendant circum-
Stances or results that are included in the description of the offense, that negative an excuse or
Justification for an offense, or that negative a defense under the statute of limitations or establish
Jurisdiction or venue. Section 1.13(10) defines the concept of “material element” to include all
elements except those that relate exclusively to statutes of limitation, jurisdiction, venue, and the
like. The “material elements” of offenses are thus those characteristics (conduct, circumstances,
Tesult) of the actor’s behavior that, when combined with the appropriate level of culpability, will
Constitute the offense.

