Stanford Law Review
(cid:21)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:35)(cid:45)(cid:44)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:47)(cid:38)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:43)(cid:42)(cid:46)(cid:47)(cid:45)(cid:48)(cid:33)(cid:47)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:42)(cid:1)(cid:38)(cid:42)(cid:1)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:1)(cid:28)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:46)(cid:47)(cid:31)(cid:42)(cid:47)(cid:38)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:45)(cid:38)(cid:41)(cid:38)(cid:42)(cid:31)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:50)
(cid:19)(cid:48)(cid:47)(cid:37)(cid:43)(cid:45)(cid:2)(cid:46)(cid:3)(cid:18)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:31)(cid:45)(cid:39)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:35)(cid:40)(cid:41)(cid:31)(cid:42)
(cid:28)(cid:43)(cid:48)(cid:45)(cid:33)(cid:35)(cid:18)(cid:1)(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:31)(cid:42)(cid:36)(cid:43)(cid:45)(cid:34)(cid:1)(cid:23)(cid:31)(cid:50)(cid:1)(cid:27)(cid:35)(cid:49)(cid:38)(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:43)(cid:40)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:11)(cid:11)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:25)(cid:43)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:44)(cid:45)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:9)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:1)(cid:44)(cid:44)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:17)(cid:9)(cid:5)(cid:14)(cid:15)(cid:11)
(cid:26)(cid:48)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:38)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:34)(cid:1)(cid:32)(cid:51)(cid:18)(cid:1)Stanford Law Review
(cid:28)(cid:47)(cid:31)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:35)(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:27)(cid:23)(cid:18)(cid:1)http://www.jstor.org/stable/1228535 .
(cid:19)(cid:33)(cid:33)(cid:35)(cid:46)(cid:46)(cid:35)(cid:34)(cid:18)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:8)(cid:17)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:16)(cid:18)(cid:13)(cid:8)
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at .
http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of
content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms
of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Stanford Law Review is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Stanford Law
Review.
http://www.jstor.org

April 1981] INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTION 593
we use one time frame or another. Finally, I will suggest what role
interpretive construction plays-why the interpreter does what he
does, although I offer my accounts of why "analysts" do what they do
with more trepidation than I have when I offer my account of what
they are doing.
Though it may appear to some that I have nonrandomly selected
the cases in which these interpretive constructs are involved, this
charge strikes me as unwarranted. First, though the group of "hard"
cases I have selected may seem unrepresentative, I have simply se-
lected nearly all of the issues that I cover teaching a traditional sub-
stantive criminal law course, using a good casebook3 that certainly
was not edited with my concerns in mind. Second, and more impor-
tantly, I have attempted in Part IV to extend the discussion of inter-
pretive constructs to the sorts of "easy" cases that legal commentators
never bother to discuss, cases with few apparent puzzling aspects. If
the interpretations I discuss are at work in these "easy" cases, they
are at stake in everyc ase.
I. A GENERAL SUMMARY OF INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTS
Legal argument can be made only after a fact pattern is charac-
terized by interpretive constructs. Once these constructs operate, a
single legal result seems inevitable, a result seemingly deduced on
general principle. These constructs appear both in conscious and un-
conscious forms in standard legal discourse. Before examining in de-
tail how interpretive constructs reify substantive "textbook" law, it
will be useful to examine them more precisely.
A. Four UnconsciouIsn terprettieC onstructs
Unconscious interpretive constructs shape the way we view dis-
ruptive incidents, but they are never identified or discussed by judges
or commentators. There are basically four forms of unconscious con-
structs, two dealing with "time-framing" and two dealing with
problems of categorization. I discuss unconscious constructs before
conscious ones because the former are often used to avoid issues in-
herent in the latter, issues that the legal analysts are most prone to be
aware are controversial, perhaps insoluble, and highly politicized.
1. Broada nd narrowt imef rames.
We put people on trial. People exist over time; they have long,
3. S. KADISH& M. PAULSEN,C RIMINALL AW AND ITS PROCESSES( 3d ed. 1975).

594 STANFORDL AWR EVIEW [Vol. 33:591
involved personal histories. We prosecute particular acts-untoward
incidents-that these people commit. But even these incidents have
a history: Things occur before or after incidents that seem relevant
to our judgment of what the perpetrator did. Sometimes we incorpo-
rate facts about the defendant's personal history.4 Other times, we
incorporate facts about events preceding5 or post-dating6 the crimi-
nal incident. But an interpreter can readily focus solely on the iso-
lated criminal incident, as if all we can learn of value in assessing
culpability can be seen with that narrower time focus.
Most often, though not invariably, the arational choice between
narrow and broad time frames keeps us from having to deal with
more explicit political questions arising from one conscious interpre-
tive construct-the conflict between intentionalism and determinism.
Often, conduct is deemed involuntary (or determined) rather than
freely willed (or intentional) because we do not consider the defend-
ant's earlier decisions that may have put him in the position of ap-
parent choicelessness. Conversely, conduct that could be viewed as
freely willed or voluntary if we looked only at the precise moment of
the criminal incident is sometimes deemed involuntary because we
open up the time frame to look at prior events that seem to compel or
determine the defendant's conduct at the time of the incident. The
use of "time-framing" as interpretive method blocks the perception
that intentionalist or determinist issues could be substantively at
stake. If one has somehow convinced oneself that the incident, nar-
row time-framed focus is the appropriate technique for interpreting
criminal law material, there is simply no background data one can
use, either to provide the grist for a determinist account or to locate a
prior sphere of choice in a seemingly constricted world. The inter-
pretive "choice" between narrow and broad time frames affects not
only controversial, doctrinally tricky legal cases, but also "easy"
cases, because narrow time-framing fends off, at the methodological
level, the possibility of doing determinist analyses.
2. Dtsjoineda nd untfieda ccounts.
A second unconscious interpretive construct relating to time in-
volves the tension between disjoined and unified accounts of inci-
dents. Many legally significant situations seem to require a
4. For example, we incorporate facts about a defendant's personal history in raising the
insanity defense.
5. Eg., in raising the defense of duress.
6. E.g., in raising the defense of abandonment.

April 1981] INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTION 595
somewhat broad time frame, at least in the sense that we feel we
must look beyond a single moment in time and account, in some
fashion, for some clearly relevant earlier moment. The earlier "mo-
ment" may be the time at which a defendant made some judgment
about the situation she was in, some judgment that at least contrib-
uted to the ultimate decision to act criminally. For instance, the de-
fendant negligently believes she must use deadly force to defend
herself and then she intentionally kills someone, having formed that
belief. Alternatively, the earlier moment may simply be the moment
at which the defendant initiated the chain of events that culminated
in criminal results. For instance, the defendant may shoot at X, but
the bullet will miss X and then kill Y, an unforeseeably present by-
stander.
Once we agree to look at these earlier moments, we must decide
whether to disjoin or unify the earlier moment with the later mo-
ment. We can treat all the relevant facts as constituting a single inci-
dent, or we can disjoin the events into two separate incidents.
Once this arational interpretive decision is made, the question of
criminal culpability is forever biased. Is a negligent decision to kill
followed by an intentional killing a negligent or intentional act? Is
the person who misses X and shoots Y someone who commits two
crimes-attempted murder of X plus, say, reckless homicide of Y-or
one crime-an intentional murder of a person? Sometimes, unifying
two arguably separate incidents allows us to avoid making a hard-to-
justify assertion that the arguably second incident or decision was
determined by the first. Often, other interests are at stake in separat-
ing or joining a series of incidents.
3. Broada nd narrowv iews of intent.
A third unconscious construct involves broad and narrow views of
intent. Each time someone acts, we can say with fair confidence that,
in the absence of some claim of accident, he intended to do precisely
the acts that he has done. But we have difficulty categorizing those
acts, because an individual set of acts may, in the observer's eyes, be
an instance of a number of different categories of acts. For example,
when the defendant intends to undertake certain deeds constituting a
particular crime, it feels both misleading in significant ways, and per-
fectly proper in others, to assert that the defendant intended the par-
ticular crime. On one hand, it is odd to think of actors as viewing the
world in criminal law categories when they act. On the other hand,
it is equally odd to think of actors as focusing in their consciousness

600 STANFORDL AWR EVIEW [Vol. 33:591
neither has killer force.21 Because neither position can dominate the
other, legal arguments about the desirable form of legal commands
are not just oscillating, unsettled, and unbalanced, but the choice of
one resolution or the other ultimately feels like a product of whim-a
reflection of one's most recent overreaction to the follies of the previ-
ously adopted form.
II. UNCONSCIOUS INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTS
Having examined the interpretive constructs in general, I shall
now apply the four unconscious constructs to doctrinally "hard"
cases in the substantive criminal law. This part illustrates how each
construct is used and how certain results are apparently mandated
only after an unwarranted interpretation is made. I shall also try in
this section to account for the appearance of particular constructs in
particular fact situations. Though I am generally skeptical of ac-
counts of construction, it is most often my belief that interpretive
construction appears to enable the legal analyst to avoid dealing with
fundamental political problems.
A. Broada nd Narrow Time Frames
1. Narrow time-framing.
Generally speaking, narrow time frames buttress the traditionally
asserted intentionalism of the criminal justice system. In a number of
doctrinal areas, though, conduct is deemed to be involuntary or
otherwise outside the responsibility of the defendant even though, if
we interpret the relevant legal material as including earlier decisions
(that is, if we broaden the time frame), we can interpret the courseo f
conduct that culminates in criminal harm as chosen.
Status versusc onductd tsttiction. The tensions of time-framing are
evident in the status versus conduct distinction. In United States v.
Moore,22 Judge Wright, in dissent, argued that a statute proscribing
narcotics possession should not apply to drug addicts, because posses-
sion merely manifests their status of being addicted. He contended
that drug addicts cannot be deterred from or blamed for possessing
21. Much of the technique of Socratic first-year law teaching involves the teacher driv-
ing the student towards a rule position and countering with a parade of horrible cases in
which actors within the culture abuse the precisely framed rules, or driving the student to-
wards advocacy of a vague, purposive standard and countering with a parade of horrors
about the "nonlegal," fiat-based, bigoted system the student has created.
22. 486 F.2d 1139 (D.C. Cir. 1973).

April 1981] INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTION 601
narcotics because their addiction rendered them choiceless.23 Since
punishment is inappropriate unless its deterrence or retributory aims
are met, it is inapt here.
Fully addicted people truly may not be deterrable by the pros-
pect of punishment at the momentw hen they decide to possess or use
drugs. In Judge Wright's narrow view of the relevant legal material,
the defendant may be nondeterrable because his then-pressing desire
makes him oblivious to the costs imposed by state punishment. But
once we broaden the time frame, we can see that even the particular
use by the addict in Moore would have been less likely if addicts were
punished. Assuming, as one must in applying deterrence theories,
that actors calculate rationally and try to avoid pain, we know that if
a person can be punished at any future time he uses drugs, not just in
the pre-addiction period, he will be less prone to start using drugs.
But, of course, if the person who ultimately came to trial had not
made the initial uses, he would not have become an addict or made
the particular use we are concerned with.24
Precisely the same objection can be made to Judge Wright's argu-
ment that the status of addiction cannot be deemed blameworthy.
Even if we should not blame people for being sick, we may well blame
23. Judge Wright stated, "[R]ecognition of a defense of 'addiction' for crimes such as
possession of narcotics is consistent not only with our historic common law notions of criminal
responsibility and moral accountability, but also with the traditional goals of penology-
retribution, deterrence, isolation and rehabilitation.
". . [T]he retributive theory of criminal justice looks solely to the past . . .. Revenge,
if it is ever to be legitimate, must be premised on moral blameworthiness, and what segment
of our society would feel its need for retribution satisfied when it wreaks vengeance upon
those who are diseased because of their disease?
"The most widely employed argument in favor of punishing addicts for crimes such as
possession of narcotics is that such punishment or threat of punishment has a substantial
deterrent effect. . . . [But d]eterrence presupposes rationality .... In the case of the nar-
cotic addict, however, the normal sense of reason, which is so essential to effective functioning
of deterrence, is overcome by the psychological and physiological compulsions of the disease.
As a result, it is widely agreed that the threat of even harsh prison sentences cannot deter the
addict from using and possessing the drug." Id. at 1242-44.
24. Thus, to use obviously artificial numbers, assume the person on day one prevalues
all future drug uses at 100 and prevalues punishment for use at (-200). However, there is
only a 1 in 4 chance of being caught using before he is addicted. He may then use the drugs,
since the expected value of use (100) exceeds the negative expected value of punishment (1/4
x (-200) or (-50)). Use may lead to the pressing desire of addiction, so at the time of the
particular use for which he is arrested, drug use may have reached a value of, say, 50,000, so
that, in Wright's terms, he is nondeterrable.
If a potential drug user knows he will be punished even if addicted, he may never use
drugs at all. Thus, even postaddiction drug use is less likely if we broaden the time frame to
include the defendant's earlier decisions to use drugs.

602 STANFORDL AWR EVIEW [Vol. 33:591
them for becomings ick. The addict may seem blameless in the narrow
time frame, but in a broader time frame he may well be blamewor-
thy. Certainly, it is not at all uncommon or bizarre for a parent to
blame (and punish) a child who goes out of the house in a storm
without adequate raingear for getting a cold, even though the same
parent would not punish the child for the "status" of betng ill. Vene-
real disease is another clear case: That VD is generally considered a
disease hardly precludes us from blaming its victims, because they
contractedit through earlier voluntary acts.25
Judge Wright dismissed, in conclusory fashion, the possibility of
using a broader time frame in assessing retributive demands.26 Pre-
sumably, Judge Wright used a very narrow time frame here to reach
the determinist result he would like to reach by using the very
broadesto ne: I surmise that the judge actually believes that the initial
"voluntary" drug uses are themselves determined by social and envi-
ronmental pressures that predate those early uses. Despairing of the
possibility of applying a very wide time focus and a more general
determinism, he avoided this political confrontation by constructing
the legal "material" in terms of the traditional incidentf ocus, a focus
which the majority implicitly rejected in the following conclusory
terms:
The gist of appellant'sa rgument is that "the common law has long
held that the capacity to control behavior is a prerequisitef or crim-
inal responsibility."
It is inescapablet hat the logic of appellant's argument, if valid,
would carry over to all other illegal acts of any type whose purpose
25. In his concurring opinion in Robinson v. California, 370 U.S. 660, 676-78 (1962),
Justice Douglas argued that it is unconstitutionally cruel and unusual to punish a person for
being an addict, since addiction is an illness. But why are we morally duty-bound to treat,
rather than to condemn, sick people, if we believe that having an illness is not an inevitably
disconnected incident, but may be part of an historical process to which the ill person volun-
tarily contributed?
Besides the time-framing issue, his argument is ambiguous in two other ways: First, what
does it mean to say that addiction is an illness? If, for instance, an illness is something doctors
can treat, would addiction count? Second, even if addiction is an illness and illnesses must be
treated, how do we know that punishment is not a form of treatment or that traditional
"treatment" is not, at least when unwanted, punishment? See In re De La 0, 59 Cal. 2d 128,
378 P.2d 793, 28 Cal. Rptr. 489 (1963) (upholding mandatory civil commitment program for
addicts because it was not deemed punishment under Robinson).
26. Judge Wright noted that "there may have been a time in the past before the addict
lost control when he made a conscious decision to use drugs. But imposition of punishment
on this basis would violate the long-standing rule that '[t]he law looks to the immediate, and
not to the remote cause; to the actual state of the party, and not to the causes, which remotely
produced it.' " 486 F.2d at 1243 (quoting United States v. Drew, 25 F. Cas. 913, 914 (C.C.D.
Mass. 1828) (No. 14,993)).

April 1981] INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTION 603
was to obtain narcotics.27
If we take it as given that we must punish the people we are now
punishing-and a lot of those people are stealing to obtain narcot-
ics-then we must avoid Judge Wright's incident-based determinism.
But this is simply a functionalist complacency, the belief that things
are right because they are done: a world view hardly more or less
acceptable than any other political assertion (e.g., things can be pre-
sumed to be wrong, if done, because the world we see is pretty
crummy), and hardly the outcome of piercing legal analysis.
The voluntarya ct requirement.U nconscious shifting between broad
and narrow time frames also arises in applying the criminal law's
voluntary act requirement. In Martin v. State,28 police officers ar-
rested the defendant at his home and took him onto a public high-
way, where the defendant used loud and profane language. He was
convicted under a statute prohibiting public exhibition of a drunken
condition. The appellate court reversed, holding that the defendant
was involuntarily and forcibly carried to the public place by the ar-
resting officers. The court concluded, uncontroversially, that an in-
voluntary act cannot give rise to liability.29 But in People v. Decina,30
the court sustained the defendant's conviction for negligent homi-
cide, though at the time his car struck the victims, he was uncon-
scious as a result of an epileptic fit, not voluntarily operating the
vehicle. The court held that the defendant was culpable because he
had made a conscious decision to drive, knowing that an epileptic
attack was possible.31
The hidden interpretive time-framing construct becomes visible
when one tries to square Martin with Decina. In Decina, the court
opened up the time frame, declaring that if the defendant commits a
voluntary act at time one which poses a risk of causing an involun-
tary harm later-drives the car knowing he is a blackout-prone epi-
leptic-then the second act-crashing while unconscious-will be
deemed voluntary. But the defendant in Martin, as well, may have
done somethingv oluntarily (before the police came) that posed a risk
that he would get arrested and carried into public in his drunken
state. While it is plausible that Martin was arrested on an old war-
27. 486 F.2d at 1145.
28. 31 Ala. App. 334, 17 So. 2d 427 (1944).
29. Id. at 335, 17 So. 2d at 427.
30. 2 N.Y.2d 133, 138 N.E.2d 799, 157 N.Y.S.2d 558 (1956).
31. Id. at 139-40, 138 N.E.2d at 803-04, 157 N.Y.S.2d at 565.

604 STANFORDL AWR EVIEW [Vol. 33:591
rant32 and could not foresee that he would wind up in public on this
occasion, it is quite possible that the defendant was arrested for activ-
ity he was engaging in at home: for instance, beating his wife.33
Why did the court not consider saying that the voluntary act at time
one (wife beating) both posed a risk of and caused a harmful involun-
tary act at time two (public drunkenness) and assessing the voluntari-
ness of the alleged criminal act with reference to the wider time-
framed scenario? It cannot be that the involuntary, harmful act at
time two was unforeseeable:34 The probability of an epileptic black-
out is almost certainly far lower than the probability of ending up in
public after engaging in behavior likely to draw police attention. Ar-
guments that we are less concerned with people "thinking ahead" to
avoid public drunkenness than unconscious driving seem inadequate
32. In a truly intentionalist discourse, the hypothetical fact that Martin did not foresee
arrest on the particular occasion that he was drunk (e.g., when he was arrested on a past
warrant) would still not preclude a finding of voluntariness, at least if the arrest was valid.
(An invalid arrest, as in Finch v. State, 101 Ga. App. 73, 112 S.E.2d 824 (1960), would make
the public appearance that follows seem involuntary in a broad time frame as well.) One of
the risks one (voluntarily) takes when one performs acts for which one ultimately may be
arrested is that one will someday be forced to go places with the police, when they want to go
and not when the individual wants to. This sort of broad voluntary reading of human inten-
tion typifies traditional assumption of risk doctrine, in which a worker is deemed to contract
away his rights to a safe workplace when he makes a deal that includes, but makes no explicit
reference to, the abnormal risks of the workplace.
33. Courts do not examine whether the defendant's voluntary acts brought the police to
his home just prior to the arrest. Instead, they unconsciously use a narrow time frame in
assessing voluntariness. Cases where the defendant clearly took such recent acts, e.g., Mar-
shall v. State, 70 Ga. App. 106, 27 S.E.2d 702 (1943) (defendant arrested after a reported
disturbance at a soda plant); People v. Lane, 8 Misc. 2d 325, 32 N.Y.S.2d 61 (1942) (defend-
ant taken from a friend's apartment by police after he began fighting with the friend's guest);
People v. Brown, 64 Misc. 677, 120 N.Y.S. 859 (1909) (defendant hauled away from a private
house because he had been "licking his horse"), read just like the cases where the root of the
public appearance is unsure or unclear, e.g., Martin v. State, 31 Ala. App. 334, 17 So. 2d 427
(1944); Gunn v. State, 37 Ga. App. 333, 140 S.E. 524 (1927); Reddick v. State, 35 Ga. App.
256, 132 S.E. 645 (1926).
Two recent California cases do broaden the time frame in looking at the voluntariness of
a public appearance, People v. Perez, 64 Cal. App. 3d 297, 134 Cal. Rptr. 338 (2d Dist.
1976); People v. Olson, 18 Cal. App. 3d 592, 96 Cal. Rptr. 132 (2d Dist. 1971) (both deciding
questions of suppressing evidence obtained after arrest, rather than validity of drunk-in-pub-
lic conviction).
34. First, one must note that the court made no foreseeability arguments; the interpre-
tive characterization of the situation precluded the need for such an argument. Second, in
courts using narrow time frames, a defendant who is involuntarily brought into public, even
when he could clearly foresee when that involuntary appearance would occur, will be acquit-
ted of a drunk-in-public charge. See, e.g., Moody v. State, 131 Ga. App. 355, 206 S.E.2d 79
(1974) (defendant brought by deputy sheriff into public in response to subpoena; court did
not see that although presence in public may not have been voluntary over the short run, it
was clearly foreseeable).

April 1981] INTERPRETIVE CONSTRUCTION 605
as well; the penalties for public drunkenness are presumably set lower
to reflect the relative lack of gravity of the offense. Ultimately, the
Martin finding of voluntariness "works" not because it is "right," but
because all the hard points disappear in the initial interpretive con-
struction of the potentially relevant facts.35
Hostility to strict liability. Commentators who attack the use of
strict liability in criminal law invariably use narrow time-framing.
They imply that the defendant deemed guilty of an offense which
allows no mental state excuses as to some element of the crime is
treated unjustly because he could somehow not avoid criminality.
Look, for instance, at H.L.A. Hart's comments on criminal responsi-
bility:
The reason why, according to modern ideas, strict liability is odi-
ous, and appears as a sacrifice of a valued principle . . . is that
those whom we punish should have had, when they acted, the nor-
mal capacities ... for doing what the law requires and abstaining
from what it forbids. . . . [T]he moral protest is that it is morally
wrong to punish because "he could not have helped it" or "he
could not have done otherwise" or "he had no real choice."36
But this implication is not valid. Often, the actor could readily avoid
35. The case ultimately may be better understood as involving issues traditionally raised
either as entrapment, see notes 135-36 tifra and accompanying text (te., the police may sim-
ply be too entwined in this particular violation to sustain a conviction), or justification, see
notes 192-93 infra and accompanying text (zie., we actually want Martin to violate the drunk-
in-public law in these particular circumstances, because, on balance, we like obedience to
police much more than we dislike public drunkenness). The interpretive construction may
obviate the need to apply inevitably vague entrapment and justification doctrines; thus, it
expands the core of the criminal law covered by rules rather than ad hoc standards.
36. H.L.A. HART, supra note 1, at 152.
See J. FEINBERG, DOINGA ND DESERVING1 11-12 (1970) ("[S]trict liability to imprisonment
. . . 'has been held by many to be incompatible with the basic requirements of our Anglo-
American, and indeed, any civilized jurisprudence.' . . . [T]he reason why strict liability to'
imprisonment (punishment) is so much more repugnant to our sense of justice than is strict
liability to fine (penalty) is simply that imprisonment in modern times has taken on the sym-
bolism of public reprobation. . . . We are familiar with the practice of penalizing persons
for 'offenses' theyc ouldn ot help. It happens every day in football games, business firms, traffic
courts, and the like. But there is something very odd and offensive in punithing people for
admittedly faultless conduct. .. .") (second emphasis added) (footnotes omitted).
All the major commentators, with the partial exception of Wasserstrom, Strict LiabZit?yin
the CriminalL aw, 12 STAN. L. REV. 731 (1960), share this hostility to strict liability. See, e.g.,
G. FLETCHERs,u pra note 1, ? 9.3, at 717-36; J. HALL, supra note 1, at 342-59; H. PACKER,
supra note 1, at 121-31; G. WILLIAMS, supra note 1, ? 89; Wechsler, The Challengeo f a Model
Penal Code, 65 HARV. L. REV. 1097, 1108-09 (1952). The Model Penal Code predicates crim-
inality only on negligence, recklessness, purpose, or knowledge. MODEL PENAL CODE ? 2.05
(Tent. Draft No. 4, 1955) provides that any strict liability "crime" can be no worse than a
"violation," with no nonmonetary penalties.

April 1981] INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTION 611
can only be practiced where there is personal fault-if one reacts with
enough horror and shock at the idea of punishing those one defines as
faultless without paying much attention to how faultlessness is de-
fined-perhaps one can ignore the charge that in our routine ac-
counts of fault in ordinary "intentional" criminal cases, we simply
rule out the determinist claim that "crime is unavoidable." The de-
terminists can be warded off by pointing out just how sensitive we
purportedly are to punishing the blameless; the desired rhetorical
point is that such sensitive people err only on the side of the accused.
2. Broad time-framing.
Much criminal law doctrine departs from the traditional incident
focus and opens up the time frame. Broad time frame construction is
most often used when deterministic discourse supplants the usual in-
tentionalism. The substantive doctrines of duress, subjective entrap-
ment, provocation, and insanity are examples of such uses of broad
time-framing.47 These doctrines describe how certain blameworthy
acts are in fact blameless because rooted in or determined by factors
that preceded the criminal incident. The question, of course, is why
the broad time frame is selected in these cases, while it continues to
be excluded as methodologically inappropriate in most other cases
for no apparent reason.
Broad time-framing unrelated to determinism and intentionalism
also occurs in other areas of the substantive criminal law. The time
frame can be opened up to account for events both prior and subse-
quent to the criminal incident.
Abandonment.T he basic decision to allow any abandonment de-
fense follows a wide time-framed interpretive construction.48 The de-
fendant has already committed some act which, if interrupted by
external forces, would constitute an offense, an attempt of some other
substantive crime. Yet we judge the act innocent because of the de-
fendant's subsequent failure to consummate the harm. Although
many reasons for this widened time frame have been offered, none
overcomes the fundamentally nonrational, interpretive aspect of the
initial broadening of focus. Some deterrence-oriented theorists sug-
47. See notes 128-54 infra and accompanying text.
48. See, e.g., MODEL PENALC ODE ? 5.01(4) (Tent. Draft No. 10, 1960), exculpating an
actor who completely and voluntarily renounces an unconsummated criminal plan, even
though he had already done enough so that were he interrupted by external forces, he would
be guilty of attempt. Cf People v. Staples, 6 Cal. App. 3d 61, 85 Cal. Rptr. 589 (2d Dist.
1970) (denying that voluntary abandonment is a good defense).

612 STANFORDL AWR EVIEW [Vol. 33:591
gest that an abandonment defense provides incentives to avoid the
consummation of harm.49 But there are surely a number of "com-
pleted" crimes whose harm can be as effectively "undone" as can the
abandoned attempt: An embezzler, for instance, may return money
to victims unaware of their loss50 and "undo" as much harm as the
person who desists from an assault with intent to commit rape be-
cause the victim talks him out of continuing.5'
Retributively oriented commentators note that abandonment
makes us reassess our vision of the defendant's blameworthiness or
deviance.52 Of course, if we admitted evidence of post-criminal con-
duct (whether remorse, restitution, condonation, or reform) into every
trial, we would frequently change our views of the defendant's
blameworthiness. Once more, the act of interpretation, the open
time frame, allows the policy conclusion.
Broad time-framing is used in the abandonment area because the
general rule-oriented nature of the criminal law has already stum-
bled in the less rule-like attempt area. Attempt law is generally prob-
lematic in our legal culture because it is inexorably less rule-like than
the law of consummated harms; the actus reus of "attempting" refers
not so much to particular proscribed acts53 as to unavoidably noncat-
egorizable acts which, in the particular case, seem to give evidence of
the particular defendant's subjective disposition to act criminally.
To commit rape is to force carnal knowledge of a woman; to attempt
rape is to do sufficient acts to indicate that one would force carnal
knowledge. Whether the requisite "sufficient" acts include the pre-
cise acts of undressing, fondling, cornering, isolating from public
view, using force, and/or simply implying that force will be used is
inevitably a case-by-case determination. I suspect that the use of a
forward-looking broad time frame in considering the blameworthi-
ness of an attempter is the predictable outcome of the breakdown of
the rule-like form. The system demands all available information
49. See, e.g., W. LAFAVE& A. SCOTT,s upra note 1, ? 60, at 450; G. WILLIAMSs,u pra note
1, ? 199, at 620-21.
50. G. FLETCHERs,u pra note 1, ? 3.3.8, at 186.
51. See Le Barron v. State, 32 Wis. 2d 294, 145 N.W.2d 79 (1966).
52. G. FLETCHERs,u pra note 1, ? 3.3.8, at 187-88.
53. See the discussion of distinguishing preparation from attempt, notes 167-80 infra
and accompanying text. H. PACKERs, upra note 1, at 100 states: "[A]ll of us frequently make
moves in the direction of criminal activity, thereby satisfying this essential element of the
attempt concept. It is, therefore, instructive to note the doctrinal mechanisms whose function
it is, baldly put, to keep from making criminals of us all." The difficulties of squaring this
vague doctrine with legalism are discussed in id. at 101; G. FLETCHERs,u pra note 1, ? 3.3.4, at
157-59.

April 1981] INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTION 613
about defendant's blameworthiness, taken from as wide a period as
possible, as soon as it departs from the rule-like form.
The attachment to overtly political Rule of Law ideals precludesa
general broadening of time focus in the traditional consummated
harm case; the idea is that blameworthiness must be conclusively pre-
sumed from the performance of one of the proscribed acts in one of
the narrow time-framed blameworthy fashions. Once we allow our-
selves to recognize the breakdowns in our inevitably imprecise con-
clusive presumptions, we see the strains of legalism. To recognize
that we were probably thinking about the unremorseful, nonrestitu-
tionary thief when we set out general penalties for larceny is to re-
mind ourselves of the limit of the universalistic model. But we can
avoid overtly political defenses of obviously inapt conclusive pre-
sumptions by implying that, as a matter of method, our factual in-
quiry simply does not go forward once a criminal act is complete.
The undefended, but deviant, broad time frame appears in con-
structing an abandonment defense because of the inevitable break-
down of pure legalist form in the attempt area. Since we cannot infer
blame from a single act, because no such act is present in attempting,
we move, at the very least, to more partial Rule of Law strictures:
We try to infer a disposition to perform one of the still automatically
blameworthy acts. But this does not imply, as Fletcher seems to be-
lieve,54 the logical necessity of allowing an abandonment defense:
Once one performs acts indicating a firm intention to commit blame-
worthy criminal acts, there is no rational reason not to treat the per-
formance of these acts as conclusively presumed proof of criminal
intent. Of course, such a conclusive presumption would be inaccu-
rate, as all conclusive presumptions are; the abandoning defendant
demonstrates that our presumption that defendants who have "at-
54. Fletcher argues not precisely that the abandonment undermines our sense that the
defendant is a blameworthy harm-causer, but that it undermines the far more specific crimi-
nal intent that he feels is required to carry out a crime. G. FLETCHERs,u pra note 1, ? 3.3.8, at
189. This more complex vision, though, is ultimately circular: It is based solely on Fletcher's
notion that consummated harms are more than simply indicators of blameworthiness or need
for reformation, incapacitation, etc., cf. MODEL PENAL CODE ? 1.02(1) (Proposed Official
Draft 1962) ("The general purposes of the provisions governing the definition of offenses are:
... (b) to subject to public control persons whose conduct zndicatest hat they are disposed to
commit crimes.") (emphasis added), while attempts, uniquely, are simply indicators. But the
validity of the vision of attempts as indicators of blameworthiness and completed harms as
inexorably blameworthy, without regard to the rest of the defendant's revealed attitude about
harming, is precisely the question here; it cannot be used to provide the answer to the ques-
tion of whether the open time frame used in the abandonment defense is uniquely appropri-
ate.

614 STANFORD LAW REVIEW [Vol. 33:591
tempted" are firmly resolved to commit crimes is sometimes wrong.
But the remorseful consummated criminal would equally well
demonstrate that conclusive presumptions about the need to inca-
pacitate, reform, or blame a person because he has committed some
crime can be inapt. The abandonment defense, then, appears not
because a forward-looking broad time frame is logically better suited
to attempt law, but because the always available policy attacks on
rules (and conclusive presumptions) are allowed sway only in an area
where the rule-form is already weakened by the imprecision of the
definition of the act upon which criminal liability is predicated.
Consent. Problems of time-framing also appear in deciding
whether consent has been given to otherwise criminal acts.55 Assum-
ing, arguendo, that no action is harmful which the subject assents to,
we still can identtfyt he supposedly consenting subject using either a
broad or a narrow time frame. We can look into the subject's past or
just at a single moment of assent. Should that moment be immedi-
ately before the act is performed? If the victim at one point did not
assent to the harmful act but has assented to it right before the act is
taken, has he assented to it? When Odysseus demands at one point
to be bound up when the Sirens sing, and later demands to be re-
leased, which choice most fulfills his "desires"? When someone goes
on a diet, do you give him the piece of chocolate cake he begs for if
you are trying to do his will? That we have no ready rules of
thumb-e.g., "last statement counts," or "statements made under
oath count"-can be seen not just from these sorts of explicitly am-
bivalent expressions over time, but by noting that we vary our defini-
55. Libertarian commentators have long been hostile to the idea that one can convict a
defendant when the purported "victim" has agreed to allow that defendant to treat him in a
certain way. See, e.g., H.L.A. HART, THE MORALITYO F THE CRIMINALL AW, 37-39 (1965);
J.S. MILL, ON LIBERTY9 5-100, 179-89, 206-09 (Everyman American ed. 1951). This hostil-
ity is manifested in a generalized opposition both to so-called "victimless crime" legislation,
see, e.g., E. SCHUR, CRIMESW ITHOUTV ICTIMS( 1965), and to the judicial practice of disal-
lowing consent as a defense in particular cases of, say, assault. See, e.g., MODEL PENAL CODE
? 2.11 (Proposed Official Draft 1962). The libertarian argument is quite straightforward:
The criminal law is designed to deter harm (or blame those who do harm), and it is (defini-
tionally) absurd to say that harm has been done when all parties affected by conduct have
assented to it.
Antilibertarians have generally relied on two positions to justify punishing acts that have
been consented to: pure paternalism (the victim's capacity to judge what will be good for him
is not to be trusted), see, e.g., H.L.A. HART, LAW, LIBERTY,A ND MORALITY3 0-34 (1963);
Dworkin, Paternalism in MORALITY AND THE LAW 107 (Wasserstrom ed. 1971), and a view
that there are broad harmful externalities to the purportedly private interaction, see, e.g., P.
DEVLIN,T HE ENFORCEMENOT F MORALS (1965); E. DURKHEIM,T HE DIVISIONO F LABOR
IN SOCIETY 96-110 (1933).

664 STANFORDL AWR EVIEW [Vol. 33:591
conduct, particularly conduct not taken on single discrete occasions
by single actors to whom the harm can easily be attributed. These
may be seen as "easy" cases of noncriminality solely because of an
unshakably strong procedural norm against vagueness.
B. UnconsczouIsn terpretation
More interesting, though, is the way the more obscured, un-self-
conscious interpretive constructs serve to buttress conventional blam-
ing practices. This section applies the four unconscious constructs to
the easy cases.
1. Broada nd narrowt imef rames.
Choosing a time frame is critical for a number of reasons. Most
critically, the interpreter's ability to convince himself of the legiti-
macy, or better, the necessity of a narrow focus eliminates the more
obvious political tensions inherent in the choice of an intentionalist
account. Narrow time-framing simply excludes all the potentially
explanatory background data.212 For instance, a criminologist's fa-
miliar category for homicide-that the crime is fundamentally vic-
tim-precipitated213-disappears in ordinary criminal law discourse,
except in those rare provocation cases where the victim enrages the
perpetrator just before the killing, rather than over some longer time
period. The distinction between those who are partially exculpated
because they were enraged once (provoked), and those who are incul-
pated though they were tortured for years before reacting makes no
sense as a matter of retribution214 and only superficial sense in terms
of deterrence.215 Ultimately, I suspect, the distinction is grounded in
212. For instance, it excludes the sort of pseudo-scientific analysis of behavior in Del-
gado, Ascrption of CriminalS tates of Mind- Toward a Defense Theoryf or the CoercivelyP ersuaded
("Brainwashed') Defendant, 63 MINN. L. REV. 1 (1978).
213. See, e.g., M. WOLFGANG,P ATTERNS IN CRIMINAL HOMICIDE 245-65 (1958);
Gobert, VictimP recipitation, 77 COLUM. L. REV. 511, 530-34 (1977).
214. In ordinary discourse, a party who kills after he has been repeatedly provoked
would almost certainly be deemed less culpable than one who boils over and kills the first
time he is so provoked. Somehow, in legal discourse, the fact that the long-term provoked
defendant has managed to squelch his violent reactions in the past makes him more culpable
when he finally gives in. The legal discourse makes sense only if we assume that a person
should leave rather than slowly build up an uncontrollable rage-an assumption that de-
pends on the exaggerated assertions that the person is aware of his rage and that there are no
other reasons that compel him to stay in spite of that rage.
215. Deterrence theory, I take it, assumes that the short-run provoked party is blind to
the criminal law signals; the longer-run provoked party ought to have time to consider the
jailer and leave if he fears he is being worked into a frenzy. Again, this strikes me as a phe-
nomenologically unsound reading of many cases of long-run provocation: People may get

April 1981] INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTION 665
a nearly primeval fear of the collapse of the easy case: If long-term
interactions are appropriate subjects of judicial scrutiny, then there is
indeed no certainty in blaming.
2. Dtsjoineda nd unjfieda ccounts.
Disjoined time-framing eases blaming practices where an excul-
patory, broad time-framed determinism presses on the would-be con-
demnor. The quasi-methodological notion is that the ultimate
criminal act, even if comprehensively grounded in prior experience,
must be separated from its backdrop. While we sometimes unify an
overt criminal decision with its backdrop,216 our more usual tech-
nique is to say, in essence, that the criminal moment stands separate,
as a matter of technique, from even obviously relevant background.
But while narrow or disjoined time-framing is connected with the
artificial and problematic restriction of "excused" behavior, its more
politically central role may be in its suppression of the recognition of
something akin to the "justification" of behavior. Take our easy-case
thief. It is true that he alters the current holdings of property, but
the legitimacy of these holdings is politically contingent and prob-
lematic. It does not matter, for our purposes, whether these present
property holdings can be satisfactorily justified in the eyes of some
relevant group or other. The justification of the distribution of goods
that preceded the "theft" is decidedly not an issue in any particular
criminal trial. The incidental focus that supports this limitation of
issues-a focus that blurs the "crime" by freezing or taking for
granted the background conditions in which the "crime" is commit-
ted-serves important ideological purposes. First, it normalizes, sani-
tizes, and decriminalizes the property holdings of dominating groups,
which are unlikely to be traceable to single, easily identified disruptive
incidents. The dominant rarely appear "criminal" when the implicit
theory of criminality is dsruption, when the only sort of crime we
comfortably discuss is temporally limited. Second, the incidental fo-
cus decontextualizes, delegitimatizes, and thereby criminalizes the
activities of the dispossessed. Instead of viewing, say, theft and epi-
sodic violence as part of a dynamic struggle for control over re-
sources, as one group's more or less self-conscious "strategy" to
counter another long-term strategy of control over "privately held"
upset and then find themselves, for a moment that need last no longer than that which the
traditionally provoked party faces, in an unforeseeable oblivious-to-punishment rage.
216. For instance, we can ground the decision to kill in the perception of the need to
defend oneself and judge the defendant's blameworthiness as to the whole scene.

666 STANFORDL AWR EVIEW [Vol. 33:591
means of production and concomitant definitions of job roles and
productivity,217 and control over the state and its resources,218a nar-
row time-framed focus views each act of theft as occurring outside of
history.
Note the implicit disjunctive, nonunified interpretation of time:
Criminal trials implicitly assume that property systems arefollowed by
theft rather than that real property systems are continually being cre-
ated by a social struggle that includes everything from alternately
encouraging and discouraging the flow of illegal aliens219 to "steal-
ing." The political beliefs flowing from the unified perspective are
naturally by no means unambiguous. On the other hand, if one be-
comes fully smugly functionalist and views everythinga s part of some
single, unified grand scheme, punishing labeled thieves is just an-
other aspect of the ultimate "system" of property. On the other
hand, the unified perspective may be counter-complacent as well: If
"taking" is just another technique for getting distributive shares
straight, "antitaking" (punishment for theft) seems like a simple act
of force, a victory for one group in a dynamic struggle rather than a
restoration of some prepolitical equilibrium.
Just as the ordinarily asserted narrow time frame inculpates the
"easy case" defendant by denying him both determinist excuses and
contextual justifications, so an asserted broad and unified time frame
precludes labeling as criminal those who sell unsafe products or those
who insist on the performance of unsafe work. Rather than viewing
the introduction of an unsafe product onto the market as a reckless
act which later causes harm, exculpating interpretations focus on the
act as part of a longer-term process of market interaction. In this
long-term process, the victim's (buyer's) participation is deemed cru-
cial; the focus is precisely opposite that of the typical criminal law
analysis in which the victim's participation (precipitation) is irrele-
vant. The marketing of dangerous products is interpreted simply as
a part of a generally justified system of producing and exchanging
goods. The sale of a particular dangerous product is not viewed as a
disruptive departure from a more narrowly normatively justified sys-
217. See, e.g., Stone, The Orgins of Job Structurei n the Steel Industry, REV. RADICALP OL.
ECON., Summer 1974, at 113 (arguing that the extensive division of labor in the steel industry
is not technically mandated, but serves to immunize steel bosses from effective in-plant oppo-
sition).
218. See, e.g., P. BARAN & P. SWEEZY,M ONOPOLYC APITAL( 1966).
219. See S. CASTLES& G. KOSACK,I MMIGRANTW ORKERSA ND CLASSS TRUCTUREI N
WESTERN EUROPE (1973) (discussing impact of "guest workers" in dampening labor's hopes
for larger share of national income).

April 1981] INTERPRETIVEC ONSTRUCTION 667
tem in which safe goods are produced and marketed. Instead, it is
seen as one part of a properly equilibrated system of distribution
where goods, not harms, are delivered. The otherwise criminal act
gains legitimacy because it need not justify itse/f; one need show only
that production is worthwhile, not that this production serves any of
the purposes that generally make production worthwhile. Contrast
that account with the typical criminal law account of the thief:
Theft is deemed to represent a departure from a normatively justified
general system of property rights rather than as a part of the estab-
lishment of a normatively justified system. Each instance of theft
must be justified on its own; it is not enough to claim that the distrib-
utive scheme that would exist in a world without thieves would be
normatively less desirable on the whole than the system that has
emerged in a world with thieves.
3. Broad and narrowv iews of intent.
Interpretive flexibility in determining the actor's intent is the
ability to oscillate between views that the actor intended precisely
what he did and views that he intended some broader category of act
of which his conduct is an instance. This flexibility is critical in
drawing the vital, but ultimately ungrounded, line between legally
irrelevant motive and legally relevant purpose. Again, take our thief.
The standard, reassuring criminal law view of the act of grabbing a
bundle of goods with the expressedt ntent or purpose of feeding the pro-
verbial starving family is to steal, while only the irrelevant motive is
to feed.220 But the supposed actual intention is a sham: While a
defendant may intend acts which constitute theft, he need not intend
theft. Yet, when the defendant claims the legitimated but still
broader category for his actions, in this case, feedzng, the usual re-
sponse is to narrow the permissible breadth of category. One's pre-
cise acts become only an instance of the midrange category (criminal
takings) rather than of the broader one that might include attempts
to better oneself, to survive, etc.22'
Certainly, there are reasons of expediency for adopting the
midrange categorization: If we want to prevent theft or incapacitate
people who take other people's goods, we can reassure ourselves that
people who take intend to do what they do, and that is taking. But
220. Obviously, justification doctrine, see notes 192-93 supra and accompanying text,
limits the purported irrelevance of motive to some extent.
221. See, e.g., United States v. Berrigan, 482 F.2d 171, 188 n.35 (3d Cir. 1973), for a
typical statement of this midrange categorization.